Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 11 November 2010 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Statements by the President
It was with great satisfaction that I received the news concerning the release from house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi , the leader of the Burmese opposition .
Mrs Suu Kyi was one of the first winners of the Sakharov Prize , awarded by the European Parliament since 1988 .
However , she was unable to collect it in person 20 years ago .
I would like to inform you that I have already sent Mrs Suu Kyi an invitation to visit the European Parliament and to address one of our plenary sessions .
25 November is the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , as instituted by the UN 11 years ago .
Every day , all over the world , many women are victims of rape , humiliation and domestic violence .
A particular atrocity practised in many areas of the world is the circumcision of young women .
It is estimated that 8 000 girls fall victim to this every day .
To show solidarity with the campaign to stop this barbaric ritual , I would encourage you all to wear a rose petal today to symbolise our opposition to this practice .
I would also like to stress that the European Parliament has continued in its efforts to appeal for a complete stop to physical and mental violence against women for many years .
Composition of Parliament
The competent Spanish authorities have informed me that Mr Ramón Jáuregui Atondo has been replaced by Mrs María Irigoyen Pérez with effect from 16 November 2010 .
I would like to welcome our new fellow Member and issue a reminder that , on the basis of Rule 3 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , until such time as her credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute , Mrs Irigoyen Pérez shall take her seat in Parliament and on its bodies and shall enjoy all the rights pertaining thereto , provided that she has previously declared that she does not hold any office incompatible with that of Member of the European Parliament .
Composition of political groups
I would like to inform you that Mr Claudiu Ciprian Tănăsescu joined the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament with effect from 15 November 2010 .
I would also like to inform you that Mr Pino Arlacchi joined the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament with effect from 18 November 2010 .
Signature of acts adopted under codecision
I hereby inform you that on Wednesday , the President of the Council and I will sign 14 legislative acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure pursuant to Rule 74 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
The titles of these legislative acts will be published in the minutes of the sitting .
They will be available to you , and you will be able to inspect them at any time .
Documents received : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 18 November 2010 pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday :
The political groups are proposing to remove the debate on Mr Berlinguer 's report on civil , commercial , family and private international law aspects of the action plan implementing the Stockholm Programme from the agenda .
As a result , the report would be subject to a direct vote tomorrow , on Tuesday .
The report will stay .
There will be a vote , but no debate .
I repeat : all the political groups have agreed to this solution and this solution has thus been accepted .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Tuesday :
No amendments have been proposed .
( DE ) Mr President , on the agenda for Tuesday , there are six reports by Mrs Matera concerning mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in the Netherlands .
I am taking the floor on this because I think that the way Mr Daul has been attacked on this matter in the Dutch press is not right .
At the Conference of Presidents , Mr Daul raised the question that had been discussed by the heads of the various groups concerning whether these reports should not be dropped in the light of the budget debate .
I would like to make two comments on this .
Firstly , we should leave these reports on the agenda .
We should also vote them through and transfer this money from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to the Netherlands .
Secondly , however , Mr Daul suggested it in a comment made at the Conference of Presidents .
If it is then taken from the Conference of Presidents into the public domain without him even being given an opportunity to answer questions and explain it himself , then , as the chair of a group , one has to consider very carefully what in fact one can say at the Conference of Presidents .
That is the first point .
My other point is that it is not the European Parliament that is claiming that money is being squandered here .
It is an element of the Dutch Government - not all of it - that is constantly claiming that money is being squandered in Europe and therefore Europe should get less money .
The Matera reports show that , on the contrary , money from this budget is being used very responsibly and - in my opinion - for very important projects in the Netherlands .
Consequently , adopting these reports would show that the criticism in the Netherlands in respect of this budget is not justified .
( Applause )
I am aware of the matter and I know what has appeared in the Dutch press .
However , I would like to assure you that the vote on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for the Netherlands will proceed tomorrow as planned .
Nothing has changed .
Voting will take place tomorrow .
Wednesday :
I have received a request from the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left concerning the debate on the situation in the Western Sahara , namely , that voting on the motions for a resolution on this matter should take place during this session and not the December session , as is currently intended .
( PT ) Mr President , the situation in Western Sahara is serious enough for Parliament to hold off on taking a position on this matter .
The facts are undeniable and are plain to see .
We have seen images of destruction in the Sahrawi camps , and we know that this destruction has resulted in deaths and injuries , with many people still missing .
We know that a Member of this House was prevented from going to the camps and was expelled by the Moroccan authorities , and we know that the same thing has been happening with members of national parliaments , journalists and members of non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) .
Knowing all this , we cannot simply ignore it .
Not taking a position on this matter would now be an incomprehensible and unacceptable attitude of complacency , and even complicity , and it would only detract from the dignity of this institution and the values it claims to defend .
I would therefore like to call upon everyone to make the sensible decision of supporting the vote on a resolution on this issue during this sitting , voting in favour of this proposal .
Mr President , I think the arguments given by the GUE / NGL Group are absolutely relevant , important and necessary , so I will support this position .
Mr President , I must ask Mr Ferreira to pay attention for a moment .
We discussed this topic in great depth at the Conference of Presidents and during the preparations for the Conference of Presidents .
On behalf of my group , I would like to say that we are very concerned about what is going on in the Western Sahara .
If the pictures that we have seen are accurate , then this must give rise not just to serious debate , but also , if necessary , to consequences .
This means that we must proceed properly , however .
Proceeding properly includes discussing the events this week .
At our request , the Moroccan foreign minister has now stated that he is prepared to attend a meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
He does not have to do that .
The Moroccan foreign minister does not have to appear before the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the European Parliament .
As far as I am concerned , we should take advantage of the fact that he is doing so in any case to first confront him with the reproaches made , and only then adopt a resolution .
I believe that is a much more proper way to proceed , rather than adopting a resolution now and then listening to what he has to say afterwards .
Let us adopt the resolution in the light of the information and the questions that we will have the opportunity to ask the Moroccan foreign minister in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I personally consider that a more proper way to proceed .
Moreover , until this afternoon there was consensus on that among all the groups .
The request has been supported by the majority , so in accordance with Mr Ferreira 's proposal , voting will take place this week .
( Parliament agreed to the request )

I will give you the deadlines : the vote will take place on Thursday .
The deadlines are as follows : motions for resolutions must be tabled by 12 : 00 tomorrow , 23 November ; amendments and joint motions for resolutions must be tabled by 12 : 00 on Wednesday , 24 November ; amendments to joint motions for resolutions - by 13 : 00 on Wednesday , 24 November , in other words , an hour later .
I repeat : the vote will take place on Thursday .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to ask my fellow Members something .
There is an emergency situation in Tibet and concern about China 's intention to impose the Chinese language on Tibet .
I believe that this is an issue that deserves a debate in plenary with Baroness Ashton present .
It is really the policy currently being enacted in Tibet that is problematic , quite apart from this emergency situation .
An emergency ?
Very well .
If the majority wants to tackle this issue from that perspective , that is fine .
For my part , and since the agenda is fairly clear in December , I would like us to hold a debate on this problem and on the European Union 's policy regarding China with Baroness Ashton present , and to adopt a resolution on this matter .
I think that would be more intelligent .
Many thanks , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
This can also be proposed to the Conference of Presidents .
As a group chair , you may propose this at any time , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
Thank you for your comment .
Thursday :
No amendments have been proposed .
( The order of business was established )
ECB annual report for 2009 - Latest developments on international currency exchange rates ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the report by Mr Balz , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the ECB annual report 2009 , and
the Commission statement on the latest developments on international currency exchange rates .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have just had a request for everyone to quieten down a bit .
Perhaps certain Members could comply with that request .
Ladies and gentlemen , my report today essentially concerns the performance of the European Central Bank in 2009 - in other words , during a period in which economic , financial and , increasingly , also political actions , were substantially dominated by the economic and financial crisis .
The crisis , which started off as a purely financial crisis , spread , and also affected the entire real economy in a second wave .
Economic activity diminished worldwide , while falling tax revenues and increasing welfare expenditure as a result of the crisis led to increasing public deficits .
Further measures to stimulate the economy also contributed to the level of debt .
As a result of these increased deficits , governments throughout the European Union passed extensive austerity packages .
In my opinion , these packages were necessary and , in some cases , even overdue .
However , they constrained the capacity of the governments to act .
Although economic activity began to recover in the second half of 2009 , the financial and economic crisis then threatened to evolve into a public debt crisis in a third wave in 2010 .
In my view , this danger has not yet been averted .
In recent days , we have been reminded all too clearly by the case of Ireland that the problem of over-indebtedness in the Member States has by no means been resolved , and I therefore also agree with President Van Rompuy : the failure of the euro is out of the question .
That is the current situation , however .
My report deals instead with 2009 , about which we can say that the ECB reacted appropriately - even well , in fact - to the challenges .
Its measures proved to be widely successful and kept many financial institutions from collapse .
However , the financial institutions did not always pass on the liquidity in full to the real economy , with the result that the full recovery potential of these measures could not be exploited .
Since these measures involved extraordinary steps , it is now essential that the measures are lifted judiciously and with careful planning .
The problems in Greece and other euro countries may be , in part , home-made , but they also brought to light fundamental problems that existed within the economic and monetary union .
The principles of the Stability and Growth Pact were infringed .
We are now living through the consequences , and that includes what is going on in Ireland .
These infringements must now be removed and new infringements must be prevented .
The Stability and Growth Pact needs to be strengthened , and the economic and monetary union needs to be more in balance .
In the past , insufficient coordination of economic policies within the monetary union allowed considerable economic imbalances to arise between the euro area countries and left the euro area without a predefined crisis management mechanism .
The euro area will have to resolve these imbalances if it is to prevent a new crisis .
In the final event , however , the structural reform process - combined with the revision of the regulatory framework for financial policy - may strengthen the euro area .
The issue of the independence of the European Central Bank will also be a significant aspect of the new economic governance , particularly as regards the recently established European Systemic Risk Board .
Consequently , Parliament will continue to take its duty to review the performance of the ECB very seriously .
I am absolutely convinced that the European Union and the euro area will find a way out of this crisis and could emerge from it even stronger than before .
However , in the coming months , we need to learn the right lessons from what has happened .
This is a major challenge , but in its history to date , the European Union has constantly demonstrated that it develops best when it has to overcome challenges .
This crisis therefore also represents an opportunity that we should exploit .
In closing I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups for their extremely pleasant and constructive cooperation on this report .
It is not something that can be taken for granted , but it deserves particular emphasis in this case .

Mr President , Mr Balz , ladies and gentlemen , I have the honour of presenting to you , as provided for by the treaty , the European Central Bank 's Annual Report for 2009 .
Due to the schedule having been somewhat thrown out by the European elections in particular , I spoke to you last March about the previous annual report .
This is therefore the second time I have addressed Parliament this year .
First of all , allow me to say how pleased I am about the support once again expressed by the European Parliament 's motion for a resolution in favour of regular hearings before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and , more generally , in favour of maintaining close relations with the European Central Bank .
I welcome this even more since , this year , the European Parliament has demonstrated very convincingly its willingness and ability to assert the overriding European interest , especially with regard to the financial supervision package .
( DE ) I would like to start by giving you a brief overview of the monetary policy measures taken by the European Central Bank during the financial and economic crisis .
Beyond the crisis period , I would also like to look back on the ECB over the first twelve years of its existence .
Finally , I would like to look at the most pressing challenges that await us in 2011 .
Mr President , let me first mention the action taken during the crisis .
2009 was a most challenging year for the ECB 's monetary policy .
It started with a severe economic downturn worldwide following the outbreak of the financial crisis in autumn 2008 .
In this environment of subdued inflationary pressures , we continued with our policy of lowering our key rates further .
Overall , within a period of only seven months - between October 2008 and May 2009 - we lowered our main refinancing rate by 325 basis points .
This brought our main refinancing rate to 1 % .
To ensure that households and firms in the euro area would benefit from these most favourable financing conditions , in 2009 we also continued with - and even extended - our enhanced credit support to euro area banks .
We did this in response to dysfunctional money markets that had weakened the ability of monetary policy to influence the outlook for price stability by means of interest rate decisions alone .
Among those non-standard measures - as we used to call them - the most prominent is the full allotment liquidity provision through our refinancing operations with euro area banks against good collateral and at the main refinancing rate prevailing at the time for several maturities extending well beyond the weekly operations .
In 2009 , we also extended the maturity of our longer-term refinancing operation to one year .
These were , of course , decisions of extreme importance .
As rightly emphasised in your draft resolution on the ECB 's annual report , this enhanced credit support has been successful in avoiding what would have been - if additional dysfunctional tensions had been observed - a depression or a much deeper recession .
Let me emphasise that all our action was fully in line with our mandate to deliver price stability in the medium term for the euro area as a whole .
That we have been able to credibly deliver on our mandate is reflected in a favourable inflation outlook and well-anchored inflation expectations in the euro area .
Following some improvements in financial market conditions in the course of 2009 , renewed market tensions erupted in a number of segments of the euro area bond market .
Since the smooth functioning of the bond market is essential to the transmission of the ECB 's key interest rates , we decided to intervene in the euro area 's debt security markets with the aim of helping restore a more normal transmission of monetary policy to the economy .
To this end , we introduced our Securities Markets Programme .
To ensure that this programme does not impact on our monetary policy stance , we re-absorb all the liquidity injected .
To sum up , let me emphasise that all the non-standard measures we have adopted during the period of acute financial stress are temporary in nature and were designed with exit considerations in mind .
Some of the non-standard measures initiated in 2009 and early 2010 have already been phased out in view of improvements in conditions in some financial markets and taking the ongoing recovery of the euro area economy into account .
Let me share with you for a moment a few thoughts on the track record of the euro .
In my view , three elements are fundamental .
Firstly , the ECB has delivered what it was expected to deliver according to its treaty mandate , namely , price stability .
Indeed , euro area average inflation over the past almost 12 years stands at 1.97 % .
This fully reflects our definition of price stability , namely , our aim to keep annual inflation rates in the euro area below 2 % and close to 2 % in the medium term .
In this sense , the euro system over the past 12 years has operated as an anchor of stability and confidence and has done so during the most recent times , despite the challenging environment created by the global financial crisis .
Secondly - and reflecting favourably on the credibility of the ECB 's monetary policy - inflation expectations have , as I have said , remained solidly anchored at levels in line with price stability .
Thirdly , this success is grounded , we trust , in the full independence of the ECB from political influence , in its primary mandate to maintain price stability and in its transparent communication , particularly concerning the definition of price stability .
The ECB 's two-pillar monetary strategy allows for a forward looking and medium-term oriented course of action that is underpinned by a solid analytical framework .
That framework includes a thorough analysis of monetary and credit developments , taking the monetary nature of inflation over the medium to longer term into account .
We consider that this comprehensive approach allows for well-informed and consistent decision making , whilst being steady and looking beyond short-term volatility .
As regards the external dimension of the euro , let me only say that our currency has established itself internationally .
In 2009 , the euro represented around 30 % of the stock of international debt securities and the stock of global foreign exchange reserves .
Speaking of the external dimension of the euro , I will say a word on the present foreign exchange rate issues , domains where I would call for great prudence .
There are two major topics .
One is the relationship between the major floating convertible currencies of the industrialised countries , such as the dollar , the euro , the yen , the pound sterling and the Canadian dollar .
These currencies have been floating since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system at the beginning of the 1970s .
I should underline the strong view of the international community that excess volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates have adverse implications for economic and financial stability .
Let me say that the ECB appreciates the recent statements by the US authorities , namely the Secretary of the US Treasury and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve , reiterating that a strong dollar vis-à-vis the other major convertible currencies is in the interests of the United States .
I share this view entirely .
A dollar that is credible among the major currencies of the advanced economies is in the interests of the United States , of Europe and of the entire international community .
The second topic concerns the currencies of emerging market economies which have current account surpluses and exchange rates that are not sufficiently flexible .
On this issue , the international community agrees - and this was restated in Korea last week , as well as by the Commission - that moving towards more market-determined exchange rate systems , enhancing exchange rate stability to reflect underlying fundamentals and refraining from competitive devaluation of currencies are in the interest of the emerging economies concerned and of the international community .
The ECB used to say that this is no time for complacency .
This is truer now than ever .
The challenges lying ahead of us are manifold .
All relevant authorities as well as the private sector must assume fully their responsibilities , and this is true for executive branches , central banks , regulators , supervisors , the private sector and the financial industry .
In particular , the current crisis has clearly demonstrated that implementing ambitious reforms in economic governance is in the interest both of the euro area countries and of the euro area as a whole .
The proposals put forward by President Van Rompuy on the reform of the EU 's economic governance and approved by the European Council meeting of October 2010 represent an improvement to the current surveillance framework at EU level and seem broadly appropriate for the EU countries not participating in monetary union .
However , as regards the specific requirements of the euro area , in our opinion , they fall short of what we view as necessary to ensure the best possible functioning of the single-currency economy .
I am convinced that , over the coming months , the European Parliament will help Europe make the necessary quantum leap in economic governance a reality .
With its legislative role concerning financial supervision and the ESRB , Parliament has shown its determination when it comes to major issues .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for this and to express again my conviction that the influence of Parliament will be decisive in the economic governance debate .
Another important challenge relates to financial regulation .
We should take full advantage of the lessons of the crisis and maintain the momentum for financial reform .
As advocated in your draft resolution , a speedy implementation of Basel III is of crucial importance .
The Commission 's legislative proposals on short selling and over-the-counter derivatives are also indispensable to making the financial system more transparent and resilient .
We are facing a decisive year .
2011 should see the adoption of the revised governance framework , in-depth discussions on the crisis management framework and possibly the launch of the procedure for a treaty change .
We need to get all these reforms right , so as to ensure that Europe as a whole and the euro area can meet future challenges with even greater capacity and conviction .
2011 will be also the first year of the existence of the European Systemic Risk Board .
As is called for in your draft resolution , we are doing our utmost to support the new body .
At the same time , of course , the complete independence and the primary mandate of the ECB , enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty , are unchanged , and I have already stressed this point before Parliament .
We will continue to deliver on our mandate .
This is what the treaty requires from us .
You can trust that we will deliver what our fellow citizens expect .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first thank the rapporteur , Burkhard Balz , for the solid and comprehensive report on the ECB annual report 2009 .
The Commission welcomes the report , which reflects the key issues appropriately .
The report recognises and praises the work done by the ECB in managing the crisis .
The Commission shares this view ; the ECB , under the leadership of President Jean-Claude Trichet , has navigated in this difficult situation skilfully and with a steady hand .
I want to use this opportunity to thank Jean-Claude Trichet for an excellent cooperation and especially for his crucial role during these turbulent times .
The ECB has , both through its monitoring stance and its non-standard measures , been instrumental in the fire-fighting to overcome the crisis and thus in laying the foundations for sustainable growth and job creation .
Your report rightly stresses that the financial crisis has exposed the need for reinforced economic surveillance in the euro area .
The Commission agrees with this , which is precisely why we have put forward several legislative proposals to reinforce economic governance in the EU , especially in the euro area .
We have also taken on board several suggestions presented in the Feio report to strengthen and broaden economic governance in the Union .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has received the Commission 's proposals and is currently working towards achieving the ambitious deadline of June next year , which I appreciate and welcome .
Let me now turn to the second part of the debate , which is the latest developments in the international exchange rates .
It is correct that volatility in foreign exchange markets has increased in recent weeks , with significant shifts in the value of major bilateral exchange rates .
The euro appreciated against the dollar since June this year due to stronger data for the euro area economy and due to further expansion of the US monetary policy .
More recently , however , the euro has somewhat weakened against most currencies , as increased worries about the Member States ' public finances - above all in Ireland - have affected the euro .
In real effective terms , the euro is currently close to its long-term average following an overall depreciation this year from an overvalued level at the end of last year .
Compared to the beginning of the year , the euro depreciation in real effective terms amounts to around 7 % .
In the context of a slow recovery in advanced economies and large capital flows to emerging economies , many countries have aimed at weakening their currency or at least resorting to competitive non-appreciation .
It is therefore important that leaders in the G20 Seoul Summit last week very clearly and strongly committed themselves to abstain from competitive devaluations of their currencies .
The G20 summit also agreed to work further on the rebalancing of global growth .
An agreement had been reached to work on indicative guidelines .
It is clear that exchange rate flexibility must play a role in the necessary rebalancing so that exchange rates reflect economic fundamentals , as was underlined by President Trichet .
The Commission will continue to support this important strand of G20 work , which will also be one of the key focuses of the French G20 Presidency next year .
Finally , I need to inform you about an important development concerning the euro area .
Yesterday , when the ECOFIN Council welcomed the request of the Irish Government for financial assistance from the EU , ministers concurred with the Commission and the ECB that providing assistance to Ireland is warranted to safeguard financial stability in Europe .
EU financial support can be provided under a programme with a rigorous policy conditionality which is being negotiated currently with the Irish authorities by the Commission and the IMF , in liaison with the ECB .
The programme will address the fiscal challenges of the Irish economy in a decisive manner and the programme will also include a fund for potential future capital needs of the banking sector .
To redress stress in the banking sector , a comprehensive range of measures including deleveraging and restructuring will need to be taken to contribute to ensuring that the Irish banking system performs its role properly in the functioning of the overall economy .
The technical talks on an EU-IMF programme are now well under way and the negotiations can be concluded by the end of November .
Apart from EU and IMF financing , I can inform you that the United Kingdom and Sweden have indicated that they stand ready to contribute to the programme through bilateral loans , which is welcome .
All in all , yesterday 's decisions are a critical step forward in the joint efforts to stabilise the Irish economy and thus safeguard financial stability in Europe .

Mr President , Mr Trichet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , clearly , I join the chorus of praise for the ECB 's work , and I shall not repeat what my colleague , Mr Balz , said or what is said in the resolution .
In the short time allotted to me , I would simply like to say that we must consider our fellow citizens .
Why do I say that in this way today ?
Because , yesterday evening , on all the French television channels , a future presidential candidate made a spectacle of himself by tearing up a EUR 10 note that he had photocopied and enlarged , and showing that , by tearing up that note , he was tearing up the cause of all our ills .
Of course , that is not true .
All that is needed is for us to make an effort , together , to communicate .
The work that has been carried out in terms of supervision , organisation and regulation , to which you have referred , Mr President , is excellent .
You know you have Parliament 's support : you said so yourself .
However , we have a real task on our hands with regard to those of our fellow citizens who do not understand the messages that are being conveyed .
Every day , the headlines in the press are of increasingly grim solutions and unlikely situations , and I can tell you that , on Friday , when I was out in the field , as we say in politics , I saw nearly 100 to 150 people .
They all asked me the same question : what is going to happen with the euro ?
The fear felt by our fellow citizens is out of sync with what is being done , and done well , by the European Central Bank .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Balz , for his cooperation .
I also welcome the fact that the European Central Bank has been granted the status of an EU institution following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Secondly , I would like to point out that there are considerable macro-economic disparities between the economies in the euro area , highlighting the need for closer harmonisation between economic and monetary policies .
The Growth and Stability Pact is not an adequate instrument for resolving the current economic imbalances .
One solution out of this deadlock could be to issue government bonds at EU level .
This solidarity mechanism would provide stable financing for Member States in dire straits , would make budgetary supervision more effective and would significantly improve liquidity .
The single currency should be supplemented with fiscal tightening and joint long-term debt .
The reckless behaviour of financial operators helped trigger the economic and financial crisis .
In addition to this , the recent speculative attacks against certain Member States have made it difficult for the latter to borrow money on the international financial markets , thereby virtually affecting the stability of the whole euro area .
I therefore think that a permanent mechanism is required to protect the euro area against speculative attacks .
It is the European Commission 's duty to monitor the activity of current credit rating agencies and to devise a structure for an EU-level credit rating agency .
We must also bear in mind that the austerity measures adopted by national governments could significantly reduce the chance of the European economy 's recovery .
This is why an EU-level economic governance model is required which will combine fiscal consolidation with the creation of new jobs .
The Commission must also propose specific targets for narrowing the competitiveness gap between EU economies and , last but not least , go ahead with investments in green energy .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I join the chorus of praise for our rapporteur , who I think has outlined the issue very clearly .
In his report , he stresses the innovations afforded by the Treaty of Lisbon , and I really want to thank you , Mr Trichet , for having once again this evening reminded those of us who seem to be unaware of the fact - including , incidentally , those who signed it and had it ratified - that the Treaty of Lisbon includes a major innovation : we are going to be able to debate publicly , in this Chamber , the reform of the Stability Pact .
Under Mr Rehn , the Commission has drawn up a set of proposals that are on the right track and are rather courageous , especially in calling for discipline to be strengthened by taking account of the macro-economic imbalances that Mr Balz had , in fact , mentioned in his report .
What is more , you refer several times , Mr Trichet , to a ' quantum leap ' , in other words , a real step forward in this governance .
I agree entirely with what Mr Gauzès said ; when one goes out into the field , one almost wonders whether the proposals put forward by the Commission in September are completely relevant , whether account ought not to be taken of the crisis that is currently occurring in order to allow for as much progress as possible to be made .
I would like to point out here that those who designed the euro never thought that we would simply coordinate economic policies in the long term .
What was envisaged was political union , namely , an ability to take decisions while being supervised by Parliament .
For my part , what I find rather striking , when we speak to the citizens , is that we ultimately have motorists - the Member States - who are , at the same time , behind the wheel and by the side of the road acting as policemen .
That is rather how the current system works ; in other words , we are , at the same time , the driver , the person who issues fines and the person who is supposed to supervise the other cars .
I do not think that there is a single country with road traffic like that .
We would therefore like to raise the cost of fines a little and we shall work towards that .
Thank you for having reminded us that we have already done so in practice with regard to the reform of financial supervision , in the general European interest .

Mr President , firstly , on behalf of my group , may I express my thanks to Mr Balz for the cooperative manner in which our deliberations were conducted .
We were able to contribute certain suggestions to make the report even more balanced .
The period 2009-2010 was characterised by extraordinary measures on the part of the European Central Bank , and in view of these extraordinary economic developments , I would like to thank Mr Trichet once again for taking these measures , particularly since they were not always well received within his own institution .
We have seen during this period that the Stability and Growth Pact is inadequate .
Instead , we need effective coordination of economic policy that takes into account not just public debt but also private debt , and that deals with economic imbalances not just in deficit countries but also in countries making a surplus .
Where prices are concerned we need to focus not just on consumer prices , but also on property prices , their speculative development and the creation of bubbles .
Above all - and we are constantly urging this - we need once and for all a framework for tax competition in the European Union .
It is unacceptable to have huge austerity programmes on the expenditure side while countries continue to have unconstrained tax competition on the revenue side .
In particular , it is unacceptable - and impossible to explain to our citizens - that in such a situation as we now have , we are rescuing Ireland 's banks , but not at the same time ensuring that its scandalously low rate of corporation tax , which stands at 12.5 % , is corrected to the usual European rate of 25 % .
We need to have some straight talking here .
I would also like to ask Mr Trichet to comment on two matters in the report : the issue of transparency , as mentioned in paragraph 21 , and the issue of the security accepted , as mentioned in paragraph 39 .
You have not yet commented on these issues .
On behalf of all the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , I would be grateful if you could comment specifically on these matters .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Balz on his report .
However , at a time when the euro is facing new crises every day and it is generally accepted that new forms of governance and new rules are required for survival , it is hard for the ECB to weigh in on outside global issues .
Yet that could be precisely the problem .
Until now , most of the large global players have succeeded in working together to seek solutions to the problems of the global financial crisis .
The coordination in areas of financial services regulatory reform , particularly in areas like derivatives , has been unprecedented .
But when it is national currencies that are being defended as opposed to multinational banks , there is a strong danger that multilateral coordination is going to break down .
If the ECB looks to protect the euro above all else , the Fed to protect the dollar and the Chinese the yuan , we will all lose out .
Since its inception , the ECB has done the difficult job of balancing different cultures and methods of monetary policy .
I hope that , even while it is under intense internal pressure , it can use its expertise in these areas to enhance cooperation beyond the EU to a global level .
Madam President , I would first like to express my heartfelt thanks to Mr Balz for such constructive cooperation .
I can only emphasise the fact that despite coming from different positions , working together was a positive experience .
Many people thought - and I would like to underline this fact again here - that the crisis in the euro area was over .
Ireland shows that this is not the case .
Just as before , Europe is voluntarily offering itself up to the financial markets .
The EU Member States are still having to offer their treasury bonds in the bazaar of the financial markets and try to gain the confidence of the speculators by adopting suicidal austerity packages .
At the weekend , we saw once again where that leads us .
This time it was not the Greeks , who were supposedly out to deceive everyone , but rather Ireland - the star pupil - that was forced to turn to the European bail-out fund in order to rescue its banking system - a system which had also long been held up as a shining example of deregulation .
In the meantime , the financial sector is already eyeing up Portugal for capitulation as its interest rates continue to rise .
The European Central Bank must share the responsibility for this drama .
It has failed and continues to fail to use eurobonds in order to offer a civilised alternative to this casino approach .
While half of Europe is recovering from the crisis , the ECB idly stands by as the remaining part falls further and further into poverty and uncertainty .
Ruinous cuts across the board by national economies may be to the taste of the European investment and banking giants , but they do nothing to help either Ireland or the monetary union and the ECB .
Please pay no attention to Mrs Merkel 's simplified financial ABC , Mr Trichet .
If you want to save the economic and monetary union , do not leave European treasury bonds hanging in the air .
Introduce eurobonds before the speculators claim their next victim .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , I wanted to ask Mr Klute how his proposal for Europe-wide treasury bonds and eurobonds can be reconciled with the attitude of the German Federal Constitutional Court on such matters , and what he thinks the outcome would be were such a measure to be brought before the German Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe .
( DE ) Madam President , I admit that that is difficult to assess .
I cannot give an off-the-cuff answer to that right now .
Undoubtedly , it is a tricky situation , but I think that things have now developed so far that a rethink might possibly take place .
I am sorry , but I cannot give an off-the-cuff answer to that question .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I read the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' report on the European Central Bank 's annual report with great interest .
The report acknowledges that huge disparities between Member States of the eurozone contributed to the problems we are witnessing .
The report states that ' these imbalances pose considerable difficulties for a suitable monetary policy within the eurozone ' and reiterates that ' the financial crisis in some countries within the euro area is a serious matter for the area as a whole ' , reflecting this ' dysfunction of the euro area ' .
I strain to see the sense in calling for stronger coordination of economic policies within the euro area .
The knee-jerk reaction has been to increase economic governance , but it is limitations of enforced commonality that have led particular Member States into financial crisis , combined with extraneous reasons as yet beyond our control .
Perhaps the system does not allow for the necessary economic elasticity and self-determination to enable governments to deal with idiosyncratic problems effectively , such as rates of inflation .
The report lights upon this point , noting that the crisis and subsequent bail-outs and stimulus packages ' led to far-reaching austerity measures which ... heavily constrain the capacity of governments to act ' .
One argument is that you cannot have a single currency without further homogenisation to iron out differences between Member States and levels of wealth .
Yet any realist knows that this will not happen .
It is contrary to human nature , which logically should shine forth in a democracy , however inconvenient .
Is the eurozone ready for Estonia in January ?
I raise my eyebrows at the statement that ' the adoption of the currency by Estonia shows the status of the euro ' , suggesting that this will ' encourage ( other ) Member States to seek membership ' .
Ideological clinging to the euro will see monetary problems resurface in boom time and bust .
A single currency only works in a tight-knit federal environment .
Perhaps , with this being the Commission 's ultimate intention , they have put the cart before the horse .
Although the UK is not in the eurozone , we suffer the effects of contributing to bail-outs and through the intricately entwined economics inside the Union , it is no use waiting for the ' I told you so ' moment .
It has already passed .

( DE ) Madam President , it would be good if this report by Mr Balz could be presented subject to a reservation , and that would be a reservation as regards memoirs .
I think we might learn a lot more if you would present the chapter on the years 2008-2009 from your point of view , Mr Trichet .
In the absence of such knowledge , we are working somewhat in the dark here , and there is reason to believe that there are many extraneous circumstances of which we are unaware at the present time .
Nevertheless , you have stated that the longer-term financing measures have been extended once again , Mr Trichet .
Perhaps that is a good thing .
History will show us whether it was really such a good idea .
We do not always have to point the finger straight away at Alan Greenspan .
There is just something that I am concerned about , and that is that our citizens are simply not being told what this liquidity aid is actually being used for , and the lack of transparency as regards the way that the Irish are being forced - in many people 's eyes - under this umbrella .
We know that Ireland has already received EUR 130 billion , EUR 35 billion of which has gone to the subsidiary of a German business - Hyporealestate .
Just why is so much pressure being piled on at present ?
Why are we not in a position to say who the real creditors of the Irish banks are ?
Is it my life assurance with Allianz ?
Is it , in fact , the German banks , as is always being claimed ?
If that is the case , are we not having the wrong debate here ?
In which case , we should be honest enough to tell our citizens that it is they that we are bailing out , that it may be your own money that you made the mistake of investing in Ireland , in a banking world built on false foundations .
This , of course , also raises the question of whether every Irish bank is really essential to the system .
Why do we not have the courage to accept that one or other will fail ?
The Leman Brothers solution cannot always be the answer .
We need the risks to be distributed fairly , because a large proportion of the earlier gains undoubtedly went into the private sector .
( HU ) Madam President , first of all , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the splendid job he has done .
Since the European Parliament is the primary institution through which the European Central Bank is accountable to European citizens , I am very pleased about President Trichet 's participation in this plenary , and also that he regularly engages in monetary discussion with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The financial economy is global in nature .
The crisis , too , is global .
It is precisely for this reason that the solutions to the crisis must also be global .
We cannot ignore the fact that the Member States ' economic and financial problems still affect the euro in all its aspects .
I once again agree with the rapporteur .
Unfortunately , the EMU has not complied with nor held Member States accountable for compliance with all the principles of the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is why we speak of government debt growth , and this is why we now see a new wave of the crisis , which is a government debt crisis .
I trust that the issues regarding the ECB 's independence and its responsibility for decision making will be resolved in a reassuring manner , and that this , along with the reform programme aimed at creating a successful economic union , will help strengthen the European Union and the euro area within it .
I am sure that we are able to learn from the crisis and from our mistakes , and that the crisis will create opportunities for us .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the euro is experiencing problems , but what convertible currency is not after the systemic crisis caused by crazy finance ?
Government debt is a serious problem .
Nevertheless , the increase in public deficits is a result of the public bail-out of private banks .
What is more , the economy needed to be revived .
The financial crisis has spread rapidly to the real economy , leading to a sharp downturn and unemployment .
It appears that the world of crazy finance has not learnt from the crisis .
Wall Street and City survivors are speculating on the currency markets and short selling CDSs that they do not even have .
The lending rates for States it is suspected may default must be raised by indirectly imposing austerity policies on them , which will make it even more difficult for them to recover .
European solidarity is being shown with difficulty and sparingly .
The bail-out of Greece means , first and foremost , the bail-out of French and German banks holding a significant portfolio of Greek debts .
The support given to Ireland is , above all , a bail-out of British and German banks that would suffer deeply if Irish banks were to go under .
The fact that the rate of the euro remains volatile is not a sign that the common currency is weak .
It is a reflection of the tension in the markets , especially in the face of a currency war between the Americans and the Chinese .
Since the start of the year , China has no longer been borrowing in dollars , but has been selling them .
The tax situation in the United States is worse than that in Europe .
On top of federal public deficits , there are enormous private deficits .
Forty-eight of the 50 states in the American Union have a deficit budget .
Mr Van Rompuy spoke about the euro struggling to survive .
He is wrong .
The euro , that beacon of stability that Mr Trichet has just spoken about , will outlive Mr Van Rompuy , because the Union and its supporting structure , the Euro Group , are the most important economic unit in the world .
In spite of real problems , to which Europe is responding with continual shilly-shallying , it should be pointed out that , at world level , the 27 are the biggest exporters of goods , the biggest importers of goods , and the biggest exporters of services .
We have the most solvent internal market in the world .
Furthermore , European companies export twice as much within the internal market as they do to world markets .
The Union is the main destination for third-country direct investments .
Companies in the Union hold the biggest investment stocks worldwide .
With 500 million citizens , or 7 % of the world 's population , the Union generates 30 % of gross world product .
The United States generates 25 % , Japan 8 % and China 8 % of world product .
Our European Union , which also provides 55 % of world development aid , could have more of an influence if our leaders had a little more political courage , if they used Europe 's strength .
I will just end by saying that a strict and transparent framework must be imposed on international finance .
We must work together to overcome our problems .

Madam President , as has been highlighted by our colleague Mr Gauzès , some people hate the euro ; they see it as the root of all evil and they cheer at the prospect of the collapse of the eurozone .
But these people are wrong and they live in the past .
The current troubles are not caused by the euro ; on the contrary , the euro protects us from even worse .
We need the common currency but we also need proper governance of the eurozone ; loose cooperation on the basis of unanimity is not an option anymore .
Colleagues , we are on a ship with a giant hole in its side ; it is sink or swim at this moment .
But national governments still seem to think that it is enough to set up task forces and working groups and talk about maybe seeking closer cooperation , and then again maybe not .
The good news is that they seem to be acting more decisively and more quickly in the case of Ireland , because swift action is needed and very welcome .
This is not just about rescuing single countries : it is about the credibility of the eurozone .
It is about the world testing us .
Are we willing and able to act ?
The confidence of the world in the eurozone is essential for the stability of our currency ; the money in our pockets depends on the confidence that others have in us .
So I therefore urge national politicians to stop playing the populist card , or indeed publicly tearing up euro notes , and instead take ownership and take responsibility for our shared currency .
Finally , a word about the austerity measures .
They are much criticised , and some people even say that they will damage the economy .
Of course we have to act with caution , but these measures are necessary to sanitise public finance in the long term and are also a sign of solidarity between countries in the eurozone .
I think we should talk not only about the expenditure side but also about the revenue side , because there too , reforms - whether of the labour market , pensions or social security - are necessary and long overdue .
( NL ) Madam President , the European Central Bank has not known a year as eventful as 2009 since the euro was introduced .
Tackling the crisis has cost a great deal of effort and this is still continuing .
I think that we should have a better and stronger approach to tackling the crisis .
The establishment of the European Emergency Fund is no structural solution .
We will still have huge debts which countries like Greece or Ireland will never be able to repay .
What really helps , however , are stringent , strict budgetary discipline and the accompanying automatic penalties .
Fortunately , Mr Balz 's report is very clear on that point .
The Council should take the same approach in adapting the Stability and Growth Pact .
Cutbacks are needed if we are to overcome the crisis .
The majority of this House should also apply that principle to the European budget .
The acceptance of the 2.9 % budget increase is a very broad compromise already .
No citizen will understand Parliament wanting still more and wanting further compromises .
Therefore , do not do it !

( SK ) Madam President , according to the minutes of the negotiations held between euro area finance ministers from the beginning of September this year , published by the Reuters press agency , you apparently stated , Mr Trichet , that if you had known that Slovakia would not agree to provide voluntary financial assistance to the Greek Government , you would never have agreed to Slovakia being accepted into the euro area .
The project in question had the aim of protecting large financial institutions from extensive losses arising from Greece 's inability to pay its debts , and , as far as I remember , you explicitly referred to it as a manifestation of voluntary solidarity .
Perhaps , Mr President , in your daily dealings involving billions of euro , it has escaped your attention that the amount of money you receive each month for performing your role is enough to cover the monthly living expenses of almost 100 families in my country .
Mr Trichet , if you really think that these families living on EUR 600 to 700 a month , or pensioners living on EUR 300 a month , should further reduce their daily food consumption only so that your colleagues from the banks and financial funds can keep their profits , pay out high bonuses and indulge themselves in ever greater amounts of caviar , then please do not call that solidarity .
I know that the situation in Europe is very complex , but Slovakia is definitely not a country that you are in any position to criticise .
( PT ) Madam President , the intervention in Ireland ultimately proves that the EU should have come up with a common solution for European banks , particularly the large banks , almost before dealing with any other matter .
In practice , today we are openly discussing the failure of states , yet we still do not have a clear proposal for a solution for European banks .
The intervention in Greece and the way it has developed prove that Europe needs European solutions , and the solution identified thus far is principally based on bilateral aid , whereby every country is subjected to the judgment of its partners based on criteria that are neither clear nor stable .
The European Central Bank ( ECB ) has acted as an anchor in this situation , filling some of the gaps , particularly in terms of the vulnerability of sovereign debt .
Make no mistake , however : we cannot continue like this in the medium term .
I would therefore like to ask the President of the ECB the following three questions .
Firstly , what is the ECB 's position on a stable model for constructing a true system of solidarity between the Member States with regard to sovereign debt ?
We need this , and we should not refuse to face up to reality .
Secondly , what were the differences , if it is possible for us to identify them , which prompted the ECB not to endorse all the recommendations of the report compiled by the task force led by Mr Van Rompuy ?
Thirdly , does the ECB believe that the EU can survive with the increasing divergence of growth suffered by the Member States , and without a common instrument that restores some convergence in these growth strategies ?
( GA ) Madam President , as a Member for Ireland , I cannot say that I am too proud of what is currently happening in my own country .
However , I am sure that most of our citizens want to do whatever needs doing in order to make things right .
And to put things right in Ireland , two things are necessary .
Firstly , unfortunately we have had to turn to the support from the ECB and the IMF in the short term .
Secondly , and more importantly , the supervisory architecture of the authorities in Europe needs to work effectively so that the cosy relationship between dodgy banks , sleepy regulators and weak governments does not happen again in the future .
Thirdly , I just want to ask people to lay off a little with regard to corporation tax because , firstly , it is a matter of subsidiarity ; secondly , other countries in the EU have similar rates ; and thirdly , it would exacerbate a very difficult situation in Ireland at the moment .
( GA ) So , I know that the people of Ireland are eager to get on with the job and that things will improve in due course .

Madam President , Commissioner Rehn and Mr Trichet have given us more information here this evening than the Irish Government , which has misled us and lied to us for months .
They have been more concerned to defend their historical legacy than to defend the future of our people 's livelihoods , and indeed Ireland 's and Europe 's currency .
My appeal to Commissioner Rehn and Mr Trichet tonight is that they ensure that the timeframe for aid and the targets for deficits and debt are such that the social objectives of Europe are taken into account , as well as the need to ensure that Ireland 's capacity to grow its economy and create jobs is not undermined .
Will you confirm also that you fully understand that increasing Ireland 's 12.5 % corporation profits tax is not a solution to Ireland 's crisis , nor indeed Europe 's current crisis , but could , in fact , create an economic and jobs wasteland in Ireland ?
( SV ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Trichet and Mr Rehn very much for their absolutely excellent work in these turbulent times .
I have a very specific question for you both .
Back in my country , which does not belong to the euro area , there is currently a discussion taking place along these lines : ' This demonstrates precisely what we said when voting against the euro in 2001 .
It shows that we were right - the euro cannot work ' .
This is , of course , an erroneous claim .
I will therefore ask you two gentlemen a question .
I believe that it is a key question and a key responsibility for the two of you to explain why Europe and the euro area have ended up in these difficulties .
Is it because the euro area and the common currency have problems ?
Or is it because we have a number of politicians in the individual countries , in other words , in countries such as Ireland , Portugal , Spain and Greece , who have not actually done their job ?
Gentlemen , you need to explain this .
Otherwise , I will never be able to explain it back home in my country .
Madam President , I would like to put a question to Mr Trichet .
As President of the European Central Bank , why have you and the European Commission utterly capitulated to the speculators and assorted sharks on the international financial markets ?
You allowed them to engineer a panic in the markets over the Irish crisis - a panic designed to get you to intervene to guarantee the bond holders the billions that they gambled in bad debts .
Because they threatened you that they would attack Portugal and Spain next , you and Commissioner Rehn utterly capitulated to a market dictatorship that is unelected , faceless and unaccountable .
Can I ask you to justify this ?
Private speculators and bondholders gamble tens of billions in private deals with private developers and private bankers in Ireland for private profit , and when the gamble fails , you support the pathetic government in Ireland to saddle working people , pensioners and the poor with the cost of this gamble .
Now you have sent in the IMF as the shock troops for neoliberal capitalism to make the Irish people pay .
Morally , and in every other way , they should not pay and they must resist this disastrous attack on their services , living standards and democracy .
Madam President , my constituents in London simply cannot afford the GBP 288 estimated per family as their part of the contribution to the seven billion bail-out of Ireland .
The Irish are the authors of their own misfortune : their government mismanaged their economy and fuelled a house-building boom unrelated to reality .
But worst of all , they joined the European single currency .
The first step in solving their problems is to leave the euro ; instead , Ireland has chosen to subject itself to financial governance from the European Union .
The longer it takes to leave the euro , the worse the consequences of the exit will be .
The same applies , of course , to Portugal , Italy , Spain and Greece and , no doubt , others .
The only sensible thing that the late and unlamented Labour government did was to keep Britain out of the euro .
A sensible thing that the coalition government can do is to stop throwing good money after bad .
Madam President , Mr Batten is right .
The Irish Government horribly mismanaged our country , and it is a sad day for the Irish people that we are mentioned in this Chamber in these particular circumstances .
But we are in a situation where we need solidarity .
Perhaps Mr Batten does not understand that word , or that Ireland needs England as much as England needs Ireland and its economy .
We are all very much interlinked : let us not forget that .
Can I just ask some questions ?
Because in these emotional times , we need some cool heads and clear information .
Where stand the bank stress tests this evening , when the Irish banks appear to be absolutely overstretched and stressed out ?
Secondly , there is a question for the ECB to answer about what its mandate is .
I think that was inferred in the opening remarks , because there are interlinked relationships between all banks .
Those banks from Germany and France and other countries who invested in Irish banks need to look at what they did and why they did it .
Lastly , there is political instability this evening in Ireland .
It is regrettable , but it is necessary that we have a general election .
( FI ) Madam President , Robert Schuman , founder of the EU , said that the European Union would develop through a series of crises , and that development may now well be rapid , because there are quite a lot of crises around .
This poses an enormous challenge to the political system in the European Union and the Member States .
It has to be said that Ireland 's problems are partly due to the fact that the country has a weak government .
The political establishment now has to be careful that the cure is not worse than the disease .
For example , the representative of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance said here that the corporate income tax rate in Ireland should be raised to the European level , but that might actually be a death blow to Ireland , its growth and employment .
The idea is to get the money back , in the form of growth and employment for Ireland , and not to punish the country .
We need to help Ireland , not punish it .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Trichet , we all know that the main task of the European Central Bank is to ensure monetary stability and that you can best achieve this aim by being politically independent .
We have always supported you in this .
The crises of the last two years have shown that you have a further task , and that is to ensure the stability of the financial markets and of the financial system .
This task , too , you have performed very professionally and convincingly .
However , to do so , you have had to accept being yoked together with the governments concerned .
In other words , you were not able to act with complete political independence here ; instead , you had to work together with the governments .
I would be interested to know how exactly you would like to arrange this role in the future to ensure firstly , that you are independent , and secondly , that you can continue to perform this task properly without governments exploiting this opportunity to in fact undermine your independence .

( PT ) Madam President , the imbalances and disparities between economies in the euro area are being exacerbated , in spite of all the promises and proposals , and the question that arises is this : do you not think that it is time to review policies ?
Do you not see that insisting that countries with such weak economies adhere strictly to the irrational criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact is leading to greater disparities , inequalities , unemployment and poverty ?
Do you not think that it is time to pay attention to social sustainability ?
One example is the situation in Portugal , where workers are to hold a general strike this week in protest at so-called austerity policies , which mean cuts in wages and investment , and which will trigger an even more severe recession .
Do you not think that it is time to change policies and give full priority to social sustainability and create solidarity mechanisms , particularly ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , honourable Members , first of all , I wish to thank you for a very responsible debate .
Mrs Jaakonsaari said that the European Union has always developed through a series of crises .
That is largely true , and that is also the case this time , in the short term , while we have to be like the fire brigade and put out the fires that now blaze and threaten financial stability in Europe .
At present , we are working mainly in Ireland to safeguard the stability of the European economy .
At the same time , we are trying to build a longerterm European architecture that will actually strengthen economic union and reinforce monetary union , which is already sturdy at the moment , by means of robust and genuine economic union , which , in other words , means the implementation of the original objective for economic and monetary union .
Both are important tasks , and we cannot afford to neglect either .
Instead , we have to be like the fire brigade the whole time , putting out the forest fires and , at the same time , building a new European architecture for better regulation of the financial markets and for economic union to function more successfully .
Ireland is in difficulties .
Mrs Jaakonsaari is well aware that we in Finland have a saying that translates roughly as ' Help a man when he is in trouble , not when he is not ' : this also applies just as well to women , of course .
It is now very important that we all keep a cool head and try and support Ireland while it is in difficulties .
This is not just for Ireland itself but also for European economic stability , so that we do not allow the first green shoots of recovery to be harmed by this situation .
It is important that we make it possible for the European economy to grow sustainably and for us to be better capable of ensuring employment .
This is the very issue : sustainable growth in the European economy , and employment .
I want to thank you for the substance of the debate and indeed , I agree with Mr Gauzès that yes , we need to explain better why we are doing what we are doing , and we have to reassure our citizens .
These are tough and confusing times .
They are prone to nervousness and misinformation , and therefore we all need to do our share in communicating properly on the challenges .
Here the European Parliament and all of you , as citizens ' representatives , have a key role to play .
It is not about finding someone to blame : it is about strengthening the European construction that has protected European citizens from much worse consequences .
Any talk of deconstruction of the European project is irresponsible .
All the Member States would have been in a much more difficult situation without the European Union and its protective shield .
The euro is , and continues to be , the cornerstone of the European Union ; it is not only a technical monetary arrangement , it is indeed the core political project of the European Union .
Therefore , it is indeed essential that we do our best , do our utmost , to protect and reinforce this European construction .
I want to conclude by saying that Mrs Goulard made a very important point when she referred to the original objective of those who created the Economic and Monetary Union : to have a very strong political dimension , in fact , a political union .
President Trichet is better placed to testify on that than me because he was there then , but I would tend to agree , and that is why in our legislative package , which is now in your hands and in the hands of the Council , we want to supplement the strong monetary union by finally creating a genuine and strong economic union .
To my mind , it is indeed now high time in the EMU to fill the ' E ' with life , and that is what the legislative package on reinforcing economic governance in the end is about .
Member of the Commission . - ( in response to Mr De Rossa , who had spoken with the microphone off . )
Madam President , as you well know , I am ready to meet with the Irish MEPs to discuss issues related to Ireland , but - no matter how important and difficult the situation in Ireland is at the moment - this debate is about the ECB and Parliament 's report on the ECB .
There have been so many questions during this discussion concerning Ireland that it is simply not possible to respond to all of them .
As I said , I am ready to meet with the Irish MEPs and I hope I can meet with all of you tomorrow so that we can discuss this more precisely .
Firstly , let me say that the questions that have been asked are extremely pertinent and cover all the issues that are important today in great depth .
I will respond simultaneously to the Members of Parliament because a number of your questions converged .
First of all , I would like to restate : we are responsible for the ' M ' of EMU , the monetary union .
We have a sentiment on the ' E ' , economic union , but we are responsible for the ' M ' and what we have been instructed to do by the people of Europe , by the parliaments that voted the Maastricht Treaty , is to deliver price stability .
This is our mandate .
We are independent to deliver price stability to 330 million fellow citizens .
As I explained a moment ago , we have delivered price stability in line with our definition , which was in the continuity of the best definition in the world , and let me say that our definition of price stability now appears to be the global benchmark .
We have delivered price stability over the nearly 12 years of the euro and we are credible for the next ten years according to all the information we have .
So I want that to be very clear , because - as Olli Rehn said - many of the questions I have are questions that deal with the economic union , which is , of course , part of EMU , but we are not responsible ourselves for economic union .
We have our ideas ; we have our recommendations ; we have our diagnosis and analysis and I will come back to that of course .
My second major remark : we are experiencing the worst crisis since World War II at a global level .
Had we - both the central banks , including the ECB , and governments - not reacted rapidly and boldly , we would have experienced the worst crisis not since World War II , but since World War I , because we would have had a great depression and this fact - that we have avoided the great depression at global level - has called for immense action by governments and parliaments .
In our own analysis , the taxpayer risk that has been mobilised to help avoid a dramatic depression is approximately the same on both sides of the Atlantic in terms of GDP , approximately 27 % of GDP .
It was not , of course , utilised in terms of spending , it was even less utilised in terms of losses , if I may say , but nevertheless , it is an immense effort that has been made .
Otherwise we would have had a dramatic crisis .
Of course , this means that the global finance and the global economy is extremely fragile and we have to find ways at a global level to avoid this fragility .
But this is not a European crisis .
It is the repercussion on Europe , on European governance , of a global crisis , and there is exactly the same kind of meditation and reflection on what to do in the US or in Japan , to mention only two other major advanced economies .
They also have problems of the first magnitude and I would like us not to transform what is a legitimate reflection on how to run major advanced economies better into a criticism of the euro which , as I said , has delivered exactly in line with what was expected .
Let me also say that when I look at the finance and fiscal position , the fiscal position of the major advanced economies , I can say that Europe as a whole and the EU area in particular is in a better situation - Mr Goebbels said this - than Japan or the US in terms of public financial deficit .
Perhaps something like around 6 % , even a little bit less , as a consolidated fiscal position next year , when it is of the order of magnitude of ten or more in the two other major advanced economies .
I say that also for us to have an idea of the order of magnitude .
So what we have is bad behaviour on the part of a number of countries that are creating problems in their own country and are creating financial instability .
It is not the euro which is at stake ; it is financial instability driven by bad behaviour of fiscal policies , of course , with the interaction with markets which is always there , as we are in market economies .
Again , fundamentally , our diagnosis is that what was abnormal in the functioning of Europe was that we had poor governance , poor governance of the economic union .
I can say , sadly , that this is not surprising because the Stability and Growth Pact has been criticised wrongly by some since the very beginning .
And I have to remind you that I was myself reporting in Parliament on our battle because major countries wanted to blow up the pact , or at least to considerably weaken it .
Sadly , I have to say that this was the major countries inside the euro area and that the small and medium-sized countries were resisting this tendency .
This was in 2004 and 2005 .
You will remember it was a fierce battle because it went up to the Court of Justice , and the Commission - and I have to pay homage to the Commission - was lucid , more lucid at the time than the Council , and we were fully supporting the Commission .
So I have to remind all of you of that .
Now I have had a number of questions on precisely what we are calling for at this stage .
I have to say that we already said , when the Commission made its proposal , that we thought it was not enough .
Taking into account what we feel , taking into account what we see , in the functioning of Europe as a whole , the 27 and the 16 ( and tomorrow 17 ) , we considered that the first proposal of the Commission was too weak in terms of automaticity and in terms of rigour of the governance , both for the fiscal surveillance and for the competitiveness indicators , the imbalances .
So , to the extent that the present state of the proposal which is made by the Council is even weakening the Commission proposal , we cannot say anything to you , honourable Members of Parliament , but that we trust that we are up to the demands of the situation ; and the demands of the situation are that we need very strong surveillance , very strong governance .
In 2005 , on behalf of the Governing Council , I said that we were not satisfied at all by what was , at the time , the position of the Council , and what was finally accepted .
So I do not want to go further because we will have a number of occasions to be in contact with Parliament .
I have , of course , noted what Mrs Goulard said in terms of very hard work of Parliament , together with the Council and the Commission , to work out what will finally be the position of Europe .
But again , our message is very clear on that .
Now let me turn for just one minute to the issue of communication .
We have , of course , to permanently improve our communication .
We try to do that .
Let me only say that as regards our own communication , we are giving the clear definition of price stability which permits everybody to judge what we are doing permanently in real time .
I would also like to say that we were the first big major central bank to introduce press conferences immediately after the Governing Council .
We were the first to publish an introductory statement which is our diagnosis of the situation .
So we try to be as accountable in terms of communication as possible .
The only thing that we do not do is to publish the individual position of the various members of the Governing Council .
We trust that it is very important that for the institution which is issuing a currency for 16 states that are united in Europe , but are still sovereign states , it is better that it is the Governing Council as a whole which appears to be the pertinent entity in terms of our decision .
Now there were a number of very important questions .
Let me only mention the remark that we are responsible for the ' M ' , but to the extent that the ' E ' is in the hands of the governments and of the Commission , we have in this domain , of course , to take into account the ' E ' , as always , as any independent central bank does : if the fiscal policy is sound and reasonable , the burden on the monetary policy to deliver price stability is light .
If we have a bad fiscal policy , then we are overburdening the decisions that have to be taken by the central bank .
I would say it is the same for us in terms of interaction with the governments , but we are fiercely independent and the fact that we have had to embark on a number of non-standard measures , as I have explained , was to allow us to transmit our monetary policy impulses as well as possible in circumstances where markets were not functioning correctly and therefore , the decisions that we were taking on interest rates were not transmitted correctly to the economy as a whole .
This is the essence of the non-standard measures , to help restore a more normal functioning of the monetary policy transmission channels and we very clearly made the distinction - I repeated that in a recent colloquy we had in which Ben Bernanke participated - between the standard measures that are really what counts in terms of monetary policy stance , and the non-standard measures designed to help the transmission of monetary policy .
Now let me only say that I also noted the important question ...
( FR ) With regard to Mr Gauzès 's question on communication , which I believe others have repeated , there is a tendency , in some communication channels , to consider Europe as some sort of scapegoat .
If things go wrong , it is Europe 's fault .
We know that this is not true , and the European Parliament , of course , knows it better than anyone .
There is also a tendency to say that if things do not go well , it is the Commission 's fault or it is the fault of the European Central Bank or , better still , it is the euro 's fault .
This is the classic scapegoat phenomenon .
The euro is the currency that has maintained its internal and external stability remarkably well .
Moreover , I have not yet said that it is more remarkable than anything a central bank has ever done , within the founding countries of the euro , over the last 50 years - I saved that for last , if I may say so .
I believe that we have here a currency that is , in fact , solid , and solid in historical terms , too .
Therefore , let us beware of the scapegoat phenomenon .
I have to say that we all need to work very hard in terms of communication , but I also address that message to the European Central Bank and to the euro system as a whole ; in other words , to all the national central banks that belong to the euro area .
Moreover , I would say that this is also undoubtedly a problem faced by the 27 , and hence a problem for the European Union as a whole .
( Applause )
Thank you very much for your detailed answer , Mr Trichet .
I think at this point it is necessary to give a more detailed answer than is usually the case in this House .

Madam President , I , too , would like to express my great thanks to Mr Trichet , Commissioner Rehn and , above all , the Members of this House for such an open and comprehensive debate .
It has been highly objective , even if , towards the end , our honourable Members from Ireland sometimes let their emotions show through - which is quite understandable .
In the brief time that I have available , I would like to mention three points .
The first is the independence of the European Central Bank .
I believe it was right and vital for the Heads of State or Government - under the general leadership of Helmut Kohl , a revered citizen of Europe and , at that time , the German Chancellor - to have instigated the independence of the ECB .
The European Central Bank is the guardian of the euro .
I believe that the euro has been as stable as it has in the recent months of the crisis precisely because , in the final event , we have such an ECB .
I would therefore ask you , Mr Trichet , to continue to act as independently as possible in the months ahead .
If people express their opinions to you , by all means listen to them ; but in the final event , the president and managing board of the ECB must safeguard this independence .
Secondly , we need to be more open with the citizens of the European Union .
This is a important point .
Above all , we should not always provide them with information in the language of Brussels , for which we have come in for some criticism , but in such a way that it is genuinely understood by those to whom we are sending the message - the people of Europe .
As far as I am concerned , that is a very important point .
Finally , Mr Trichet mentioned Basel III .
This is another thing that I would certainly emphasise .
We want to implement Basel III promptly .
However , I only want to implement Basel III promptly if everyone at G20 level implements it simultaneously .
We cannot have Europe taking the lead once again and being the sole trailblazer , to the great detriment of our international competitiveness .
I would therefore argue that Europe should actually implement this together with its partners worldwide , or else consider what the alternatives are .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Balz for all his efforts in compiling this report .
The austerity packages proposed for exiting the crisis should not result in measures which could jeopardise economic recovery .
I believe that a balance needs to be struck between the economic consolidation process and the protection of investments through jobs and sustainable development .
The lesson provided by the Member States which have entered the euro area unprepared must make us think seriously about setting realistic deadlines over time .
In the current situation , a delay of one or two years may be acceptable .
Enlargement must continue , with the prerequisite of meeting the Maastricht criteria .
In this respect , I believe that adopting the euro should not be seen as a momentary solution , but as being part of a medium-term wide-ranging political strategy .
in writing . - I welcome and support this report .
However , we should keep in mind that , once all the talk about fiscal consolidation , regulation and macro-economic governance ends , we must examine what effect this has had on economic activity - which is the bottom line of any discussion .
The reality is that we need good and effective regulation and better economic governance so that small and medium-sized businesses , which are the main driver of economic growth , develop and grow .
The sad truth is that these businesses have suffered greatly in the past two years .
As a result , we have high and rising unemployment .
The ECB 's policy of pumping in billions of euro to help save indebted banks was the right thing to do , but many banks have become over-reliant on the ECB 's liquidity .
So now we have a situation where banks which provided credit too readily in the boom years are refusing to grant credit to small businesses .
If this continues then we will not have the growth needed to reduce budget deficits and government debt levels .
Unemployment will rise , and our economic performance will stagnate .
Let us act wisely if we do not want to fail the people of Europe again .
Common system of value added tax and duration of obligation to respect a minimum standard rate ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Casa , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2006 / 112 / EC on the common system of value added tax , with regard to the duration of the obligation to respect a minimum standard rate - C7-0173 / 2010 - .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to draw this Chamber 's attention to the fact that an important vote is currently under way within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and therefore I have to excuse many of the Members who are not going to be present here as we are running late and the voting process has only just begun .
As the President rightly stated , this report I drew up is extremely important as it concerns the VAT system that we are seeking to amend .
Now , as everyone knows , the negotiations in order to modify the permanent VAT system have been ongoing for quite some time , yet no significant headway has been made .
The transitory system that has been used since 1993 is continuously being extended , and we all know that this situation is not a sustainable one and that we need to find a more lasting solution .
The current transitory system is not yielding the desired results when it comes to the internal market .
This system diminishes businesses ' efficiency and also restricts their effectiveness between borders .
It is also worrying that this system gives rise to complex forms of fraud , such as carousel fraud , which we discussed recently within this very Parliament .
These bear a seriously negative impact on the Member States ' income .
The solution facing us is not an easy one , and the right solution can be adopted only after an in-depth debate and long consultation periods have taken place .
We are all aware of the Commission 's recent commitment to draw up a Green Paper in the near future in order to stimulate a discussion on this issue .
The report I am in charge of urges the Commission to ensure that the process is an efficient one and that we do everything in our power to ensure that , firstly , the new system will improve the internal market 's effectiveness ; secondly , that this new system reduces the burdens on the business sector ; and thirdly , that it combats fraud as effectively as possible .
This report , which , as we know , has already been approved by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , also urges the Commission to ensure that the concrete proposals will be made public by 2013 .
Let me underline this last point : I am not proposing that they should have a system that is adopted and in place by 2013 .
I am saying that the proposals must be made public by 2013 .
What I would like , however , and I believe I am expressing the viewpoint of the Members in this Chamber , is for this new system to be up and running before the end of this legislature , so that the current transitory system need not be re-extended .
Whilst we will approve the extension of the new system , we expect concrete steps to be taken without delay in reflecting upon these new proposals .
I would like to thank my colleagues , especially the shadow rapporteurs , for this report , and I augur that more fervent discussions on this topic will take place , which will give way to a speedy solution .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the European Parliament and , in particular , David Casa , for his constructive and quick report on the Commission 's proposal to extend by five years the existing rules on the minimum standard VAT rate .
This proposal is simple and is not controversial .
A quick opinion of the European Parliament on the Commission 's proposal will allow the Council to adopt the proposal before the end of the year - just in time , before the current rule expires .
The proposal has indeed already been discussed in the Council working party .
No obstacle appeared to a speedy approval .
As stated by David Casa , the Commission 's proposal will give businesses the necessary legal certainty and allow further evaluation of the appropriate level of the standard VAT rate at EU level .
The Commission will indeed launch very soon a broad debate on the future of VAT in order to evaluate and address the numerous shortcomings in the EU VAT system such as its complexity , the high level of administrative burdens for businesses , and fraud .
Before the end of the year , I will propose to my fellow Commissioners the publication of a Green Paper on the evaluation of the current system and preferable ways forward for the future .
I am looking forward to reactions as regards such issues as how to achieve a simpler , more robust and modern VAT system and how to reduce collection and compliance costs for businesses , in particular , SMEs , whilst limiting fraud and providing flexibility for Member States .
On the basis of the results obtained , the Commission will define its future policy in the VAT area in a Communication on the way forward at the end of 2011 .
The amendments tabled clearly demonstrate the Parliament 's interest in participating in this discussion on the future VAT strategy .
I welcome this sign of interest and hope to have a fruitful debate with you on this important issue at a later stage .
However , I consider that these amendments are outside the scope of the proposal discussed today , which is limited to extending the period during which the minimum standard rate applies .
Moreover , some of the amendments pre-empt a debate we should have on the basis of the Green Paper .
This applies , in particular , to the amendment which requests the Commission to come up with a proposal on definitive rules on VAT rates by 2013 .
At this stage , the Commission cannot commit on a date to table a proposal on VAT rates .
It cannot predict the outcome of the consultation , whose scope will be broader than the VAT rates .
I hope that this consultation will give a clear idea of the priorities for the future of VAT .
The Commission 's planning for future legislative proposals will therefore depend to a great extent on the outcome of this consultation .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal focuses on allowing the current system to continue to run until 2015 and an endeavour to restrict tax rate bands to 10 % .
This is very important , because otherwise , competition between Member States might be distorted in certain sectors .
Central to this parliamentary report is the notion that it will not be long before the Commission initiates a broad programme of consultation to establish a new system of value added tax .
In my opinion , the amendments that Members have tabled are , contrary to the view of the Commissioner , extremely important , as even at this stage , we want to mark the direction in which we hope that this new VAT system will go .
In future , we need to be able to lighten the administrative burden associated with VAT and make it as easy as possible for small and mediumsized enterprises , in particular , to produce reports , though at the same time effectively combating VAT fraud .
The public economy in many European countries at present is in a mess , and one solution proposed is to start to raise VAT rates .
However , that will not be of any help in countries where it is common to avoid paying VAT .
Here , I would like to refer to the report by Mr Casa adopted earlier on here .
It focused , in particular , on ways to combat VAT fraud in connection with goods and services that were prone to this sort of abuse .
I hope that the Commission will actually start to do something about this in the future .
Mr President , as indicated in the Council 's proposal for a directive , the minimum VAT rate has helped keep the system operating at an acceptable level .
I believe that we should consider having a common regulatory framework which would include the conclusions reached following the experience of the budgetary imbalances highlighted by the financial crisis .
A new European VAT strategy is required , focused on reducing red tape and the fiscal obstacles which hamper businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises .
We must also consider the need to prevent and combat fraud .
However , until this strategy has been finalised , I believe that the decision to extend the transitional provision on the minimum VAT rate until 31 December 2015 is intended to reassure the business community , prevent structural imbalances in the European Union and encourage harmonisation of fiscal legislation .
Pending the Commission Green Paper on the review of the VAT system , I would like to highlight the tendency of some governments facing recession to increase the VAT rate to 24-25 % , as has happened in Romania and Hungary .
The relative commitment to keep the maximum VAT rate within a 10 % range above the 15 % limit has been observed up to now .
However , I believe that we need an absolute ban in this respect to prevent any breaches of the 25 % threshold .
Let us not forget that beyond these statistics , we are dealing with ordinary citizens whose standard of living is being increasingly affected by austerity policies and excessive taxation .
I would like to end by saying that overtaxation is not a remedy for an ailing economy .
It only serves to prolong the agony .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur very much .
As a matter of principle , I believe that we should avoid controlling consumption by means of VAT rates .
However , as long as exceptions and reduced VAT rates do not obviously interfere with the free market , we have hitherto chosen to accept differences between EU Member States .
However , as you well know , Professor Monti states in his report on the single market that current differences can also adversely affect the single market .
It is therefore important for us to call for a definitive system of VAT rates and to clearly point out that a review of the VAT Directive should use the single market strategy as a guideline rather than the separate interests of the individual countries .
It is also important , as the Commissioner says , for us to focus on reducing the administrative burdens , removing tax barriers and improving the business environment , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises , while at the same time ensuring that we create a system that stands firm against fraud .
Taxes are , of course , a very national matter and one in which the nations ' self-determination is important .
At the same time , it is important to remember that a well-functioning internal market probably requires more and closer cooperation , including with regard to matters of taxation , than we have today .
I therefore hope that the Commission - and the Commissioner - will have the courage to tackle these issues in its forthcoming proposals and that these proposals will actually take as their starting point a well-functioning internal market , despite national opposition .
Difficult questions in difficult times require detailed analysis .
( SK ) Mr President , in the submitted proposal , the Commission proposes applying a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 % for a further 5 years up to 2015 .
Even though I understand the Commission 's argument that it wants , through this directive , to provide companies with legal certainty , I think that the VAT analysis requires some very intensive work .
The reason for this , in my opinion , is that many companies and many cases of tax losses in cross-border trade show that the VAT system in Europe is very badly organised .
It is not just a problem of the actual rate ; it is a problem of the rules applied on the national market and in international trade , which allow these scams to operate quite legitimately in many cases .
I would therefore like to use my speech to make a call for the review of the entire VAT system , which I think would be in the interests both of our economies and of our businesses .
I consider a deadline of 2013 to be quite realistic , and we should simply move forward on this problem not by sorting out the rates , but by sorting out the rules .
Mr President , taxes are , at best , a necessary evil , and should always reflect spending needs .
A tax rate that is set before spending needs are decided is a recipe for taking people 's money and then deciding what to spend it on .
It is a recipe for profligacy .
Harmonisation of VAT rates to a common standard and a common reduced rate , which was the proposal of the Commission back in 1993 , would take yet more power out of the hands of Member States .
The levying of taxation is one of the defining characteristics of a sovereign state .
It will be yet another step towards the sovereign state being the European Union , and Member States simply being powerless appendices to it .
Combating fraud and easing burdens on SMEs are red herrings .
VAT harmonisation is about centralisation and the consolidation of EU power .
( RO ) Mr President , the aim of the new VAT strategy must be to reduce administrative burdens , remove fiscal obstacles and improve the business climate , especially for SMEs .
There is a noticeable degree of imbalance in relation to the development of the internal market .
For this reason , European businesses have been put at a disadvantage .
In addition , the VAT system , as currently designed and implemented by Member States , has weaknesses that fraudsters use to their advantage .
I would like to call on the Commission to present the results of its analyses .
It will also have to arrange consultations on the new VAT strategy with all stakeholders .
In this respect , common aspects will have to be dealt with , such as reduced VAT rates , exemptions from the scheme , the option to set a maximum rate and , last but not least , the place of taxation of intra-EU supplies .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I want to thank you for the comments and the views expressed during this debate .
I am glad to see that the European Parliament and the Commission share views on the need to rethink the current VAT system .
As I indicated in my opening remarks , I welcome the spirit of the amendments relating to the future of VAT .
Nevertheless , the Commission considers that this technical proposal only concerns the periodical extension of the minimum level of the standard VAT rate .
The outcome of the consultations on a new VAT strategy is only mentioned in order to justify the reason why it is premature to set a permanent standard rate level .
There is therefore no need to refer to the aims and the framework of the new VAT strategy in this context at this stage .
I also repeat that the Commission cannot commit today on a date for the future legislative proposal on rates .
We will first need to have the debate on the future of VAT , which will give a clear idea on the priorities for the Commission .
The outcome of this consultation will steer the Commission 's planning for the future legislative proposal .
We are finalising our work on the Green Paper and , in the coming weeks , we will produce the real questions for debate for everyone involved : the general public , Members of the European Parliament , stakeholders and the Member States .
The questions which will be raised clearly address issues which were raised during today 's debate .
I am looking forward to fruitful debates in the coming months in order to enable the Commission to develop a much better strategy for VAT in the future .
Mr President , yes , I am indeed glad that the Commissioner has understood that we are calling for the drawing up of a Green Paper without delay in order to fuel a more in-depth debate on the Commission 's proposals .
As my fellow Members in this Chamber have mentioned , we must quickly rid the system of all types of fraud and help the business sector as much as we can to eliminate the barriers that the current system creates .
We also want to see a more effective internal market .
Today , we did not discuss what solutions are required .
What we are asking of the Commission is to come up with proposals without delay so as to help instigate proper discussions on the new system , thus enabling us to improve upon what we currently have as soon as possible .
I understand that the aim of this report is , in actual fact , to extend the time period .
However , I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that we are eager for it to present us with proposals as promptly as possible , as this will allow us to share our own ideas in turn , and ultimately guarantee a fairer system for everyone .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 : 30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
For most EU Member States and third countries with internationally interlinked markets , VAT ( or sales tax ) is one of the main sources of financing for the state .
Sales tax is therefore at least as important as direct taxes .
Maintaining a minimum standard rate of 15 % for the next 5 years will aid competition in the internal market and will provide legal certainty for companies .
With regard to the reduced VAT rates in the EU , in the case of reduced VAT rates on certain services , such as repairs , hairdressing or beauty treatment businesses , the Commission must also take care to avoid distortions of competition .
Such forms of tax relief have a negative effect on Austrian small businesses , for example , which may not be able to stand up to competition from Slovakian or Hungarian service providers .
The solution to this is as follows : YES to the targeted subsidising of SMEs , including by means of sales tax , BUT while avoiding distortions of competition between the Member States .
Urgent aid to Haiti ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on urgent aid to Haiti .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is deeply concerned by the deterioration of the cholera situation in Haiti .
The number of casualties among the hospitalised cases is increasing sharply day by day .
The number of people admitted to hospitals comes to more than 20 000 .
At the end of last week , more than 1 100 people had already lost their lives .
But it is feared that these figures are severely underestimated .
The fatality rate is very high and shows that people arrive too late at health centres .
Cholera treatment is simple , but early access to treatment is key to limiting fatalities .
Treating cholera patients also requires considerable human resources .
The Haitian public health system is now seriously overstretched , despite substantial support from the international community .
Médecins sans Frontières , as one of the front-line medical actors , is calling on all groups and agencies present in Haiti to step up the size and speed of their efforts .
The whole country is now affected .
The epidemic is spreading at an alarming rate in the capital , Port-au-Prince .
Slums such as Cité Soleil are especially prone to contagion due to very bad hygiene conditions and poor access to clean water .
We are focusing on saving lives through prompt treatment of those affected , increasing access to clean water , promoting better hygiene behaviour and supporting epidemiological surveillance in order to know where and how the epidemic is evolving .
The Commission has reinforced its humanitarian presence with relevant medical expertise and mobilised funds - EUR 12 million - to support partners in Haiti .
The European mechanism for civil protection has also been activated through the Monitoring and Information centre of the European Commission and has already cofinanced the transport of in-kind assistance provided by France .
Another offer from Austria has just entered the pipeline .
An EU civil protection and technical support team with Member States ' experts is to be deployed early this week .
Experts from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control have been deployed by DG SANCO to assess the best way to reinforce epidemiological surveillance in Haiti , and further cooperation is under consideration .
After the recent incidents related to civil unrest in Cap Haitien and Port-au-Prince , we are following closely the security situation with our partners and the relevant UN agencies , particularly ahead of the presidential elections of 28 November .
The Commission was in touch with the UN Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordination , Baroness Amos .
We fully support her in stressing the importance of allowing national and international aid workers to continue lifesaving activities without disruption .
Considering the serious and rapid deterioration of the cholera situation , further contributions are urgently required to fill gaps in health , water , sanitation , hygiene and logistics .
Priorities include medical personnel and other personnel specialised in water , sanitation and hygiene , as well as medical supplies , beds , water purification units and tablets .
The Commission is therefore in contact with the Belgian Presidency and the Member States to encourage further EU support to help Haiti at this very critical and difficult time .
EU support can be channelled through the EU Civil Protection Mechanism .
The endless efforts of Haitian and international aid workers to meet the current challenges on the ground are commendable , but it is clear that the sheer scale of the crisis requires even more assets and resources .
We are therefore now working hard on stepping up our emergency response together with our partners , but difficult times are certainly ahead , due to the rapidly evolving situation .
The continued solidarity of the international community with the Haitian people remains absolutely essential .
This is why I call upon you all to do your utmost to scale up the support of the Member States in order to avoid a major humanitarian disaster .
Mr President , Mrs Damanaki , ladies and gentlemen , the cholera epidemic has already claimed more than 1 200 lives , and more than 52 000 people are infected .
Thus , in spite of the strong presence of international organisations in Haiti , the situation is deteriorating daily , and the epidemic could infect some 400 000 people in the next few months .
I am , of course , delighted at the EUR 12 million released by the European Commission , and I support Mrs Georgieva 's appeal to the Member States to provide aid in kind so that water can be purified , and to supply equipment .
Providing drinking water and toilet facilities is the only way to reduce the number of people infected .
One of the priority actions is to reassure the population frightened by this disease , which is unknown in the country .
Communicating with the populations is essential in order to provide information about the disease and to avert it , but also to prevent internal violence from spreading , especially since the country is in the middle of elections .
This new crisis has once again highlighted the inability of the Haitian authorities and of the health system to cope with this crisis .
The country has suffered numerous disasters for years .
The earthquake in Haiti demonstrated the almost total incompetence of the local authorities .
Following the earthquake , there was genuine political will to reconstruct Haiti differently , and there were many promises of donations .
Almost a year later , reconstruction has hardly begun , and those involved in development are pessimistic .
The European Commission must act as a driver in the reconstruction process so that Haiti finally emerges from this chaos .
Mr President , I welcome once again the swiftness of the European Union 's humanitarian intervention .
However , at the same time , I believe that our efforts in this country must focus on building a minimum operational state structure at a time when the state of Haiti is just a sham .
It is failing to fulfil its basic duties such as organising refugee camps , maintaining order and providing hygienic conditions and drinking water .
This vulnerability has facilitated the rapid spread of disease and the death of more than 1 200 people .
Haiti needs a state which can do something for its poor .
Three out of four Haitians are surviving on less than USD 2 a day .
More than 1.5 million citizens are living in refugee camps , posing a serious source of risk to public health and safety .
I believe that the Haitian state 's weakness is now the main risk factor .
Its lack of authority means that the population 's discontent is being targeted at UN forces .
Indeed , NGOs risk no longer being able to accomplish their mission .
This is why the elections on 28 November are vital and must not be postponed , despite calls from some quarters .
Mr President , of course there are co-factors that have undoubtedly encouraged the spread of cholera in Haiti .
This is certainly not an answer , but it is an explanation .
The answer to this scourge must be twofold .
For the moment , the aid workers on the ground have confirmed to us that soap , substances to make the water fit to drink , and proper hygiene education are needed .
Preparations are being made in the present situation for the long term as well .
In a country in which everything is still to be done or redone , reconstruction is necessary after the earthquake , and priority must be given to building infrastructure that is designed to improve both individual and collective hygiene .
I hope that , eight months after the New York conference on the reconstruction of Haiti , it will no longer be possible to cite a lack of funds as an excuse for the little progress recorded to date , given that all the speakers agreed that the humanitarian phase must continue for many months yet .
It will also be necessary to name those responsible for the slow progress without too much beating about the bush .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , we see in Haiti one of the hugest humanitarian aid operations ever .
We have to make sure that we do not lose the battle against this catastrophe and that we manage to get results and help Haitians to build their future .
Apart from being an individual disaster for millions of people , a failure would also be a backlash for the international community 's effort and capacity to conduct a joint effort in humanitarian aid .
I believe that we have to put all our experience , all the lessons we have learnt in Haiti and elsewhere , and also enough money , into the pot .
Therefore , I very much welcome the Commission 's announcement that it will put an additional EUR 12 million into the fight against cholera .
We have to make sure that this support reaches Haiti immediately , that it arrives in full and not just in part , and that we support the right initiatives in order to make it effective .
We also have to make sure that we do not neglect the efforts for the earthquake reconstruction because , without that , fighting disease will be impossible .
I have two questions to the Commission .
Firstly , I would like to know whether the pledged money has arrived - the money that was promised - and whether it was disbursed and absorbed .
Secondly , I would like to know what you think about postponing the elections , because that is again on the agenda .
The Haitian revolution has never managed to enter the history books .
Let us hope that the difficult time in Haiti at the moment will enter the history books as the starting point for preparing a better future for all Haitians .
I hope it can also be mentioned that the EU played a very positive role in this .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , two months ago , I co-chaired the delegation under the ACP to Haiti and this was probably one of the greatest and most moving experiences of my life .
First , there are tremendously dedicated people there doing the work to try to help the Haitians , and second , the Haitian people are a very proud people and we should recognise that at the beginning of this debate .
But we were told by the President and the Prime Minister how lucky the Haitians were that they had good sanitation and that they had no disease - and the sad thing now is that disease has hit them .
This is not a terribly hard disease to cure .
But you have got to be there to see the conditions under which the aid workers are working and when you talk about a health service , I am sorry , Mr President , Haiti does not have a health service like the rest of us and you know it : they are dependent on Médecins Sans Frontières , the British Red Cross and many other organisations from all around the world .
As far as the election is concerned , it is true that Haiti does not need an election at this moment .
But until they get a President and a Prime Minister who can lead them , they will have no chance of moving forward .
I want to commend - because when I was there I saw it for myself - the brilliant men and women of the European Commission Office , under terrible circumstances , trying to keep a European presence in Port-au-Prince , and they have done a fantastic job .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank all my fellow Members , and especially the Conference of Presidents , for having agreed to this debate on Haiti , proposed by my group .
It was an emergency .
Last January , after the earthquake , the international community rallied round strongly in support of Haiti .
However , it seems that there was a gap , not to say a gulf , between the promises made and the aid that in fact arrived on the ground .
Last March , Baroness Ashton made a commitment , on behalf of the European Union , to provide aid worth EUR 1.235 billion to help the people of Haiti to build a better future .
Since last July , the NGOs and , in particular , MSF , Commissioner , have been sounding the alarm and reporting the pathogenic living conditions endured by hundreds of thousands of people .
The situation has scarcely changed since then , yet people are amazed that the cholera epidemic is spreading very fast , and the international community is again beginning to feel pity .
There have already been more than a thousand deaths , and the number of people affected is increasing all the time , even though specialists say that the measures to prevent the disease from proving fatal are relatively simple to take .
However , health workers have little training in this disease , and there are problems in getting basic healthcare products to where they are needed .
Under such circumstances , how can one fail to understand why riots have taken place ?
The Haitian population feels quite helpless .
It is difficult for it to go on having confidence in the international community .
My questions will therefore be simple , Commissioner :
Where exactly is all the aid that the European Union promised to Haiti , and not just the humanitarian aid ?
If it had arrived sooner , do you not think that this further tragedy could have been avoided ?
How is it that , once again , international conferences seem to have resulted only in unkept promises ?
Why are President Préval 's efforts to turn MINUSTAH into support for reconstruction not meeting with any response ?
Finally , the Haitian population wants the elections to take place , but under what conditions will they take place and what sort of support will the European Union provide ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite all the warnings which were made against neglecting the future of Haiti following the earthquake in January , the news in recent days seems to show that the island has been abandoned by the international community at the most critical moment , that of reconstruction .
Indeed , cholera , something which few people in Haiti know about and which is ultimately given a mystic , religious significance , is now spreading .
The United Nations peacekeepers have been accused of spreading this contagion .
It took just one Nepalese soldier on the island to become infected for hundreds of people , women and children , to besiege the general headquarters of the peace force .
Humanitarian workers have also felt threatened and many are leaving the country .
The tension is extremely high , and much of the rubble caused by the very violent earthquake of 12 January remains on the streets and in the town squares .
We have heard that there is not enough water and that it is therefore impossible for people to wash and to protect themselves against infection .
The vibrio is spreading rapidly , and the number of dead is rising exponentially .
The figures have already been given , but I want to repeat them : to date , there have been 1 130 victims , and the number of hospital admissions has risen to more than 18 000 in one month .
However , there are thousands of others who report symptoms of infection every day .
The international community cannot delay any longer .
A solution must be found immediately , otherwise any further infection will remain forever on our conscience .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Commissioner Georgieva on the effective coordination work that she has undertaken and indeed the discussions that she is having with Baroness Amos at the UN .
The easiest and cheapest thing for this House to do now is to criticise .
I would like us to be positive and place the pressure where it needs to be .
I say this to all Members of this House .
We need to put pressure on our own Member States to bring forward more aid , and more aid in kind .
If you look at the list of countries , these are countries - such as Spain , Ireland , Italy , France , Austria , Hungary - currently facing grave economic situations , yet they have dug deep .
Therefore , I urge each and every one of us to contact our own governments and ask them to commit .
If there are questions as to whether aid is getting through or not , let us build the capacity to get the aid through .
Finally , I should like to thank the Commissioner and congratulate her on the commitment of the extra EUR 12 million .
The great tragedy is the earthquake .
The even greater tragedy now is this cholera epidemic .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first the epicentre of a terrible earthquake , in precisely the poorest and worst-governed area in the American hemisphere , and now cholera in the country which receives one of the highest amounts of per capita international aid .
What a contradiction !
It is not just a terrible combination of bad luck : in Haiti , in the streets crowded with children and tents crammed in amongst the rubbish , no one knows where to begin .
The local political class is often greedy and focused on power games rather than taking control of the reconstruction efforts , and the bureaucratic machine , decimated by the earthquake , has a weak administrative culture and , in some cases , has even obstructed the distribution of aid .
There are many , often badly run , international organisations and , in fact , they have failed to protect the population .
Visiting the country with the European Parliament delegation in June , the concentration of abandoned fields , rubble which had not been removed and rubbish already gave a clear indication of how bad the situation could become .
Now cholera is here .
The Commission and the Directorate-General for Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection ( ECHO ) have so far done what was required , but they must now redouble their efforts .
My feeling is that now , as well as strong recovery action , Haiti needs greater protection at the international political level .
Mr President , this is a tragedy that does not bear talking about .
When the disaster struck in January last year , the international community descended on Haiti with great fanfare .
Military helicopters came to lift heavy pieces of masonry that had fallen down .
They have all gone .
They suddenly left .
Those pieces of masonry are blocking roads and there is no access , and the road network has broken down .
Commissioner Georgieva has been trying hard to coordinate the activities .
Why did this happen ?
Why did all those people - including Secretary of State Clinton , who suddenly turned up there in January - suddenly disappear ?
Why is the United Nations now being asked to disappear ?
When are they going to ask the EU to disappear ?
This is ridiculous .
We need the international community back there at the level at which it was working , and should let ordinary Haitians be depoliticised from this nonsense going on in the capital .
( SK ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for the report you have presented to us on the current situation in Haiti .
The outbreak of another epidemic in Haiti was to be expected .
Since the start of the year , and since the earthquake , we have been working hard , but the work has not advanced as quickly as we hoped .
We have spoken often about the situation prevailing in Haiti before the earthquake .
It would certainly have helped us if Haiti had been a functioning state , but it is not , and nor will it be for a long time yet .
There is much ground to be covered .
There is now a need for urgent action , as we are risking further epidemics and further violence .
Commissioner , there is a real need to bring the best health experts together in Brussels , and to draw up a strategic aid plan for Haiti .
The situation must be resolved in the areas of security , finance and especially health .
( EL ) Commissioner , I , too , should like to start by congratulating you on your outstanding work in the case of Haiti and for everything you have done in Pakistan .
We know that you will be present at every emergency .
This truly was a monumental disaster .
We are talking about over 1 000 dead and 15 000 sick and the numbers keep rising .
The needs are immense and we can see that the money at your disposal is not enough .
It is becoming increasingly clear that we really do need new financing instruments ; perhaps - and obviously first of all - a transaction tax .
We need other financing mechanisms that can support our efforts to cope with increasing humanitarian needs .
We should also consider what we can do to prevent the transmission of diseases from people working for the UN from happening again .
( NL ) Mr President , this afternoon , I received the latest information from a Dutch aid agency which has had a presence in Haiti for many years , and that information actually confirms the sombre , but realistic , picture that the Commission has described .
At the same time , the Dutch aid agency have told me that they have put their trust in Europe , in particular , as a major donor .
What is it then that they are relying on us to do ?
Well , although a huge amount was pledged at the international donor conference , only a fraction of it has been received .
Now the United Nations has requested additional funding , but a large part of the money that has been pledged has not yet been received .
I hope , therefore , that the European Union will take the lead in ensuring that the money really comes through because the situation in Haiti is distressing .
Of course , prevention and clean drinking water are the priorities .
I hope that the European Union will take the initiative to ensure good water supplies for Haiti .
Experts , the digging of water wells , clean drinking water and also medical care are particularly important .
All of these are in short supply .
I appeal to the Netherlands , but also to the European institutions , to ensure that they actually come to Haiti 's aid immediately in this acute emergency .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Damanaki , first of all , I should like to congratulate the Commission for the efforts carried out in Haiti .
However , the situation requires an urgent and much stronger response .
We need more resources and a greater international commitment , despite the difficulties involved in mobilising funds in the current economic context .
It cannot be that funds are available for some problems but not for this humanitarian situation .
We have a number of health and humanitarian priorities : to inform the population about a specific disease , obtain tents , improve sanitation in all areas and provide access to clean water .
All these tasks are urgent and we need a great effort on the part of the Commission and all the Member States .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank Commissioner Georgieva for the work that the Commission has done .
It is very important that the European Union has a very strong and visible role to play in Haiti .
However , this is about our fellow human beings , our fellow creatures .
We also have a responsibility for them , as they have been the victims of an unparalleled catastrophe : first an earthquake and now a cholera epidemic .
It is important that when we send money and aid there , it gets to its destination quickly .
Many Christian aid organisations have been doing a good job there , and it appears that they also have effective channels for delivering aid promptly to those in need of it .
In this respect , I hope that the Commission can also make use of the recognised humanitarian and Christian organisations that are doing such good work there .
This way , it will be possible to get the aid to its destination and achieve the best possible result .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you all for your engagement and discussion on a topic that is , unfortunately , going to be with us for quite some time to come .
This is not an easy crisis to resolve .
We have had some estimates about the scale of the problem over the coming months - including from our own experts - and I agree very much with those who said we need to deploy expertise from the European Centre for Disaster Control in Haiti .
The estimates are that somewhere between half a million and 720 000 people will be infected before this wave of epidemics is over .
The Pan American Health Organisation estimate of 400 000 is a little lower but of the same order of magnitude .
So we will have to mobilise .
I agree with each and every one of you who spoke about immediate mobilisation and the need to help right now .
Let me make four points .
The first is how we can best help .
This is a time when we have to deploy true partner organisations and immediately give them the resources to act .
We also have to call on the Member States to provide in-kind assistance .
Since Thursday , when I addressed the Member States , we have been seeing support coming through , but more is needed in terms of healthcare professionals , water purification tablets and support for an awareness campaign , because - as many here have said - there is widespread misunderstanding of what this disease is and how it can best be treated .
As a result , people die unnecessarily because they are scared to go to treatment centres : they are afraid of catching the disease there rather than being treated for it .
Secondly , a number of speakers have talked about the pledged money and what is happening with reconstruction in Haiti .
The pledge made by the Commission has been honoured .
The Commission committed EUR 460 million and is delivering according to the timetable which it announced , and the High Representative and Vice-President , Cathy Ashton , and Commissioner Piebalgs are about to take stock with Member States on where we stand with the money we have promised to provide .
I can assure you that this is going to be taken very seriously , because the reputation of the international community is at stake at a very difficult time .
However - and this is my third point , which is a very important one - there is a limit to the absorptive capacity in Haiti , which I believe I talked about with some of you .
When I first arrived in Haiti , I thought that , terrible as this disaster was , it was not Haiti 's worst problem .
Haiti 's biggest problem was the many decades of lack of development and the absence of a functional state which , among other things , also means the absence of a functional health service .
I saw people in camps queuing in front of a doctor , not because they were sick , but because they had never seen a doctor in their lives and were taking advantage of a health service being offered in the camps .
This total lack of the skills and capabilities of a functional state creates problems that are making this epidemic worse .
We are still struggling to get the government to authorise space for the disposal of dead bodies - without which the epidemics can , of course , spread further - and to dislodge latrines so that sanitation can improve .
So I cannot stress strongly enough how critical it is for us to understand that Haiti 's problems are not easy to resolve , because at the heart of this problem is these decades of lack of development and the absence of a functional state .
A question was asked about the elections and whether they should still be held .
The Haitian authorities prefer to stick to the timetable .
It is difficult for me to give an answer .
I have not yet been to Haiti , but my feeling is that cancelling or postponing the elections might actually destabilise a very difficult situation .
There may be something to be gained by holding the elections but , as I have said , this is based on what I have heard , not on what I have seen .
My fourth point concerns engagement .
You called for the Commission to be very directly engaged : we are , and will continue to be so .
Baroness Ashton will very probably be in Haiti tomorrow , and I am planning to go myself because at this point , mobilisation , good coordination and , frankly , also giving hope to people there , and to our own staff , are important .
Our own people are struggling with a very difficult situation : they are in places where the Haitian health officials become scared by the epidemic and just leave , and they then have to handle a massive increase in cases .
What we need to do now is to make sure that we retain a calm presence and try to steer the course for people which gives them the most hope .
One Member spoke about the Haitian people being very resilient .
They are , and they deserve all our help at this very difficult time .
The debate is closed .
Long-term plan for the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay and the fisheries exploiting that stock - Multiannual plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the fisheries exploiting that stock - Prohibition of highgrading and restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea , the Belts and the Sound - Use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture ( debate )
Τhe next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
the report by Izaskun Bilbao Barandica , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a long-term plan for the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay and the fisheries exploiting that stock - C7-0157 / 2009 - ,
the report by Pat the Cope Gallagher , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a multiannual plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the fisheries exploiting that stock - C7-0010 / 2009 - ,
the report by Marek Józef Gróbarczyk , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2187 / 2005 as regards the prohibition of highgrading and restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea , the Belts and the Sound - C7-0156 / 2010 - , and
the report by João Ferreira , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 708 / 2007 concerning the use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture - .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would firstly like to acknowledge , thank and congratulate the inshore fishing sector of the Bay of Biscay for its responsible behaviour .
Commissioner , the sector urgently needs this plan if it is to achieve its objective , namely , to carry on a profitable activity without jeopardising the future of the fishing ground .
This requires maintaining anchovy stocks in the Bay of Biscay at a level that allows for sustainable exploitation in economic , environmental and social terms .
This can be done much more effectively by calculating yields on the basis of scientific reports rather than allowing total allowable catch ( TAC ) calculations to become subject to obscure political negotiations .
The rules of exploitation must therefore be addressed in the plan , and this means that fishing quotas must be established on the basis of stock estimations obtained from scientific reports .
Commissioner , this initiative was tabled by the Commission in July 2009 .
We started working in September .
We established a work procedure together with the entire Spanish and French sectors represented by fishermen 's organisations , scientific institutes and the South Western Waters Regional Advisory Council .
Following this method , we worked on a joint proposal that received broad support in Parliament .
Having achieved a high level of consensus and being conscious of the impending entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the uncertainty surrounding how it should be applied to cases that were already open , on 30 November , we held an indicative vote in the Committee on Fisheries .
This open and inclusive approach has run up against a very different attitude on the part of the Council and the Commission .
For a start , we learnt in the course of our work that a control regulation was being prepared which would affect this report , although we only received limited information on this matter .
This plunged us into uncertainty in a way that could quite easily have been avoided .
Following the vote in the Committee on Fisheries and during the Spanish Presidency , I negotiated the initiative with the Council .
We decided to call a trialogue meeting but , to our surprise , on the same day of the meeting , the Spanish Presidency unexpectedly announced to us that , at the request of the French Government , the Spanish Government had decided to postpone the issue as it was unsure about its legal basis .
After months of work , we had stalemate .
The Spanish Presidency had no agreement and no possibility of a trialogue .
I asked the new Presidency whether it was willing to continue negotiations .
They told me not to be impatient , not to hurry .
In view of the Council 's utter unwillingness to move forward , we took a new vote , following advice from legal services .
In this second vote , three amendments were rejected which had been adopted in the indicative vote and which were of crucial importance to the sector .
The first one relates to exploitation rates and proposes 0.4 as a more appropriate rate .
The second amendment refers to the inclusion of live bait in the TAC .
It would be a mistake to count it as part of the caught quota .
Finally , the third amendment refers to the review of catches .
If the Scientific Committee is unable to produce an estimate of the current biomass because it lacks sufficient information , the sector must not be doubly penalised with a 25 % reduction of the TAC on the previous year .
The Commission had already considered it more appropriate in this case to reduce the TAC by 10 % , in no event less than 7 000 tonnes .
As regards the powers of this institution , they have been consistently disregarded by the Council and the Commission .
The fact that even as we are debating this initiative , we have heard unofficial news that the Council has requested its withdrawal , gives a clear indication of its attitude .
Is this true ?
I am asking you now , Commissioner .
Why ?
What do you intend to do ?
I would like an answer today .
I would also like the Belgian Presidency to tell me why it has requested the withdrawal of the initiative .
I would like some clear answers on these issues .
We have been working for 14 months and all we have is confusion .
The actions of the Council and the Commission are damaging the credibility of the European institutions in the eyes of a sector that is tired of this way of doing things and needs solutions .
Strengthen your credibility in this sector !
Or at least win back the credibility you have lost since September 2009 !
Parliament is determined to exercise the codecision powers conferred on it by the Treaty of Lisbon .
You must respect them .
Your actions do not match up to 21st century leadership .
Our guiding principles have been transparency and participation .
Please adopt these principles .
This is how the European project must move forward .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I wish to sincerely thank all those who helped me during the preparation of this important report on Atlantic Horse Mackerel : the shadow rapporteurs , the secretariat of the Committee on Fisheries , the Pelagic RAC , the group policy adviser and the adviser from my own office .
I would also like to thank the Commission and the Council for their help and support .
The collaboration and discussion , and the input of ideas from all these people , ensured that I was able to place this report - which I would hope would be generally accepted - before you today .
The western stock of horse mackerel is one of the most important stocks for the fisheries sector in Europe .
The proposal is based on the implementation plan agreed by the European Commission and the UN world summit on sustainable development in 2002 .
At this summit , the Commission agreed to maintain or to restore fish stocks to levels that can produce the maximum sustainable yield .
The subsequent proposal by the European Commission was drafted in close cooperation with the pelagic Resource Assessment Group ( RAG ) , which had originally put forward this proposal .
Egg surveys for horse mackerel have been conducted every three years since 1997 .
The data collected was insufficient to allow the scientists to make a full assessment as to the health of the stock .
The proposed management plan addresses these difficulties by establishing a formula for vessels in the horse mackerel fishery , known as the harvest control rule .
This rule provides for a mechanism for calculating an annual ceiling of maximum allowable landings of horse mackerel harvested from the defined area .
The plan was expected to come into operation in late 2009 but was delayed due to the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty .
Of course , I fully respect the rights of the Council to set and to allocate fishing opportunities .
I met with representatives from the Belgian Presidency prior to the adoption of my report in the Fisheries Committee .
They suggested a proposal which would provide the Council with a degree of flexibility in terms of the total removable amount when setting the total allowable catch .
I believe that this proposal by the Belgian Presidency , which was subsequently adopted by the Fisheries Committee , protects the Council 's exclusive right under the treaties to set and to allocate fishing opportunities .
I would like to discuss the amendments proposed by the PPE , the S & D and the GUE / NGL political groups in relation to Area 8C - in other words , the Bay of Biscay .
I would like to inform the House that , as rapporteur , I support the amendment tabled by the socialists but cannot accept the PPE and the GUE / NGL amendments .
I will give my reasons for that .
The scientific advice is clear .
This is one stock which covers the entire geographical area .
Should Parliament adopt the PPE and GUE / NGL proposal , it would make a nonsense of the management plan to introduce two separate tagged areas for one stock .
If we did this , it would establish a very dangerous and a very serious precedent for future mackerel management plans .
We could not agree to the splitting of a single fisheries stock .
Those who wish to support this will be doing so for their own personal reasons and for the reasons of their Member States , but this is a common fisheries policy and we must adhere to this .
I appreciate that our Spanish and Portuguese colleagues may have concerns , and I have included those concerns in Amendment 7 in the draft report .
It states that this plan shall be implemented taking account of artisanal fisheries and historic rights .
In conclusion , this amendment is acceptable to the Council and the pelagic RAG and takes into consideration the views expressed by the Spanish and Portuguese colleagues .
But let us keep the policy as it is .
Mr President , I would like to start my speech by expressing my very sincere thanks to everyone who helped in the preparation of this report : the European Commission , all the shadow rapporteurs and the members of the Committee on Fisheries , for their support in drawing up this report .
We achieved complete agreement , as the report was adopted unanimously by the European Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries .
Once again , I would like to express my very sincere thanks .
The report , which aims to regulate fishing of flatfish in the Baltic Sea and to stop the practice of discarding while maintaining the model of fisheries management known as total allowable catch ( TAC ) , indicates that this system is functioning properly and has a practical application for certain species of fish .
This is why the significance of the introduction of Article 15a into Regulation ( EC ) No 2187 / 2005 should be highlighted .
The species of fish caught may have a low market value or may not be fit for human consumption .
It should also be stressed that this provision allows for the removal from deck of live flounder which have been caught and which have no market value during the period when protective restrictions are in force .
This is why this article will allow the sustainable exploitation of living aquatic resources .
The action plan adopted on the basis of my report must eliminate discards in the Baltic Sea , for example , by the introduction , where appropriate , of a complete ban on discards in the Baltic Sea fishery .
This must result in sustainable and more efficient management of marine resources .
Bringing in a complete ban on discards in the case of flounder or other flatfish is not justified , as this will have a negative impact on their stocks .
Bearing in mind the need for the fishery to remain stable and predictable , and for fish stocks to be exploited within established limits , concern should be expressed that a ban on discards might be used to legalise the large-scale industrial fishing of under-sized cod in the Baltic Sea .
Due to a lack of reliable scientific data on the basis of which cod by-catches in industrial fisheries can be assessed , it is essential that full documentation of catches should be introduced immediately , together with full monitoring of the vessels engaged in these fishing activities .
There must be 100 % monitoring of industrial catches at landing , otherwise the policy of protecting Baltic fish stocks would be unrealistic and the long-term cod management plan pointless .
The Union must take immediate action under the common fisheries policy to settle the issue of industrial fishing in the Baltic Sea , bearing in mind that , from an environmental point of view , such fishing is harmful to the Baltic 's ecosystem , particularly as the Baltic Sea has been classified as a ' particularly sensitive sea area ' by the International Maritime Organisation 's Marine Environment Protection Committee , and is therefore among the most precious and most sensitive marine ecosystems in the world .
In view of the climate changes in the Baltic Sea which are causing different species of fish to adapt to this , meaning that their migration and spawning patterns are also changing , a review should be carried out of the marine protection areas in the Baltic Sea and a long-term management plan for flatfish species drawn up in this area .
In view of a lack of reliable and up-to-date data on the basis of which a decision can be taken to leave certain areas of the Baltic Sea unprotected , the changes which are occurring should be taken into consideration and a review of protected areas carried out .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the introduction of alien species is one of the main factors in the disturbance of ecosystems and one of the main reasons for global biodiversity loss .
As the Commission itself notes , the introduction of alien species into Europe 's coastal seas and inland waters is due in a great many cases to aquaculture and stocking practices .
The Commission 's proposed amendment to the regulation concerning the use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture is based on the results of a research project , the IMPASSE project , which has brought together various European institutions in a concerted action focusing on the environmental impacts of alien species in aquaculture .
This project proposes an operational definition of a closed aquaculture facility , giving greater detail to and expanding the definition currently in use .
In line with this definition and according to the conclusions of the project , ' the degree of risk associated with alien species could be reduced considerably , possibly to an acceptable level , if the potential for escape of target and non-target organisms is addressed during transportation and by well-defined protocols at the receiving facility ' .
In view of the results of this project , the Commission is proposing to ease the unnecessary administrative formalities required of operators by proposing to dispense with the permit requirement for introductions and translocations for closed aquaculture facilities .
It should be stressed here that , while the risk assessment process is based on scientific and technical analyses , the verdict on the acceptability of risk is the subject of a political decision .
We therefore believe that relaxing the introduction procedure for alien species in aquaculture must go hand in hand with the most stringent definition possible of the requirements with which closed aquaculture facilities will have to comply , in keeping with the results of the IMPASSE project .
The need to supervise the facilities must also be established , with the aim of ensuring that all technical requirements put forward by the experts are actually taken into account and complied with during the operation of the facilities .
This also applies to the care to be taken in transporting target and non-target species to or from the facilities .
These were the main concerns in drawing up the report and the proposed amendments to the Commission 's original proposal .
Allow me to make one further comment : The sustainable development of aquaculture demands substantial support for scientific research and technological development in the area of farming native species , so as to enable production and diversification in the supply of foodstuffs , along with an improvement in quality , while also guaranteeing greater environmental security .
This legislative initiative should therefore be backed up by strong backing for this area .
It is necessary to explore the potential of aquaculture , but there is also a need to overcome its limitations in an environmentally sustainable way .
Among other things , it will be vital to refocus the priorities of the Framework Research Programme , so as to enable adequate coverage of this important area of research .
It only remains for me to express my gratitude to all the shadow rapporteurs for their help , thanks to which it was possible to complete a fruitful piece of work , and to the services of the Commission and the Council , including the Spanish Presidency and now the Belgian Presidency , for the work that we have carried out over these months .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to say a few words about the long-term anchovy plan , but I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Bilbao , and all the members of the Committee on Fisheries , for their work on this proposal .
I would like to say to Mrs Bilbao that there was indeed a delay in adopting this proposal , but I would like to say that it was clear enough that the Commission has done absolutely everything to unblock the situation .
The anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay was threatened with collapse and the fishery was therefore closed in 2005 .
It was reopened in January 2010 , just five years later .
Last July , scientists confirmed that the stock was safely above precautionary limits .
This allowed me to propose a TAC of over 15 000 tonnes , which is in force now .
The TAC follows the harvest rules of the plan and I am happy to see that this proposal is already helping us to manage the stock properly .
Clearly , the long closure caused serious financial damage to those depending on this fishery .
We absolutely need to prevent this happening again .
The only way to do that is to exploit the stock consistent with maximum sustainable yield and keep a low risk of fishery closure .
Our proposal shows that this can be done while , at the same time , providing sustainability for the industry .
If we want to avoid closure , then we need to keep the exploitation rate at 30 % .
I would like to thank the Committee on Fisheries for its support both on the substance and in relation to the delegation of powers to the Commission .
I can support these amendments .
I can also support those amendments related to the alignment of the proposal with the new control regulation , in force since January 2010 .
There is only one exception , however .
It relates to reducing the delay for notifying entry into port from four hours to one hour .
This amendment changes the four-hour rule which is in the new control regulation .
You know that this new control regulation has been in force since the beginning of this year .
I am not in favour of amending it so soon , especially since the control regulation itself allows coastal Member States to apply specific exceptions when justified .
So we have this margin .
We really do not need to change this control regulation so soon but , of course , it is for you to decide .
I will turn now to the second report , the multiannual plan for horse mackerel .
Let me say that Mr Gallagher , as rapporteur , and all the members of the Committee on Fisheries , have done excellent work on this proposal and I would like to pass on to you my sincere thanks for all your hard work and your constructive approach .
Western horse mackerel is by far the most important of the three horse mackerel stocks in EU waters .
The stock is currently stable at a good level , which means the TAC for 2011 is almost unchanged .
The annual TAC decision on this stock , which is based on recent scientific advice , does not correspond to our objective of having binding , predictable long-term management .
Therefore , this plan , like other long-term plans , is dear to me because I want us to move away from the annual haggling in Council on how much can be fished .
We owe it to the industry to give them more planning and stability by agreeing on long-term plans .
Your general support , both on the substance and on the delegation of powers , shows that we have the same goal .
I can support your amendments and those related to the alignment of the proposal with the new control regulation , in force since January 2010 .
Other than this , the plan itself should not fix TAC areas , leaving the possibility of adapting these in the annual TAC decisions following the relevant scientific advice .
There is one amendment , however , that does not go in the right direction , namely , your acceptance of the Council Presidency 's compromise of around 5 000 tonnes .
The figure of 5 000 tonnes is simply not science-based .
How has it been decided upon ?
Why not 6 000 or 7 000 ?
Having discretion to move the TAC up and down to the right levels in a long-term management strategy does not seem to me a robust approach .
I will turn now to the third report on the Baltic technical measures .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mr Gróbarczyk , for his very good work on the report , which was adopted unanimously .
Once again , I thank the Committee on Fisheries for fully supporting it .
With this proposal , we are ensuring legal continuity in respect of our policy on high grading , which was introduced in the Baltic Sea last year , as well as on fishing restrictions for some species .
I will now focus on the last report : the use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ferreira , for his work , and the Committee on Fisheries as a whole .
As you know , the Commission is committed to promoting the sustainable development of aquaculture in the EU through the new aquaculture strategy .
This implies a high level of environmental protection , but also the establishment of the conditions to facilitate aquaculture operations .
We need to do that .
Amending the regulation on the introduction of alien species in aquaculture closed facilities will certainly facilitate aquaculture activities by eliminating unnecessary administrative burdens whilst , at the same time , ensuring adequate protection for aquatic habitats .
This is not all that we can do , of course , so I very much welcome the proposal by Mr Ferreira to enhance our research efforts on aquaculture .
We are going to do our best by means of our budget and by means of CFP reform .
I am very pleased that the discussions in the Committee on Fisheries have resulted in a better definition of ' closed aquaculture facility ' .
I would like to stress that the initial proposal was adopted by the Commission one month before the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , so we had the same problem here .
The Committee on Fisheries tabled amendments aiming to bring the basic regulation into line with the new comitology provisions of the Lisbon Treaty .
We considered it opportune to carry out this alignment as proposed by Parliament .
On the other hand , it was necessary to modify our proposal formally to introduce such substantial amendments , and this accounts for the delay we are talking about .
To conclude , I would like once again to thank all the rapporteurs in the Committee on Fisheries for their reports and for their work on these relevant issues .
Mr President , thank you very much to the authors of the reports for their excellent work .
I would like to focus on management plans , although I will not go into any substantial aspects , as they have already been highlighted by the rapporteurs .
Instead , I will refer to the significant institutional challenges they are creating , which must be resolved .
After more than a year of negotiations with the Council , Parliament has quite responsibly decided to bring the reports to first reading with the aim of exerting pressure to break the current deadlock , which affects not only these two proposals but also all the others that are to be put before us in the near future .
Parliament is willing to find a compromise solution with the Council and the Commission but the key requirement for that to happen is for the Council to acknowledge and accept that the basic core of long-term management plans must fall under the ordinary legislative procedure , that is , under the legal basis of Article 43 ( 2 ) of the treaty .
It is incomprehensible that before the Treaty of Lisbon , when the Council also had exclusive competence in matters of TAC and quotas , Parliament was asked for its consultative opinion , whereas now , the Council claims exclusivity on these same matters , even though , according to all legal advice , Article 43 ( 3 ) must be interpreted restrictively .
I therefore urge the Commissioner to take account of Parliament 's position , even if any proposals - and I believe Mrs Bilbao 's question on this particular point has not been answered - were to be withdrawn or replaced by new texts .
Failure to do this will compel us to refer the matter to the Court of Justice and to block future long-term plans , which is to be avoided insofar as it is a basic instrument of fisheries management .
Mr President , Commissioner , there are a great many technical details in the texts we are debating today .
However , behind them stands a clear instruction : the European Parliament is calling on the other institutions , the Commission and the Council , to pay attention to scientific data whenever we pass decisions on fisheries issues and how we fish .
We cannot negotiate along political lines when deciding how to fish each species of fish .
The Council and Parliament cannot negotiate along political lines issues which need to be judged on the basis of scientific data .
It is only on the basis of scientific data that we can establish the surpluses in our seas and what we can fish without having an irreversible impact both on marine life and on fisheries .
We have before us the revised common fisheries policy .
What we are asking in these reports is that you act boldly when revising the common fisheries policy , by ensuring that decisions taken to safeguard a viable future for our seas and fisheries are taken on the basis of scientific data .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will concentrate on the report on anchovy fishing in the Bay of Biscay and our group 's view on this matter .
This is an issue that is extremely important and it is an example of how we should approach sensitive matters relating to fisheries .
It is important to remember that the fisheries that we are talking about collapsed in 2005 as a result of overfishing .
Now that fishing is permitted again , it is carried out on the basis of the precautionary principle , and that is the way it should be done .
It is the only long-term and sustainable way to do it , which was also our group 's view on this matter .
The fact is that the fisheries industry may perhaps hope for a larger quantity of fish to start with , but in the long term , it is better to do what we will probably opt for now .
This is also the way that our group believes we should handle this type of question , both today and in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon has altered Parliament 's power when it comes to fisheries policy .
The management plans that we are to vote on tomorrow will be the first test of how well Parliament is living up to this responsibility .
I think that , in the main , we have coped well with the challenge , but it has not been without its false alarms .
There is always a temptation for the decision makers to compromise on scientific advice out of a misguided consideration for the fisheries industry .
Moreover , people have short memories .
Despite the fact that anchovy fishing in the Bay of Biscay collapsed as recently as 2005 and the fisheries industry had to stop fishing completely , there are still short-sighted financial incentives that jeopardise the long-term sustainability of the stocks .
However , caution won out against games of chance in committee .
Counting fish is not difficult ; it is like counting trees .
It is just that fish move around and they are not visible .
Thus joked the world-leading marine biologist Willy Kristensen in the film ' The End of the Line ' on the depletion of fish stocks in the world 's oceans .
What he was trying to say was that there is a large degree of uncertainty in stock estimations .
This is important to remember now that the EU and the world have decided to achieve the maximum sustainable yield ( MSY ) in respect of all commercial fish species in approximately five years .
I would like to point out that it is an utterly impossible task to achieve the MSY for all fish species everywhere at the same time .
We therefore need to have safety margins .
Ecosystems must be considered as a whole and the MSY must be regarded as an upper limit , not as a goal .
I hope this will be taken into account in the forthcoming fisheries policy and respected in the management plans , both in Parliament and in the Council .
We need to get long-term management plans in place quickly for all of Europe 's marine ecosystems .
Finally , I would just like to say that I totally agree with the rapporteur , Mr Gallagher , that splitting up a quota for a single stock of horse mackerel goes completely against scientific advice .
Mr President , the issues raised in this debate are not specific to the area specified .
There are also issues affecting vessels in the North Sea .
I had a meeting with fishermen from Whitby in Yorkshire on Friday .
They are just as concerned with issues that are likely to drive out of business the remaining vessels in the British fleet .
The immediate threat is of a proposed reduction in the number of days they are allowed to fish , from 135 days possibly down to 90 days .
I asked the trawlermen how much of a reduction they could bear before being driven out of business , and they replied that any reduction would have that effect .
The policy of forcing trawlers to discard dead and dying fish to avoid landing under-sized fish or exceeding species quotas is absolutely monstrous .
All fish that have been caught and will not survive must be landed .
Discarding is not conservation , it is waste .
High grading is a response to the unfair quota system .
Reform the system and it will disappear .
Quotas are bought and sold on the open market and speculated by the rich and powerful .
This pushes up the price of quotas , which are rented to fishermen for extortionate amounts .
Speculation must be ended completely .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the Gallagher report and , in particular , the multiannual plan for the stock of Atlantic horse mackerel , it is vital to advocate the amendment proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which was drawn up by Mrs Patrão Neves , focusing on the three objectives of the Green Paper and the reform of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) : the environmental objective , which is well respected in this report , and the economic and social objectives , whether they focus on economic viability or a decent living for professionals .
It is very important that we make a distinction here .
When we talk about the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel , it is important to distinguish between Zone VIII C , the area around the Bay of Biscay , which is essentially geared to artisanal fisheries and which forms the livelihood for a significant part of the Portuguese , Spanish and French populations , in particular , and the zone further north , which is focused on industrial fisheries , and is thus essentially geared towards economic profitability .
For this very reason , there needs to be an amendment to this report so that it is harmonised not only with the fundamental objectives of the Green Paper on the CFP or on the reform of the CFP , but also with the recommendations presented by the Council on the Regulation on total allowable catches ( TACs ) for 2011 , in which Atlantic horse mackerel in International Council for the Exploration of the Sea Zone VIII C is essentially seen as geared towards artisanal fisheries , while the north , within this western zone , is mainly focused on industrial fisheries .
This approach , which looks at the specific nature and purpose of each area where the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel lives , is the only one that can truly protect all the aims of the CFP .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , congratulations to the four rapporteurs .
I , too , am going to address the issue of management plans for anchovy and Atlantic horse mackerel stocks .
The proposal on the exploitation of anchovy stocks , which was initially going to be a proposal for sustainable anchovy exploitation , has proved a complex proposal which is currently blocked by the Council .
This is the sector that has suffered the greatest damage .
We are at a standstill because the situation has not been unblocked due to a failure to take decisions on the part of the Council and also the Commission .
I would like to highlight the position of the Spanish socialist delegation , which has supported the sector 's unanimous claims throughout this process , backed - and I stress , backed - by scientific reports and by the Regional Advisory Council .
This same position is maintained in relation to the new issues raised by the upcoming reform of the common fisheries policy .
In the face of this stalemate , we request that the Commissioner withdraws the proposal if necessary , takes into account the position of Parliament , and puts forward a new proposal .
As for Atlantic horse mackerel , Mr Gallagher has outlined several issues on which we also agree , such as the introduction of multiannual programmes , total allowable catches and scientific recommendations .
He also proposed an amendment that the Socialist Group regards as significant and which the Spanish Socialist Group also regards as significant , as Spain has a traditional horse mackerel fishing sector , the produce of which is consumed fresh on the same day it has been caught .
The lack of recognition of this sector will result in socio-economic damage and will certainly weaken the prospects for improved management .
For this reason , we believe that Mr Gallagher should have taken our proposal into consideration , differentiating the case of coastal fishing .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks to the rapporteurs .
In view of the high level of imports of fish and fish products into the EU , it is essential that we maintain and support our local fishermen , as well as the domestic aquaculture sector .
We urgently need improved catch methods in order to secure the long-term livelihood of both our seas and our fishermen .
It is equally essential that we enable aquaculture to expand further .
We are in urgent need of more effective data collection and more intensive research , since only once we know what is actually going on will we be able to make the right decisions for the future .
Our lack of success in combining economics with ecology - which are not actually that different - is often down to excessive bureaucracy and insufficient knowledge .
( ES ) Mr President , with regard to the debate on anchovies , I would also like to highlight how important it is and the fact that it is a turning point , not only for the sector , and for the subject of anchovies in particular , but also for relations between the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
In this respect , I would also like to make it very clear that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance supports the proposals that were made by the Commission from a more precautionary perspective .
We fundamentally support the proposals on three points :
the first is the exploitation rule , which we - like the Commission - consider should not be greater than 0.3 ; the second is the total allowable catch ( TAC ) , which we also consider should take into account live bait ; the final point is the reduction of the TAC , which must be at least 25 % , if it is deemed necessary .

We have supported the Commission on these three matters , and we think this is reasonable , precisely because what we want to do is act , for once , like holistic doctors who cure , rather than forensic doctors who simply certify deaths .
I believe it is important that we make this message clear and I think that this is a good opportunity to do things properly .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my contribution concerns the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the prohibition of highgrading and restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea , the Belts and the Sound .
What we are concerned with here is not simply the amendment of a regulation , but two very important and excellent species of food fish that we urgently need in Europe for our internal market .
Once again , it is clear that science and the industry need to work together to ensure that their experience - particularly in the areas of discards and the management of stocks , but also as regards what happens to by-catches - is evaluated and assessed sensibly .
We know all the options for imposing restrictions here ; Mr Gróbarczyk has set them out excellently .
It is essential that Article 15a is included in the regulation .
You have heard why - the rapporteur has once more stated it quite clearly .
Our common aim is to minimise by-catches and discards , and we achieved this in committee .
However , for some species of fish - and flounder and turbot are among them - it is the case that juvenile and under-sized specimens can be thrown back if they have been taken on board with the catch .
Naturally , it is also essential to work with excellent fishing gear here , to fish selectively and to respect closed seasons .
These two species of fish have constantly changed their spawning grounds , so naturally , the fishing areas have also been clearly defined , and the spawning times and spawning grounds described precisely .
The marketing parameters must not be revised downward so that the only possibility left is to make fishmeal from such excellent stocks .
That is not our aim .
We want to serve the market , which is why we have amended this regulation in this way .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Damanaki , I am very pleased that this week , we are able to adopt four important regulations on fisheries policy , and that we have been able to reach agreement among ourselves as well as with the Council and Commission on the reports concerning aquaculture and technical measures in the Baltic Sea .
Unfortunately , the same cannot be said for the two regulations on long-term management plans .
The right formula for management of sardine stocks has always been subject to considerable argument among the committee .
I believe that the submission to plenary looks very good and I am pleased that it seems that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has also now realised this , as it has tabled no more amendments .
I assume that you will be voting in favour tomorrow .
We have a much more serious problem where the Council is concerned , however .
Contrary to the advice of their own legal experts , the majority of the Member States are refusing to accept the European Parliament 's right of codecision - a full year after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon !
I consider that outrageous .
I have therefore suggested to the chair of our committee that a joint letter be written to the European fisheries ministers .
I would be pleased if we could reach agreement in the coming days so that together , we can demonstrate how determined Parliament is .
We will not allow ourselves to be fobbed off by the Council so easily .

Mr President , I support the line taken by Mr Gallagher in his report and will be voting accordingly tomorrow , when we get to that .
The principle of multiannual planning is a sensible one if it allows for reasonable forward planning on the part of fishers and also the processing sector .
But , in general , there remain some very negative aspects of EU fisheries management , as you are aware .
I strongly believe that it is the fishing nations themselves - those who have entitlement in particular sea areas - who should be making the decisions on stock conservation and management .
A number of speakers have again referred to the scandal of discards .
There is a growing awareness in Scotland that discards are a direct result of EU regulation and , in particular , the cod recovery plan .
I hope the Commissioner will take note of this and take action to deal with that part of the discard scandal , which could be avoided by changing some of the unworkable regulations which currently apply .
( ES ) Mr President , in my speech , I am going to focus on two reports whose procedure and final results are an example of what to do and what not to do .
I am referring to the plan for anchovy stocks and the use of exotic species in aquaculture .
Regarding anchovies , an example of how not to do things , the subject has been under discussion for more than one year and , unfortunately , it has become a debate on the powers that the Treaty of Lisbon grants to Parliament and on the legal basis for the Commission proposal , rather than a debate on what is better for fishermen , industries and fisheries .
It has been a long and futile debate , the victim of which has been the sector , which has looked on in astonishment as we have become lost in discussions while the long-awaited management plan has yet to move forward and is in danger of never seeing the light of day .
People who work in the anchovy sector are rightly complaining about the administrative hindrances that this plan is facing , when it is so essential for avoiding further interruptions to the activities of this fishery .
I sincerely believe that , given this background of uncertainty , the Commission should seek to send a positive signal to the sector today in Parliament .
On the contrary , with regard to the use of exotic species , the agreement reached by Parliament at first reading is a good compromise .
The Commission , the Council and Parliament have succeeded in reaching an agreement quickly and without major disagreements over law or fact .
The agreement not only establishes a strict definition of closed aquaculture facilities , but also achieves greater legal clarity for the businesses in the sector and , more importantly , removes a piece of the bureaucracy that Europeans have had enough of .
I am convinced that the administrative processes need to be reduced to an essential minimum .
Europeans have to deal with excessive bureaucracy , which makes it extremely difficult to start up or operate any activity .
Therefore , reports such as today 's that remove administrative procedures are not only good news for the aquaculture sector but should also be a constant feature of the way in which we work .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Damanaki , I am going to focus on the Gróbarczyk and Ferreira reports .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on having reached agreements at first reading with the Council to revise two regulations that adapt the fisheries policy to the Treaty of Lisbon and highlight the European Union 's commitment to sustainable fisheries management and the conservation of biodiversity .
The prohibition of high grading and restrictions on flounder and turbot fishing in the Baltic Sea are essential measures for effective and adequate resource management .
It is appropriate to incorporate them permanently into the Technical Measures Regulation for those waters .
This focus could be extended to the rest of EU waters and form part of the no-discards policy of the upcoming reform of the common fisheries policy .
It is also essential that the European Union updates the definition and operative conditions for closed aquaculture facilities , considers how to publish the list and establishes , in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , the procedures for EU development or implementation of the rules aimed at avoiding pollution from those activities that could endanger or affect our ecosystems .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate our fellow Members , Mrs Bilbao , and Messrs Gallagher , Gróbarczyk and Ferreira , on their reports .



I would like to say how pleased I am to see Parliament conclude its first reading on the two long-term plans for anchovies and horse mackerel .
In fact , with the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has become a joint decision maker on these matters .
With regard to the anchovy stock , I am delighted by the text adopted in the Committee on Fisheries , which is aimed at long-term management of a much fished species .
This plan will allow for joint management measures between the main fishing countries .
Live bait will be taken into consideration in the quotas , making it possible to check the quantities fished in the fairest way .
Moreover , I welcome the measures for supervising control of this fishery .
The system for controlling vessels absolutely must be the same in the various Member States exploiting this stock .
I would like to congratulate Mr Gallagher on his report .
I know we shall adopt it tomorrow : it makes the socio-economically and environmentally sustainable exploitation of the mackerel stock possible .
This plan comes up with a new decision-making method concerning the total allowable catch that will make it possible to ensure the sustainability of the stock in the long term .
I would also like to remind you of the importance of the principle of relative stability , which is particularly close to my heart .
The rapporteurs stress the need to tackle discards , and this can only be welcomed .
However , like my fellow Members , I find it regrettable that the Council is challenging Parliament 's new joint decision-making power concerning the long-term management plans .
I think that this issue of a legal basis needs to be resolved as it is delaying implementation of the plans , which is essential for conserving the resource and regulating fishing .
We must also define , once and for all , the notions of non-industrial fishing and industrial fishing .
This will ensure that the reform of the common fisheries policy is undertaken on a sound and firm footing .
This is also what is suggested in the report by Mr Gróbarczyk , whom I thank for the quality of his work .
Moreover , a total ban on discards is not realistic , as we know .
I hope that the European Commission will support the sector , which is introducing selective gear and ensuring economically and environmentally sustainable fishing .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one minute is not long enough to cover four reports .
I therefore congratulate the three other rapporteurs , but I will only comment on Mr Ferreira 's report .
Adherence to the principles of biodiversity must be central to the actions which the European Union undertakes with regard to fishing and aquaculture .
The compromise amendment is the result of the good work carried out by Mr Ferreira , who has clearly understood these concerns .
We must not have preconceived ideas when looking for ways to improve fish farming standards , but we must be rigorous in the control and application of regulations which are as precise as possible , in order to avoid the risk of altering the environmental balance .
In this way , the greatest support for organic production is a decision which is made in the general interest and which encompasses the protection of biodiversity .
That , in fact , is the best way of optimising the production of native species .
Commissioner , I hope that , as part of the common fisheries policy reform , this further measure with regard to aquaculture can be included in one simplified regulation .
This will simplify matters greatly , and I hope that a single regulation on aquaculture will make the procedures as a whole even simpler .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Gróbarczyk for his help .
I am very pleased that it was possible to include a very significant point in the report , calling on the Commission to prepare a comprehensive management plan for flounder in the waters of the Baltic Sea .
I would like to take the opportunity to bring to the Commissioner 's attention the fact that the Polish authorities have been proposing the adoption of a comprehensive management system for flatfish stocks in the Baltic for many years , and have not obtained any tangible results from the European Commission .
A uniform system for the management of flatfish , wherever they may be located , must be drawn up .
They have great economic importance for Baltic fishermen , including those from Poland , which is why they merit greater attention from European institutions responsible for fisheries than they have enjoyed so far .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their reports and , in particular , Mr Gallagher .
Two things jump out at me immediately in hearing the discussion that has gone on .
The first thing is that the whole concept of creating an opportunity to allow for a split within the TACs in one fishery is irresponsible to the extreme .
We should strongly oppose that .
Secondly , with regard to the issue of discards , maybe now is the time to look at creating a grey market for those discards .
They are by-catches to normal fishery operations and instead of them being thrown back into the water , why not allow them to be landed and pay for the cost of catch - not a market price , but the cost of catch .
This can be used as a replacement for the thousands of tonnes of imported fish , coming from the Far East and other places , to fill other markets within the European Union .
This can be a win-win situation .
It can reduce the amount of discards and also ensure that fishermen are not throwing back a valuable product .
Mr President , it is good that the EU is trying to preserve endangered fish stocks , but before there is too much self-congratulation on these proposals , we must remember that many past EU fishing rules have been appalling failures .
Britain 's home waters have been fished to near extinction under European fisheries policies .
The reality is that the protection of fish stocks is best left to local fishermen and national government marine scientists , not EU bureaucrats .
The advice from the men working in the broken remnants of Britain 's fishing fleets is simple : scrap quota systems , which lead to discards and high grading , and replace them with weight-based catch limits so that all fish caught are landed for human consumption or for processing into animal and fish feed .
We need to replace the system of openly tradeable quotas and so stop financiers , supermarkets and the super rich from speculating in fishermen 's livelihoods .
Quotas of all kinds - and in whichever seas - should be owned by fishermen from ports with traditional connections to those waters and be tradeable only between fishermen who are likewise entitled to fish by personal , family and community connections .
( GA ) Mr President , I am no authority on this matter , but since I come from an island nation , I know that fishing is very important for coastal communities throughout Ireland .
My esteemed Irish colleague , Mr Gallagher , who is an authority on this topic not just in Ireland but beyond , made some very pertinent points when he spoke about the nonsense of shared quotas for two separate areas for the one stock .
My group , the PPE Group , has a different view .
At the same time , what Mr Gallagher says seems to be logical , as horse mackerel is a transient species .
So I would like the Commissioner 's response to that in particular : not a personal response but one based on scientific evidence .
I would also agree with colleagues regarding discards , and I would also like to see us developing aquaculture much more ...
( GA ) because there will be more and more demand for fish in the future , and I hope that every kind of fish will be available to all .

Mr President , I have recently been trying to establish the cost of the common fisheries policy to the British economy .


The best estimate in lost catch alone is at least GBP 3.6 billion per annum ; the cost of higher food bills is put at around GBP 4.7 billion per annum ; the cost of subsidies , unemployment , wasted resources , red tape , etc. is put at about GBP 2.8 billion per annum .
This makes an annual total upwards of GBP 11.1 billion .

The fishing industry has been devastated , with over 97 000 jobs lost since 1973 in fishing and dependent industries .
The knock-on economic and human costs are incalculable ; the ecological impact of the common fisheries policy is a disaster .
Over 880 000 dead fish are dumped into the North Sea every year .
The solution for Britain is , of course , to leave the European Union , regain control of our territorial waters and restore sanity to a revitalised national fishing industry .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , anchovy fishing in the Bay of Biscay ceased in 2005 due to the poor state of stocks .
The aim of the proposed plan is to ensure sustainable fishing by establishing quotas based on scientific criteria .
This plan is supported by the sector , which needs stability .
I ask the Commission to withdraw this proposal and to take account of Parliament 's initiative .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the honourable Members of Parliament for their contributions .
The discussion was very interesting indeed .
First , I would like to react to the remarks of Mrs Fraga , on behalf of the EPP and of other Members , about the institutional problems we have now , referring to the new institutional environment we have under the Lisbon Treaty .
I have to admit that the enforcement of the Lisbon Treaty has created a new era , and we would like to adapt to this new era .
I would like to say in a very clear way that the Commission understands and supports the idea that Parliament has to have a say in terms of the harvest : the role of the long management plan .
We think that the treaties are very clear when they refer to this issue .
This is our position but , as you know , there is a reaction in the Council .
Some Member States have reacted in a very strong way , but also there is a general reaction to this approach .
We have to find a solution here , because otherwise we cannot go on to enforce long management plans and , as you will understand , long management plans are our future .
We cannot go on with a new policy dictated by short-termism and all these political bargains we are used to .
So we have to find a solution to unblock the situation .
I have in mind to try to find a way out by means of a trilateral meeting .
I am going to propose to Parliament and the Council that we all sit together in order to find at least a compromise solution , which we need as soon as possible because we cannot go on in this way .
All the long management plans are blocked now , and I have some new proposals about some new management plans , which are very important for salmon , for example , and for pelagic stocks .
These are very important long management plans .
They are ready and we are waiting to find an institutional solution to these very sensitive problems .

Referring to the contributions of the other groups , I would like to welcome the contributions of Mr Arsenis , Mr Haglund and Ms Lövin on behalf of their groups and to agree with them that what we need is long management plans and scientific advice .
I understand and I would like to be very clear on the demands of our fisheries and the problems of our fisheries sector .
But I would like to tell you that we are now discussing a clear example of the situation .
The anchovy plan and the fact that we had to close the fisheries there for some years is clear proof that we cannot go forward while ignoring scientific advice .
I understand the problems , and we have to find a synthesis and a solution .
My idea - and this will be one of the main themes of our fisheries policy reform - is to continue heeding scientific advice and also try to find a solution in case that advice is not clear enough and we do not have enough data to form a clear opinion .
I would also like to say that the report by Mr Gróbarczyk is very important , and that technical measures concerning how to avoid upgrading are very important for our policy .
I would also like to underline that we need a policy on flounders and flatfish , as we have already said .
We intend to produce such a policy .
We need a very brave policy regarding discards , to which a lot of you referred .
I do not think we can afford to throw fish back in the sea when they are so valuable .
We cannot afford this any more .
Perhaps it was a solution when we had plenty of fish in our waters , but now we have real problems .
We cannot throw fish back in the sea .
So we have to find a solution here , and I very much welcome proposals such as compensating fishermen for the cost of the catch in the case of by-catches .
We can find solutions , but what we have to do through our policy reform is move towards a target of eliminating discards .
Of course , we have to bear in mind all the technical measures needed for this , but we have to move in this direction .
One last remark about the aquaculture problems .
We have to reduce the burdens which create obstacles in aquaculture .
I can agree with that .
I can agree with the rapporteur and Mr Milana and other speakers who have spoken about it .
What I can say is that we are trying to achieve this as part of our CFP reform .
I would also like to reiterate that we are going to increase scientific research into aquaculture species , because we really need to proceed to mass production of these aquaculture products if we really want aquaculture to be an alternative to our fishing sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , first , I would have appreciated a clear answer from you as to whether it is your intention to give in to the Council 's wishes , acknowledging - which I am grateful for - the problems regarding acceptance of the powers that the Treaty of Lisbon gives to Parliament .
The Committee on Fisheries has voted for a second time and has not asked the Commissioner to withdraw the proposal .
What we are asking the Commissioner to do today is to give us an answer as to whether or not she is going to give in to what the Council wants .
The sector needs a plan .
The sector has been responsible and has worked for more than two years with scientific institutes and the Commission in order to establish and set out the exploitation rule in the proposal .
It is a responsible sector which has been closed for five years , and let it not be forgotten that it was the sector itself that asked for the closure .
The year before the closure , it was able to fish 7 000 tonnes and each day it established and set the quota that could be fished in order to make that small quota more profitable .
It then unilaterally decided to notify the Commission that it was stopping fishing because it had reached the limit set .
That is the sector that we have .
It is a sector that has asked us more than once to make a decision and to be transparent , and one that I can personally say has worked responsibly and rigorously to get to this much needed plan .
Adopting this plan means moving away from obscure political decisions on quotas and total allowable catches , the basis for which is sometimes unknown .
We have lived for many years with this lack of transparency .
The 21st century is not the century of non-transparency and that is not what the European people deserve , nor is it what is deserved by a sector that has proved itself to be responsible .
Fortunately , the latest report conducted by AZTI ( Basque Scientific Institute ) and the Juvena study have shown us that there are much greater anchovy stocks for the coming year .
I would , however , like a clearer answer , Commissioner .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and colleagues for their contributions , as well as the shadow rapporteurs , the secretariat of the Fisheries Committee , the Council , the Commission , my group 's policy adviser , and indeed my own adviser .
I understand that the Council , at a technical level , is divided as to whether or not the harvest control rule should be exclusively decided by the Council .
I also understand that the 27 Ministers have yet to discuss this dossier in full , and this issue in particular .
I hope that common sense will prevail .
With regard to the Commissioner 's difficulty with + / -5 000 tonnes , I would say to you , Commissioner , that this was a pragmatic solution .
We have been dealing with this dossier for over a year now and it was a way forward .
I believe that at times , we have to be pragmatic in order to overcome the difficulty .
I would like to say to those in the S & D Group that there is absolutely no ambiguity about my position in relation to your amendment .
I will certainly be recommending that we support that amendment .
In relation to the PPE Group 's proposal , I would say that the PPE Group should reflect on this .
I was very careful to include its concerns in Amendment 7 , which deals with the Bay of Biscay .
It deals with artisanal fisheries and historic rights .
Anyone who supports that must remember that we will have many more reports in Parliament .
If you support something that is wrong now , it may well be that , if you are to be consistent , you will have to support something that is wrong in the future .
Scientifically , it is totally wrong to split a TAC , and that is not just my personal opinion .
If we do it now , we may well have to do it in the future in a one-stock fishery .
Multiannual plans are vital to allow the sector to plan forward .
Hopefully , good sense will prevail tomorrow and we will put in place a report that we can stand over .
Mr President , once again , I would like to express my very sincere thanks to all the shadow rapporteurs , especially those present - Mrs Ulrike Rodust , Mr Kuhn and Mr Ferreira , and also to Mr Kuhn and Mr Alain Cadec , for their warm and kind words on the subject of my report .


Thank you very much .
I , too , hope that the report will function as a continuation of accepted solutions and , above all , as the start of work on regionalisation .
Regionalisation is our objective and what we are striving for in the common fisheries policy .
This is what will determine the success of the future common fisheries policy in practice .

rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks for the comments that were made on my report and use my floor time to make a few remarks about the multiannual plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the proposed amendment to Mr Gallagher 's report that I presented on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
The purpose of this amendment , which the rapporteur 's Amendment 7 does not completely ensure , is to clarify the specific nature of the different fleets and make clear that these specific points and the ultimate destination of the fish should be taken into account when defining the total allowable catches ( TACs ) .
Small-scale coastal and artisanal fisheries have economic and social characteristics that are distinct from those of industrial fisheries , among other aspects .
When setting limitations on fisheries aimed at supplying fresh fish to the public for consumption , these should not be treated in the same way as industrial fishing , which is geared towards processing fish .
With regard to the different fleets and the technical issue that was raised , I still do not agree with the rapporteur 's position .
We are effectively talking about the same stock , from the same source , but , as has already been mentioned , this is a source that is developing in distinct fishing areas . Coastal and artisanal fishing ideally operate in a specified fishing area , with industrial fishing in another .
We are therefore talking about areas that have clearly defined boundaries , and we believe that this is compatible .
Moreover , we believe that the TACs need to be adjusted to each of these different fishing areas so as to ensure that the stock is managed sensibly .
This is because , as has also been noted here , sensible management of the stock should take into account not only environmental and biological aspects , but also economic and social factors .
Things that are essentially different should not be treated in exactly the same way .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 23 November 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The report on the prohibition of highgrading and restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea , the Belts and the Sound calls for new provisions in the regulations on fishing in the areas in question .
The Baltic Sea has the status of a ' particularly sensitive sea area ' , and is one of the most valuable , but also one of the most sensitive , marine ecosystems on our planet .
For this reason , I agree with the rapporteur that it is essential to abandon - and not only here - industrial scale fishing .
It is only through economically and environmentally balanced fishing , using the right fishing methods , that we can help to preserve fishing and to preserve the current range of fish species at a sustainable level for future generations .
In connection with climate change , there has been a massive movement of fish in the Baltic Sea , and it is therefore necessary to review the protected sea area regularly .
I would therefore like to call on the Commission to do this at regular intervals .
It is also essential for fishing companies to be encouraged through legislation to use the best equipment currently available in terms of selectivity , and thereby to avoid catching such huge quantities of under-sized fish and fish other than the target species , or by-catches .
The European Parliament should make a point of including this in the proposed reform of the common fisheries policy in 2011 , which I will be urgently promoting .
Information on medicinal products ( Community code relating to medicinal products ) - Information on medicinal products ( Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Christofer Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending , as regards information to the general public on medicinal products subject to medical prescription , Directive 2001 / 83 / EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use - C6-0516 / 2008 - , and
the report by Christofer Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending , as regards information to the general public on medicinal products for human use subject to medical prescription , Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency - C6-0517 / 2008 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at last , we have come to the plenary debate on the new legislation on information on medicinal products .
What we are about to debate is the last part of what certain people are calling the most controversial issue in the medicinal products package , namely , information on medicinal products .
I will admit that as recently as a year ago , I probably would never have believed that we would come to plenary together in as much agreement as we have nevertheless achieved here in Parliament .
The fact that this is the case is largely down to my shadow rapporteurs .
It is their constructive proposals and their willingness to compromise that has helped us to reach agreement and hopefully adopt this report with considerable support in plenary .
It is not only a question of willingness to compromise .
I think that perhaps it is even more important that we have realised that we want , and are working for , the same things here in Parliament .
The first is that we all , first and foremost , want Europe 's patients to have better and more accessible information on medicinal products .
The second is that none of us wants advertising for prescription-only medicinal products , and the third is that the information that reaches patients and is disseminated by companies must be checked and approved by the relevant authorities .
These are principles that everyone shares and that have made it easier for us to reach agreement .
However , it is also why we felt somewhat compelled to re-draft the Commission 's proposal .
I would like to highlight five things that we focused on when re-drafting the Commission 's original legislative proposal .
The first is that we tried to change the perspective of the legislation - from a focus on the right of pharmaceutical companies to disseminate information to now focusing on the right of patients to have access to information and , with that , the companies ' obligation to publish and make available this information .
Secondly , we tried to tighten up all of the exceptions that existed to avoid possible loopholes for advertising - something none of us wants .
Thirdly , we ensured that the information on medicinal products coming from companies is checked and is reliable in that it must have passed through a pharmaceuticals authority somewhere .
The fourth thing we did was to say that any information that could come from pharmaceutical companies should not be received by patients or the general public without them asking for it first .
No one should ever receive unsolicited information on medicinal products .
We have therefore rejected any so-called ' push channels ' , such as advertisements on the radio , television or in newspapers .
The last point I would like to highlight is that companies are only one link in the information chain .
Healthcare and society in many countries throughout Europe must take a much greater share of the responsibility than they currently do .
There are points on which we do not agree .
In this regard , I would simply like to ask a question and call on my fellow Members to in fact accept the exception relating to information that doctors give to patients they are treating , in other words , that such information need not go through the same process of checks as other information .
I have a specific example that could pose a problem if such an exception is not accepted , namely that a doctor in Sweden , for example , would not be able to give an English package leaflet to a patient who does not understand Swedish on account of the fact that it could never be approved in Sweden , as English is not an official language there .
I will conclude by addressing the Council , which , unfortunately , is not here - something that has been quite telling in this matter .
I regret the absence of the Council .
I really wanted to take account of the Council 's opinions and arguments in order to facilitate the debate , but as yet I have been met almost entirely by a flat refusal .
It has been difficult to listen to someone who does not provide any information .
We have succeeded in reaching agreement on this matter .
I am certain that the Council , too , if it begins to discuss this matter in detail , will actually encounter more or less the same conditions for agreement as we have created here .
However , the Council must not try to ration information in order to save money .
That is not something that we want to encounter .
We do not believe that more poorly informed patients are in any way easier to deal with or that it is cheaper to withhold information .
I call on the Council to take the baton so that , together , we can ensure that Europe has better information on medicinal products for the sake of the patients .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , during my hearing as Commissioner-designate , I made it clear that information to patients is a very important topic for me .
Patients are highly interested in their own health and wellbeing .
But today , the availability of information on medicines in Europe is very diverse : you could even say very unfair .
Whether patients obtain the relevant information depends on languages , IT skills and often even social class and networks .
For a Europe that strives to overcome today 's health and inequalities , this is not sustainable .
The key ambition of the Commission 's initial proposal therefore remains justified , and I applaud Parliament and , in particular , your rapporteur , Mr Fjellner , on taking this important proposal forward .
However , I strongly believe - as I also stressed during my hearing - that we have to address this file from a patient 's angle .
We have to ask what information patients need , not what information industry may wish to provide .
We have to ensure that we do not drift into direct-to-consumer advertising , which patients clearly do not want .
Again , I applaud Parliament for taking exactly this stance .
This will allow the Commission to accept many of your key amendments when we present our modified proposals .
This concerns , in particular , the obligation to publish information , the question of what information is covered , the information distribution channels and the control mechanisms .
Firstly , I support the amendment stating that industry must have the obligation and not just the right to make certain information on medicinal products available .
This is a very important change .
Secondly , as regards what information is published , I generally agree that information should not cover comparisons between medicinal products , as this could be seen as promotional .
Of course , this information is highly relevant for patients and healthcare professionals but , due to its potential abuse for promotion , it needs a strict framework .
We are cooperating with Member States on such a framework in the area of health technology assessments .
I also share the view that the proposals should concern the information made available by industry and not by third parties such as journalists and scientists .
However , we know that there is a grey zone which leaves room for abuse .
I therefore believe that such parties should be obliged to declare whether they have received financial or other benefits from industry .
Thirdly , as regards the information channels , I partially agree with your amendments .
However , not everybody uses the Internet ; we must avoid corroborating inequalities by excluding those who do not use digital communication tools from access to medical information .
I consider , therefore , that it should be possible for industry to draft printed material on its own initiative and not only by request .
This draft information could be used on request by the public or via healthcare professionals .
Fourthly , on the control of information , I agree that information which has not already been approved during the marketing authorisation process must be pre-approved by competent authorities as a matter of principle .
However , I believe that Europe should play close attention to the constitutional concerns that some Member States raise as regards the compatibility of pre-vetting with freedom of expression .
It should be possible for these Member States to provide for exposed control , irrespective of whether they already have such exposed control in place .
Several of Parliament 's amendments concern information from sources other than industry sources .
In this context , let me stress that I fully agree with the political ambition to place the proposals on industry-generated information on medicines , which we are discussing today , in a broader and more comprehensive agenda on patient information .
Yes , there are other very important sources which have to be exploited as fully as possible , but the proposals are not the right place to address them .
The Commission is already obliged to draft a report on the readability of the package leaflet .
Therefore , any changes regarding this issue would be premature .
Nor is it feasible to introduce , for each clinical study mentioned in the summary of the European Public Assessment Report , a link to the Eurydice Database on clinical trials .
A general link between databases would suffice .
The public summary of the assessment report should not be annexed to the European marketing authorisation , as it is already publicly available through the EMA website .
I recognise that , in addition to information provided by industry , there are already a number of European and national databases and portals providing information on medicinal products .
What we lack is interlinkage between them .
I propose that the future European medicinal web portal recently created by the Pharmacovigilance Directive be used as a central point to access information .
In this context , I fully recognise the need for broader information about diseases and their prevention .
Patients are interested in all different treatment options , not just learning about medicines .
However , this cannot be addressed through the present proposals , which focus on medicines .
Nevertheless , the Commission is well placed to serve as a European information switchboard .
I see our role as connecting other reliable information providers such as Member States or patient organisations .
European action can add value , and many information tools such as the EU health portal are already in place .
Honourable Members , you will not be surprised that there are some amendments that the Commission , after careful reflection , cannot support .
The right of citizens to lodge complaints , for example , is a fundamental EU principle .
It is neither appropriate nor necessary to restate this .
The level of penalties should be determined at national level and not at European legislative level .
A list of the Commission 's positions on all the proposed amendments has been made available to Parliament .
Let me conclude by again thanking Parliament and Mr Fjellner and the shadow rapporteurs for your important contribution .
I hope this week 's vote will help strengthen patients ' access to information and convince the Council of the need to start in-depth discussions of the proposals .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Dalli , patients should have the right to know as much as possible about their illness and the medication available to treat it .
Yet how can we distinguish information from advertising ?
Where and how is it possible to obtain objective and unbiased information ?
There are various interpretations of the texts currently in force , with the result that they need to be harmonised , strengthening the sovereignty of the individual .
Information needs to be reliable , validated by the authorities , independent , accessible and targeted to an average , non-expert audience .
The intention is to ensure more informed and responsible citizenship on the part of the end user .
The deadline for the tacit approval of the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) should be extended from 60 to 120 days .
The requirement to state the reasons for a refusal lends weight to such rejections and gives balance to the final outcome .
The EMA has a vital role as the preferred source of objective information .
I would like to conclude by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Fjellner , on his work , and by saying that I am delighted that he accepted almost all the proposals that I tabled as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and the other colleagues who have contributed to this dossier .
I would also like to congratulate Commissioner Dalli .
I think we have reached a good outcome , and now the report is much more patient-oriented than the initial proposal .
Nowadays , patients increasingly tend to seek health-related information so that they can be actively involved in the decisions concerning their health .
Patients also tend to seek information online .
This information is not easy to control on the Internet , but sooner or later we have to deal with that problem , which will not disappear if we simply do not do anything because it is too complicated .
I therefore support imposing strict rules for the registration and monitoring of websites , as well as making available a list of registered websites so that patients can be sure of the reliability of their source .
Safeguards are also needed , and the report provides them , namely by limiting the information that can be made available to information that is approved by the competent authorities .
To this end , we in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection have adopted a number of amendments covering advertising , concentrating on changing the wording from ' disseminate ' to ' make available ' in the context of non-promotional information according to the ' pull principle ' , whereby patients have access to information if they need it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when you consider how we debated this proposal from the Commission during the last parliament - going from outright rejection to celebrating all the good things coming our way - then I must say that I am very enthusiastic about what has been tabled here .
For this , we owe the rapporteur and his co-rapporteurs a great deal of thanks for having brought together this broad spectrum of opinions into a coherent position .
I feel that the key words here are ' patient oriented ' .
In other words , we have not been distracted by peripherals but instead have asked what it is that the patient needs .
I believe it is right that we have established that patients are able to obtain information from a number of channels , not just one .
I should like to reiterate , however , that the doctor must continue to be the trusted point of contact for the patient and must undoubtedly have an influence over decisions .
The way we are guaranteeing that is by banning advertising and ensuring that the information patients receive has been checked and approved by an authority .
This means that the information is based on scientific fact to start with , so patients can rely on it .
Of course , it is true that not everyone is able to find these things out via the Internet .
That is why we have various channels , however , and I think it is so widespread that we do not need to worry about that .
I only hope that the Council will now at last have the courage to deal with this matter .
It is very important ; action needs to be taken quickly .
Our patients expect it .
Then we will have done a good job .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the 21st century dawns , patients particularly need appropriate information so that they can be fully involved in the treatment pathway , know where to find treatment , decide on the best treatment with healthcare professionals and follow the planned treatment to the letter .
Nowadays , patients demand independent , comparative information that is tailored to individual needs .
Unfortunately , the proposals for the revision of the directive submitted by the European Commission failed to properly meet the needs expressed by European citizens .
These proposals opened the door to direct promotion by pharmaceutical companies , which we believe is a nonsense in terms of responding to patients ' real needs .
Neither the public nor the Member States stand to gain from this move .
On the contrary , it means more red tape , increased costs and risks to patients .
It is for these reasons that we initially submitted a proposal to reject these texts , thereby requiring the Commission to revise its proposals .
This approach , which was also adopted by my fellow Member , Mr Schlyter , of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , enabled our rapporteur , Mr Fjellner - to whom I pay tribute - to undertake a major review of the Commission 's proposals .
At the same time , we tabled some 60 amendments with the aim of better protecting the health of our citizens and of facilitating patient access to independent , comparative information tailored to individual needs .
The adoption of these amendments by the Committee on the Environment meant that we could place more emphasis on patients ' rights to information , rather than make it an option for the pharmaceutical industries to provide that information .
In light of the compromise amendments reached , and given the positive changes made to the substance of the text over recent months , we have decided to withdraw our proposal to reject the texts .
The draft report , as amended , has succeeded in counterbalancing the European Commission 's initial proposals .
Nevertheless , we shall continue to speak out against health professionals being used to distribute to their patients brochures and information that have been supplied by pharmaceutical companies without any checks by health authorities .
Similarly , we will oppose the authorisation of industrial campaigns , especially information campaigns , in relation to vaccines .
Information must not be freely distributed by pharmaceutical companies .
Experience shows that we must be very vigilant - and what happened with the Mediator medicinal products shows , in fact , just how vigilant we must be - and make sure that we strike a balance , as we have sought to do with this draft report .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of my group 's shadow rapporteur , I would like to congratulate Mr Fjellner for the great work accomplished .
The ALDE Group welcomes this report , which finally sets a clear framework for the provision of information to patients on medicinal products .
Patients need to be informed objectively and there needs to be a clear barrier between information and advertising .
Therefore , information about prescription medicines should be regulated strictly .
Special attention has also been given to new media - mainly Internet websites - defining clear safeguards , developing mechanisms for the monitoring of contents and ensuring specific provision for proper enforcement .
I would also like to make a personal point with regard to the materials provided to healthcare professionals for distribution to patients .
There is no objective reason to exclude such materials from the provision covering other contents , especially when we know that doctors are the most trusted sources of information to patients .
I will therefore personally vote against Amendment 88 and I hope coherence will guide our voting position in order to maintain the major improvement that this report would bring to the Commission proposal .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , I would like to begin by emphasising that this is one the reports that I fully support .
I have been campaigning throughout my career for every citizen to be put in charge of his or her own health , but this can happen only if people are properly informed
As Horst Schnellhardt has already mentioned here , we have been campaigning since the last legislative session for progress to be made over this standard .
These eternal debates over the fact that we are unable to distinguish between advertising and information now seem ridiculous to me , if you will pardon the expression .
We can all distinguish between requested information and information that is forced on us .
We should open the door fully to all information that is requested .
Let us not forget that we are living in a globalised world , and let us not oblige European citizens to seek out information on US websites .

Madam President , just like Mr Ouzký , I , too , have devoted my professional career as a doctor to the question of how better to inform my patients .
However , it is customary to begin by applauding the good work of the rapporteur , and I would like to do this , although with a minor criticism which I will return to later .
When we began negotiating this proposal , we faced two problems following the election of the new Commission .
First , the issue had transferred to a new Commissioner , and second , we faced a problem over whether to continue the work started , or to throw away the existing document and start afresh .
Just like most of you and Commissioner Dalli , I agreed that the original Commission proposal was not a good one , as it did not address the needs of patients and consumers .
We therefore did not want to lose time working together on the old document .
We agreed to reject the commercial campaign mounted by the pharmaceutical companies .
We ruled out print media as a communications channel , and we agreed that patients had a right to know who was providing information , and that companies were responsible for all the information they disseminated .
I am rather surprised that Mr Fjellner is again submitting to the plenary an amendment proposal which we rejected in the committee and which would be a retrograde step , contrary to the amended wording of the proposal .
If such a proposal were to be adopted , I would find it difficult to vote for what is generally a decent document .
Madam President , Commissioner , I agree with the rapporteur that the focus should be on patient safety and providing patients with information .
Patients , nurses and doctors should all have access to the best possible information on a given medicinal product .
Doctors I speak to want greater accessibility of impartial information on medicinal products , both for themselves and for patients and other professionals .
They also want the descriptions of the preparations to be standardised , as they use the Internet predominantly to find information on the effects of medicinal products .
Here they compare the active ingredients of the same medicine from different companies at home and abroad .
It is therefore extremely important for pharmaceutical companies to understand their responsibility and the importance of their information being factually and technically correct and of it not being construed as advertising .
Pharmaceutical companies must sell their products , we know that , but accountability actually increases consumers ' confidence in a preparation .
( DE ) Madam President , the wellbeing of patients is key here .
In order to cover themselves , pharmaceutical companies often include every minor side effect in package leaflets , which , of course , complicates matters greatly .
Confused patients tend to change the dose on their own initiative or to discontinue the medication .
Moreover , the flood of information via the Internet , some of which is reliable and some not , adds greatly to the confusion and uncertainty .
Certified websites are a step in the right direction , but are not yet enough .
A further priority is to make the information comprehensible even to those without medical or pharmaceutical qualifications .
The package leaflet must be unmistakable and legible .
The font size should be increased , particularly for older people .
I regret to say that there are third countries that are profiting from the high level of protection in the European pharmaceutical sector .
Both original and fake medicines are thus freely available in large quantities in Turkish bazaars .
We therefore also need to impose obligations on these third countries in order to put an end to this black market entirely .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the directive that we are discussing is intended to harmonise the content and quality of pharmaceutical information which is accessible to all citizens of the Union .
Whilst it stresses the right to advertise , it ultimately asserts the patient 's right to information .
We must give all European citizens the same opportunity to access information on medicinal products .
The main objective of this directive is to make European patients more informed so that they can take a more knowledgeable approach to medicine .
Every one of us , and especially the pharmaceutical industry , must have the same objective , which is to provide information that is accurate and useful and , at the same time , available to all citizens without distinction .
I believe that there are two particularly important points in the directive .
Firstly , citizens must be given the opportunity , by means of accurate information , to use medicines correctly , so that they have a more beneficial effect on their health , whilst the risks associated with their misuse are minimised .
Secondly , accurate and effective information can increase citizens ' awareness of the burden of pharmaceutical costs on public spending .
In any case , we must be very attentive and rigorous on certain points .
I refer , above all , to the danger of medicinal information turning into disguised advertising .
We must avoid the risk of supposedly scientific information disguising a much less noble intention , which is to influence patients and steer them towards buying a particular medicine .
It is therefore crucial to have effective tools to control information , especially that which patients may obtain from the Internet .
In conclusion , I therefore hope that the Committee will provide ways to control information in such a way as to guarantee its accuracy .
These controls should be entrusted to dedicated independent organisations so as to offer greater guarantees of impartiality .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in his address , Commissioner Dalli himself said that we must focus on the patient .
Although the original proposal from the Commission tended rather to put the market at the centre , we have now succeeded - through a wide range of amendments that were adopted with a large majority - in putting people at the centre instead , thereby taking into account what Commissioner Dalli said .
The right of the patient to high quality non-promotional information on the benefits and risks of prescription-only medicines was urgently needed .
We need this regulation .
I myself come from the world of advertising - my professional background is in advertising and PR - and I know that advertising has one aim , and that is to sell .
Our task , however , is to provide information .
I believe that the present report and the corresponding amendments give due consideration to our responsibility to provide information .
Commissioner , since the costs of medicines make up a large proportion of healthcare spending , I urge you to work to ensure that patients are well informed and continue to pursue and focus on your initiatives , prevention and health promotion .
Together , we will then be successful .
Madam President , how often do we wonder about the side-effects of medicines we are taking ?
How often do we wish for more information on products and illnesses ?
This report deals with these questions and the need the public has for information .
The change of focus from the original Council proposals was important , as was the emphasis on the patient 's right to access information as opposed to the possibility of pharmaceutical companies providing information .
This was achieved by a ban on direct consumer advertising for prescription-only medicines .
In addition , an important issue was the recognition of the national competent authority and healthcare professionals as the main source of information .
Again , this was achieved .
The Information to Patients Directive sends a strong message on the rights of patients .
I congratulate the rapporteur on tackling a difficult dossier and producing a comprehensive directive which , I hope , we will all support unitedly .
( LT ) Madam President , in the European Union , we stand for the principle of consumer , in this case , patient , awareness and are aiming for citizens to partly take responsibility for their own health .
However , our duty as politicians is to protect patients from incorrect and misleading information .
That is what we are doing today .
As far as public access to information about pharmaceuticals is concerned , it would seem that the situation varies across the European Union .
The distinction between information and advertising is becoming less clear .
I therefore support Parliament 's position which aims for a clearer definition of information and advertising .
It is important for patients to obtain reliable objective information in their mother tongue , for it to be designed for the non-expert public , and for it to be easy to understand and access , bearing in mind the particular needs of consumers .
As well as patients , we must protect doctors from hidden advertising as their relationship in the treatment process is particularly important .
We are living in an age when borders are disappearing and information can move freely , just as we can ourselves .
Therefore , we must apply certain safeguards to ensure the wellbeing of European patients .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur for his excellent work and hope that we will all be healthier and will have easier access to information .
( CS ) Madam President , the directive on medicinal products has not been significantly amended for almost 10 years , and a revision of this directive is therefore long overdue .
I fully support patients being fully informed and being made equal partners with doctors , sharing in decisions and also taking their share of responsibility for such decisions .
Accessibility of information will undoubtedly play a fundamental role in this change .
Such information clearly includes information on medicinal products , including those that are subject to medical prescription .
Patients should have access to information on a product , and not only in printed form , but also in electronic form .
They should have access to information that is independent , objective , comprehensive , true and accessible in an intelligible form and intelligible language .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his good work .
I support his proposal .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Christofer Fjellner , and his shadow rapporteurs .
Under difficult conditions , and despite battling against a severe headwind , a very good result has genuinely been achieved with this report .
The Commission proposal has been improved considerably .
A strict ban on advertising remains : there will be no information on the radio , television or in magazines ; instead , patients must actively seek out the information .
I base my position on the idea that patients are responsible people .
They want to be informed , and I would very much like to help them achieve that .
I therefore also want the patient to be at the centre of the information .
I would like to focus on two key points .
I myself have said in no uncertain terms - including in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - that I would like to see health portals on the Internet and similar information in printed media .
Our citizens often look things up on the Internet , where they often come across poor and uncontrolled information .
We must therefore counter this with an alternative : controlled information .
Pharmacovigilance was a first success , with the adoption of drug safety portals that included the package leaflets and information on the medicines .
However , I would like to go beyond this , Commissioner , and would have liked to have seen comprehensive Internet portals that also provide information on illnesses and prevention .
If I have understood you correctly , you support this in principle , but perhaps have not said so in this dossier .
I would like the Commissioner to make a clear statement as to whether he also supports this .
I consider this to be a very , very important matter .

( FR ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Fjellner , on the excellent work he has been doing for several months on these two reports .
I say this especially because we have been waiting years for this text .
The oldest MEPs among us will remember that , back when the pharmaceutical legislation was being revised , we wanted to talk about teaching patients about medicinal products and treatments , but that , unfortunately , there was some confusion between information and advertising .
Nowadays , information must not be allowed to be disguised advertising and , in fact , the emphasis in these reports is no longer on the right of companies to convey information but on the right of patients to access it .
The rationale is therefore completely different , and that is why patients are the priority .
Moreover , we say ' no ' to unsolicited information , a move that will reduce the distribution channels and thus the risks of advertising .
Patients themselves will search for the information they want , which will not be forced on them , via the radio or television , newspapers or magazines .
That , in fact , is what makes it different from advertising .
Some information will therefore need to be pre-vetted .
Such pre-vetting must be carried out by national authorities , and it must allow for the creation of specialist , objective websites , and the use of specific printed materials , as Commissioner Dalli has explained .
All the conditions are therefore in place for ensuring good quality information , objective information , information for which patients have long been waiting .
This is why the Council absolutely must fulfil its responsibilities and agree to it , because we cannot allow just any information to be found on websites .
We have been waiting for 10 years : 10 years for the Council to make its decision .

( HU ) Madam President , Mr Fjellner , too , deserves thanks for the report , for we have long needed a proposal for providing patients with more and better information on the prescription-only medicinal products prescribed to and used by them .
Quality information is very important and contributes to improved healthcare conditions .
When patients are adequately informed , they are more likely to follow the required treatment and will better understand the decisions relating to their treatment .
What we need is not only harmonisation of European regulations .
We must also ensure an improvement in public health through the provision of correct information .
Pharmaceutical companies also play an important role in this .
However , we must also make sure that there is no excessive drug consumption as a result of commercial promotion .
There are numerous problems with the provision of information on medicines in EU Member States today .
In some Member States , patients have difficulty accessing even the most basic information about prescribed medicines .
This causes serious inequalities in EU healthcare .
In addition to information available on the Internet , we need to provide guidance through traditional channels as well .
However , our aim is not to ensure that pharmaceutical companies have the right to provide information , but to give patients the opportunity to obtain information .
We need to distinguish between information and advertising .
In my view , communication between patients and doctors is also important , since the primary source of information for the patient must be the physician who prescribes the medication .
Other information channels should only serve to supplement that information .
( CS ) Madam President , I very much applaud the work of the rapporteur on regulations for improving the accessibility and quality of information on medicines for European patients .
As a doctor , I can say that the information on product leaflets is reliable and intelligible to doctors .
Now , it must also be written in such a way that lay persons also understand it .
However , we are also aiming to put an end to misleading advertisements on the Internet that encourage people to buy products that not only do not cure , but may even harm patients .
It is , however , not easy to regulate web content in a globalised digital environment .
I would like to emphasise again that the solution is to implement as soon as possible the proposal to introduce reliability marks for safe websites .
Only then will it be possible to ensure reliable content concerning medicines on the Internet , regardless of where in the world the website operator is based .
Such a plan was also included in my report on consumer confidence in the digital environment .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report being discussed is extremely important , since it will enable European legislation on access to information on medicinal products to be harmonised and , above all , because it will ensure that patients obtain more information about prescription medicines .
The posting of this information on websites must be transparent and independent .
To ensure this , all information must be examined by the relevant national or European authorities , to prevent it from becoming disguised advertising of medicinal products , perhaps through the action of production companies .
Finally , I call for the same attention to be given to information contained in prescription medicine brochures also .
In this regard , I would prefer doctors or pharmacists to be the ones who provide detailed information to patients , to ensure the thorough understanding of medicine administration that is required .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we believe that the regulation is positive , since it is aimed at providing a harmonised legislative framework with regard to non-promotional information on prescription medicines which pharmaceutical companies may communicate to the public , leaving the advertising ban unchanged .
The motion stresses the difference between advertising and information .
The provision of information is based on the principles of active research .
Doctors must continue to be the main source of information on medicinal products .
Other sources , which are understood to be complementary and which include magazines and newspapers , should be maintained .
The central focus is the patient 's right to information , with the active participation of organisations that represent citizens , particularly patients .
We voted in favour .
Madam President , we would all like to see patients using the existing information that is available to them .
We need to create awareness among citizens about the use of the information currently available .
I support colleagues here who say that we should not advertise products , and would say to the companies involved that communicating quality information to consumers is the best form of advertising , because if a product works for the citizen , then that is a clear message that it will be used where it is required .
Of course , we need to have general practitioners communicating medical and scientific information to their patients .
This often does not happen in the best possible way .
Finally , we also need to be clear about how medicaments are allocated to citizens of different age groups .
They are prescribed today with no review of the case for a year .
This is very dangerous , and we need to have much more rigorous assessment of how patients are cared for , on a regular basis .
Otherwise , we will have medical problems .
Madam President , I am pleased that the Commission started by pointing out precisely the fact that access to information on medicinal products currently varies enormously throughout Europe , because we have tried very hard to ensure that everyone has good access and to harmonise this access .
At the same time , I had a requirement of my own and that was that the information must not be worse or sparser in any particular country .
I know that this is something that many people were concerned about in some countries , including Sweden , where , for a long time , we have had a system called Fass .
I will now address those people directly and say that the way Parliament has voted here not only means that it is possible to retain Fass , but it is also possible for other countries to introduce similar systems .
In other respects , of course , the rules in Europe today are rather strange in that anyone can say whatever they like about medicinal products that are subject to medical prescription except those who manufacture these medicinal products ; in other words , those who should know most about them .
I am therefore pleased that we have established that they not only have the right , they actually have a duty to disseminate certain basic information .
They must also contribute , because after all , they are the ones sitting on a lot of the information .
To the Commissioner I would simply like to say that I am very pleased to see that you and I seem to agree on all of the points that are key for me in this work .
I believe that the Commission and Parliament are now in agreement .
This puts considerable pressure on the Council to take up this matter in a constructive way and work further on it .
To be honest , even with regard to the points in the proposal to which the Commission has stated that it has objections , I would maintain that the essence of what we want to achieve is very similar , for example , as regards printed material and the possibility of helping those countries that have constitutional problems , including Sweden , to solve them in the proposal .
Finally , I would like simply to address those Members here who do not think that we should have an exception for doctors and the information that doctors are to provide .
Personally , I think that a doctor who sees a clinical trial published by a company should have the right to give it to a patient if the doctor deems the information to be relevant , or that a doctor who finds a package leaflet in a language other than that Member States ' official language should have the right to print out that information and give it to a patient .
In that case , however , we must vote for the doctor himself to be able to decide and not for this directive to govern what doctors are to give to patients .
It is always the doctors ' responsibility and we should not regulate it here .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 24 November 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - Information regarding consumer products has become essential .
Information on medicines is especially sensitive .
One important distinction which has to be made is between information and advertisement .
The European Parliament , in discussing this report , is making safeguards where medicines are concerned .
One instance is that printed matter has to be submitted to the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) 90 days in advance for analyses before being forwarded to consumers .
One important element which is not being addressed is information on prices .
During this legislature , I have insisted on the high prices of medicines in Malta when compared to the same medicines elsewhere in the European Union .
The difference in price is not minimal but unbelievable .
The cost of some medicines in Malta is double or even more than the cost in Europe .
When I submitted questions to the Commission on the subject , they always indicated that this is an issue for the national government .
I strongly believe that the EMA should not only act as a shield for consumers in relation to information on medicines , but when consumers are being blatantly overcharged for medicines and national governments are unable to tackle the issue , the EMA should have the ability to address the issue .
in writing . - I welcome the provisions in the report on the information on medicinal products which emphasise the right of consumers to information .
Regarding this , I would like to draw your attention to the online public consultation launched by the EC in connection with forthcoming amendments to the Tobacco Products Directive .
Undoubtedly , this initiative is praiseworthy and I support it .
But I would like to see the position of Parliament and the Council because , since I have familiarised myself with the proposals , I define some as extreme , unreasonable and , to some extent , I am even surprised at their inclusion for discussion .
I mean some of the proposed options such as the introduction of simplified uniform packing without insignia , a ban on the display of products in sale and prohibiting the use of additives in the production of tobacco products .
I believe that in drawing up new regulations , reality must be considered .
Extreme bans and restrictive regulatory measures on tobacco should be treated with caution .
This is a growing problem and I don 't want this signal to remain without discussion .
The Commission proposes , but what it gives us as proposals is not always the best for all Member States .
A debate in this case is obligatory !
I think it is a good thing that , as a result of this proposal , the focus of the directive and the regulation has moved from drug manufacturers to patients .
It is extremely important to raise patients ' awareness of prescription drugs in order to prevent overconsumption of medicines as a result of commercial considerations .
Unfortunately , in many Member States , it has become the norm for drug companies to lobby hard , offering a number of benefits which certainly have an influence on doctors ' decisions .
Needless to say , business interests are not always consistent with the interests of patients , and this is why the amendment to Directive 2001 / 83 / EC and Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 are necessary in order to create a clear framework for giving out information on prescription drugs .
A clear framework would help to promote the rational use of drugs and would be in the interest of patients .
There should certainly be clearer distinctions made between advertising and information , even though direct advertising of prescription drugs to consumers will remain prohibited under the relevant proposals .
in writing . - The Environment Committee has made some important improvements to the Commission 's proposal which , in its original form , would not have prevented all forms of advertising of prescription drugs directly to patients .
Prescription medicines are not like ordinary consumer goods .
They should be supplied by clinical experts , not marketed like cars or cosmetics .
So I welcome the continued ban on advertising of prescription medicines on television , radio , and in the print media .
Healthcare professionals remain the most trusted source of information about medicines .
So I cannot support the rapporteur 's amendment which would allow healthcare professionals to distribute additional , unapproved material from the pharmaceutical companies directly to patients .
This would represent a clear opportunity to advertise , something which we want to avoid and which would be inconsistent with our position against direct advertising to patients .
It is especially inappropriate because the material directly from the pharmaceutical company would , in the patient 's eyes , carry the legitimacy of the doctor distributing it .
On the whole , the report represents improvements for patients compared to the Commission proposal , and we should not undermine these improvements by allowing pharmaceutical companies to advertise directly to patients in the doctor 's surgery .
Restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jill Evans , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( recast ) - C6-0471 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would first of all like to thank all of my colleagues who have made this first reading agreement possible - in particular , of course , all of the shadow rapporteurs , the Commission and both the Spanish and Belgian Presidencies , as well as the Environment Committee and the group staff and assistants .
We managed to reach agreement following a lot of hard but constructive work , including some very difficult compromises .
To put this debate into its proper context , over 9 million tonnes of electrical and electronic equipment is sold every year in the European Union .
Most of this is large household appliances and IT and telecommunication equipment .
As this market continues to grow , it has also become the fastest-growing waste stream in the EU , estimated to rise to a huge 12.3 million tonnes by 2020 .
It is a very complex waste stream that includes several hazardous substances .
The waste hierarchy makes prevention of waste the first priority , which means substituting hazardous substances in products which prevent recycling or pose a risk to health and the environment when undergoing waste treatment .
The Commission estimates that the current RoHS Directive has led to a reduction of 100 000 tonnes of certain heavy metals and two groups of brominated flame retardants from going into the waste stream and potentially entering the environment .
RoHS has set a global standard , but there was a need for more clarity , so we had a great responsibility with this recast to ensure that a clearer and more ambitious law was adopted .
I believe that we have improved the current directive in a number of ways .
It now has a clear methodology , with criteria for deciding on new restrictions , complementary to and independent of REACH .
The scope has been extended to include all electrical and electronic equipment within eight years , unless it is specifically excluded .
There will be a review for additional exclusions within three years , together with an examination of three phthalates and one brominated flame retardant identified as priority .
Time-limited exemptions can be granted on the basis of clear criteria and application deadlines .
Nanomaterials will be looked at specifically in future reviews of restrictions .
Given my ambitions for this report , Members will not be surprised that I am not completely satisfied with the final outcome .
The RoHS Directive was designed to address the specific problems of a specific waste stream and I think that we have missed an opportunity to move it forward substantially by adding further restrictions .
However , we have kept its identity and strengthened the Commission proposal in many ways .
On correlation tables , my group supports making this obligatory for Member States , but this is a horizontal issue that affects all European legislation and cannot be resolved in this one file .
To help find a solution , I proposed in Amendment 105 that we adopt a declaration calling on the Commission to report on the current practice of Member States in providing correlation tables and how it affects the Commission 's work instead of insisting on mandatory correlation tables .
This will give us a much clearer picture for the future debate .
In summary , we managed to strengthen a rather vague and unambitious proposal into a new RoHS which will deliver a higher level of protection for human health and the environment now and in the near future .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , Mr Potočnik , the Commissioner responsible for this file , is here with me , but unfortunately he has to remain silent because of a problem with his throat .
I know that he has been working on this file for a long time , so I will do my best to be his voice .
We stand on the threshold of a first-reading agreement on the recast of the directive on the restriction of hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment - the RoHS agreement .
We would not have reached this point if it were not for the hard work of the European Parliament on this important dossier .
I would like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Jillian Evans , as well as the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , for the excellent work carried out on this proposal .
RoHS has been a successful piece of legislation since it was adopted in 2003 .
It has prevented thousands of tonnes of banned substances from being thrown away and potentially released into the environment .
It has brought about important changes in the design of electronic products in the European Union and worldwide .
Other countries , including the EU 's major trading partners , have followed the EU 's example and brought in similar legislation .
We use enormous and increasing amounts of electronic equipment , which contain a lot of metal resources .
A computer , for example , contains over 60 raw materials .
On average , each EU citizen produces 25 kg of electronic waste every year .
This law will ensure that electronic products are freed from many hazardous substances and will make this large waste stream easier to recycle .
This law therefore also helps make the EU more resource-efficient , in line with our Europe 2020 strategy .
However , industry and Member States alike have reported the risk of inadequate or inefficient implementation and enforcement of the directive .
The status quo is insufficient , not only in terms of protection of the environment , but also in terms of creating a level playing field within the EU .
Therefore , it is important that this law be clarified and streamlined .
The key element for the Commission is to ensure alignment with REACH , but real environmental benefits only arise when a law is properly implemented and enforced at national level .
I hope that the introduction of the common definitions and assessment tools of the new legislative framework for the marketing of products in this law will significantly improve this .
In addition , the directive 's environmental ambition is improved through the extension of the product coverage , first by the two new categories - medical devices and monitoring and control instruments - and , in eight years , to all electronic products .
Further extensions to the scope of this law will further increase the environmental benefits , but economic operators should , of course , have sufficient time to adapt , and all scope changes should be based on solid information .
The Commission will therefore review the scope changes as regards the current law , which have not yet been subject to impact assessments .
The Commission would therefore like to clarify the issue by making two statements .
First , on the scope , the Commission interprets that it follows from Article 2 ( 1a ) that during the transitional period of eight years , Member States are obliged to allow electrical and electronic equipment that was outside the scope of Directive 2002 / 95 / EC , but which would be covered by the new directive , to continue to be made available on their market .
Second , concerning the review pursuant to Article 19 , the Commission intends to undertake , no later than three years after the entry into force of this directive , an impact assessment focusing on the changes in scope .
This review may result in the Commission making a legislative proposal in line with its right of legislative initiative in the treaties .
We would also like to make the following declarations as regards nanomaterials .
We note that work towards a common definition on nanomaterials is still ongoing within the Commission .
We intend to adopt a recommendation on such a common definition for all legislative sectors in the near future .
The Commission considers that the RoHS provision covered different forms , including nanoforms , of the substances which are currently banned , and those which , in the future , will be subject to a priority review under RoHS .
Finally , the Commission also regrets the lack of support for the provision , including in the Commission proposal , making the establishment of correlation tables obligatory .
The Commission accepted the substitution of the obligatory provision by a recital encouraging Member States to follow this practice in order to facilitate a first-reading agreement , but it states that this should not be seen to be a precedent .
We will continue to work with the colegislators in an effort to find a horizontal solution to this horizontal institutional issue .
The Commission can accept the compromise package in order to reach an agreement on this directive at first reading .
I would encourage Parliament to adopt the same position .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , to begin , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Evans , for her excellent work in preparing the report .
Without her commitment and determination , achieving a compromise between the political groups and the institutions at first reading would have been impossible .
The RoHS Directive belongs to those legislative acts which place the environment and sustainable development on the same footing as the uninterrupted movement of goods .
Her efforts in the field of environmental protection have , to date , led to a spectacular placing of limits on heavy metals in the waste stream of electrical and electronic equipment and the appearance of technological innovations .
Our priority during work on the review of the RoHS Directive was to raise safety standards for electrical appliances and electronic gadgets for sale in the European Union .
The new rules will require all manufacturers of electrical and electronic equipment to use substances which have been tested and which are safe for health and the environment .
The open scope of the directive will have a positive influence on the harmonisation of the internal common market and the movement of goods , and will give European entrepreneurs legal certainty .
I believe the negotiated compromise is a good one , and that it is beneficial in terms of environmental protection and the removal of toxic substances from equipment and waste products .
On the other hand , the amended RoHS Directive gives industry and entrepreneurs the necessary timeframe in which to introduce changes and to make the adaptations required .
The proposed methodology for determining the substances intended for priority review is based on REACH , and also brings legal coherence and consistency to European Union legislation .
Madam President , I hope that our Commissioner gets his voice back again , because we need a voice at the climate conference in Cancún .
I had been rather surprised that Mrs Damanaki was speaking here on the revision of the hazardous substances directive after also speaking on the fisheries revisions ; thank you for stepping into the breach .
Parliament has not got everything that it wanted .
Annex 3 has been dropped , which we regret .
However , we will continue to keep an eye on these substances and when the revision takes place in three years ' time , you will have to come back to this House with your impact assessments and provide evidence of the problems that exist there on a substance-by-substance basis .
We also have a considerable number of exemptions , so that it rather resembles a Swiss cheese .
We also need to check here the gaps and shortcomings that exist as regards human health and the environment .
I will simply say that solar panels were highly controversial .
We want to keep cadmium out of the environment , but these panels put 100 000 tonnes of cadmium into the environment .
That is something we will have to watch carefully .
I am pleased that the Commission has made some concessions with its four statements , so for now , we will take what progress has been made in 2010 and we will meet again in three years ' time for the revision .
Naturally , I would also like to thank the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs .
Madam President , Commissioner , with this directive , we have before us legislation that has come about surprisingly quickly .
I am very surprised that we have reached a compromise already which I and my group - and I expressly underline that - consider acceptable .
When all is said and done , this piece of legislation has had a very difficult passage through Parliament .
We expanded its scope , only to restrict it again straight away .
We have quite incidentally attempted to declare certain substances highly dangerous ; perhaps we should ask ourselves whether this legislation is really the right forum for such a debate .
Personally , I did not think it a good idea to include PVC and nanomaterials in a directive on ' hazardous substances ' .
I therefore think it sensible that this is no longer the case in the compromise .
The previous speaker has just said so already , but it really is remarkable that we consider each gram of polluting substances so carefully and are then sometimes very irrational in our debates .
Apparently , there are industries in Europe which we are ring-fencing for political reasons .
This seems to be the case for enterprises in the renewable energy sector .
The fact that we instantly exempt them completely from the scope of this legislation by saying that we have to put up with environmental pollution for the sake of climate protection and our objectives in the area of renewable energy is incomprehensible .
It does not add up .
I only hope that we do not do the same thing in the case of electronic waste - the decision on which is also imminent here - because that would be even more astonishing .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I would like to add my thanks to the rapporteur and her staff .
After very long negotiations , we have an agreement that my group can sign up to .
However , I do want to take this opportunity to mention a couple of areas .
This recast was intended to improve matters .
By definition , I think that is what a recast should do .
It was intended to simplify the requirements and demands on manufacturers .
Looking at the result , it seems to me to be in many ways one step forward and two back .
I welcome the removal of Annex III , which effectively created a blacklist for many substances , but I regret the inability to agree on the availability as a criterion .
That took a great deal of discussion .
Secondly , it was intended to create legal certainty .
I have to mention the opening of the scope here .
Right from the beginning , I argued that it would create uncertainty and simply cause new demands for exemptions and exceptions .
It seemed to me that , at the very least , we required a full impact assessment from the Commission before agreeing to this .
I have not changed my mind , but I accept that I have lost the argument .
The checks and balances now being written into the regulations are , I believe , going to lead to a number of challenges , and I welcome the Commission 's commitment to look at this after it is included .
But it would , in my view , have been better to have done this before .
I wonder how this opening of the scope has actually advanced legal certainty and clarity .
Finally , I would also like to mention the real danger of over-regulation .
In voting for the RoHS recast , we are , in effect , continuing a dual tracking of regulation and EU approval for chemical - hazardous - substances .
We have the REACH regulations in place , and their implementation is , as we heard at committee recently , evolving satisfactorily .
At some point soon , we will have to grasp the nettle and let the REACH regime lead , as it was intended to .
I look forward to the Commission taking this point on board .
Madam President , I would like to start by expressing my thanks to the rapporteur , who has done a good job and salvaged what was possible in the face of great resistance from the Council and the majority here in Parliament .
One major success of the new version is the open scope .
This approach is exemplary and I am pleased that we were able to agree on it .
On the negative side is the fact that the list of six substances that were already banned has not been expanded to include substances such as chlorinated and brominated flame retardants , phthalates and PVC .
Although there is sufficient evidence of the risk to health that these substances present , they will not be banned in 2011 when the new version is in force .
Certain leading electronics manufacturers have been placing products such as mobile phones , televisions and laptops that do not contain these pollutants on the market on a voluntary basis for a number of years , and without any great increase in costs .
We have passed up a great opportunity here to make the growing electrical and electronics industry a little more environmentally friendly .
Leading manufacturers are showing us the way .
Instead of supporting these manufacturers with good initiatives , however , the EU is behind the times .
It is the poor of this world that will suffer as a result .
After all , every year , we dump millions of tonnes of toxic electrical and electronic waste on them .
The poor cannot afford to pay for lobbyists in the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we opposed the proposal for a directive in committee because the rapporteur had radically changed the Commission 's proposal in a restrictive way by expanding its scope ; proposing the gradual phase-out of a further 33 substances in Annex III , including brominated and chlorinated flame retardants , as well as PVC and its additives ; limiting the scope for exemptions and the time taken to adjust ; and introducing restrictive regulations for nanomaterials .
Had this House voted in favour of this decision , which is not supported by sufficient scientific evidence , it would have caused very serious damage to the economy , with major repercussions for unemployment .
Fortunately , thanks to a series of trialogues in which I participated as shadow rapporteur , a more than satisfactory compromise has been reached , with a commitment to conduct an audit and a possible review within three years .
Another complex subject was the detailed definition of nanomaterials , which has been suspended , pending a proposal by the Commission .
The text , as arising from the trialogues , can be supported and adopted .
( DE ) Madam President , our heartfelt thanks go to the rapporteur .
The directive on electrical and electronic equipment is highly controversial .
There were great differences of opinion regarding various aspects .
I am therefore pleased that agreement has been reached and at what I regard as the good result of the trialogue negotiations .
I would specifically like to reiterate two points .
One is the question of the scope .
What equipment should the directive actually cover ?
There is one thing that we must not forget : originally , it was meant to cover domestic appliances - in other words , white goods .
The open scope now includes many new product groups , which would also have encompassed technologies for renewable energy .
I must point out that this directive actually had a quite different objective .
Naturally , much stricter and higher standards of protection need to be applied in the case of domestic appliances than in the case of technologies such as those that are uninstalled , recycled , etc. by specialist personnel .
That is why I , in turn , advocated the exemption of renewable energies .
I was not in favour of expanding the scope , but then I saw that a majority was moving in that direction .
I think it would have been counterproductive to include renewable energy in this directive .
It would have resulted in a competitive disadvantage and therefore I think it is the right decision .
Then I would like to say something about Annex III : I would have had concerns about including a further 37 substances as priority substances when there is no real justification on health grounds for a future ban on these .
I think that would be a panic measure , and that is why I think the decision made is the right one and am pleased about this aspect of the result too .
( NL ) Madam President , let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur .
Mrs Evans has a remarkable determination , thanks to which we can today reach a compromise that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament ( the S & D Group ) can endorse .
I am saying ' can endorse ' because a number of significant improvements have been made to this very important legislation .
These improvements concern the expansion of open application areas , though we would have preferred them to be introduced more quickly .
A further result of the improvements is that we still have a separate , independent directive - independent of REACH - obviously with the necessary coordination between the two .
Thirdly , and I personally find this extremely important , thanks to these improvements , we have a good methodology , which Parliament has had difficulty negotiating , which should ensure that substances come under review again , so that we can see what their possible effects may be .
On top of that , there are a number of substances ( HBCDD ) - which I have to look up on my paper here - one of the most commonly used and most controversial brominated flame retardants and three important phthalates - that should be addressed as a matter of priority .
Naturally , action is also being taken on nanomaterials .
We would have wanted to go much further , but we are happy that the Commission will , nonetheless , issue a statement .
That is very important .
Would we have wanted to go further ?
Yes , of course , we are unhappy with some aspects .
Obviously , our group would have liked some additional substances to be banned , the review to happen more quickly and there to be fewer exemptions .
As far as the latter is concerned , I really must come back to solar panels for a moment .
The S & D Group was the only group to oppose to the end the totally mistaken idea that solar panels should be kept outside the scope .
A special lobby has emerged around this issue , and completely unjustifiably so , if you ask me , because that will allow cadmium , a substance which has been banned since 2003 , to remain in circulation for another ten years at least .
I find that particularly unfortunate , especially for a sector that should undoubtedly be taking a lead in this regard .
Nevertheless , the S & D Group will be pleased to support this compromise .
I only hope that the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group do not have the wrong dossier in front of them , because I have not seen from them much involvement in the trialogues .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the recast version of the directive should help improve protection for the consumer and environment alike .
I believe we have achieved this because we have established a realistic framework that is based on the actual risks to consumers and the environment and that offers businesses legal certainty for investments and innovations .
This is very important for small and medium-sized businesses carrying out research in specific areas .
It is comforting to know that we have been able to agree risk-appropriate guidelines in relation to this important topic and , in this regard , I would also like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs .
We have heard several speakers express their regret that the panels have been dropped .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are not talking about cadmium here , but about cadmium telluride .
The issues at stake here are innovation and investment .
Indeed , we need to consider these questions separately .
The devices in question are not electrical appliances , but rather equipment for generating electricity .
This is a very significant distinction .
We cannot take a catch-all approach , saying ' These are all poisonous substances ' .
After all , for example , my own body contains a certain amount of sulphur .
Now , sulphur is not something I would readily choose to ingest .
However , things are quite different when we are dealing with chemical compounds .
That is why I am pleased that we have finally managed to put the question of PVC behind us .
The businesses that manufacture PVC have done a lot of research in the last few years .
One only has to look at the latest developments to realise what has been going on in the world .
We do not need to revisit a debate that is already ten years old .
I am satisfied with the version now before us .
I am certain it will enable us to achieve great benefits to the environment and consumer , as well as promoting innovation .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in recent years , we have witnessed considerable attempts by Community institutions to ensure that the production , use and disposal of electronic products better protect the environment and human health .
The RoHS Directive is a key element of this policy .
Compliance with the directives is certainly a challenge and a burden for businesses , but it is also an opportunity .
Indeed , the ability to supply less polluting products is a very important distinguishing factor for our businesses , so much so that it can be classed as a real competitive advantage .
Businesses must not regard the regulations and the provisions in the directive simply as obligations designed to penalise them , but as opportunities to improve business processes and product quality .
Nonetheless , some exemptions have been deemed necessary - some because of the current serious economic crisis , others because they are the subject of a subsequent and specific directive .
This is the case for nanomaterials , the space and safety sectors , fixed installations , means of transport and self-propelled machinery , human-implantable medical devices , photovoltaic panels and equipment intended for research and development applications .
In conclusion , I would take this opportunity to express my desire for greater consistency between the RoHS Directive and the REACH regulation , with any risk of confusion or overlap avoided , because businesses and operators need clear and definite rules .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that the fundamental intention of this directive should be endorsed .
The committee has finally faced up to its responsibilities and has improved significantly on the Commission 's proposal .
Nonetheless , there are a couple of issues that still need to be discussed .
Firstly , we need to remember the international dimension in all that we do .
After all , what use is it if the European Union remains unblemished , but the importing of hazardous substances is still permitted .
Secondly , small and medium-sized companies must be able to cope with our regulations and , above all , the associated bureaucratic effort involved .
Thirdly , I assume that the process launched will be dynamic rather than static in nature , which is why this problem will need to be brought before the European Parliament at regular intervals .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , although I believe this is just a small step , at least it is a step in the right direction .
At least the tabled amendment manages to encompass all the exceptions foreseen .
I believe that this will also provide some important guidance for the business sector .
However , what is particularly important in respect of these guidelines is that consumers should be kept informed .
I believe it will continue to be very important in the future that consumers should know about the potential environmental pollutants that they may be buying when they purchase electronics or electrical appliances .
This is the only way to ensure that the correct procedures will be followed with our next directive , namely , in relation to the disposal of these devices .
It is important for the Commission and the Member States to supply this information now , because a transition period of eight years really is a very , very long time .
( SK ) Madam President , in advanced industrialised countries , the lifecycle of electrical and electronic equipment is constantly shrinking .
The replacement rate of this equipment is therefore accelerating , with the result that waste from electrical and electronic equipment is becoming an ever greater environmental burden .
It is a form of waste that is complex and very often contains hazardous substances which cannot yet be removed in a satisfactory way .
It is therefore appropriate to consider the possible replacement of these substances at the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing stage .
According to the information available , our gradual aim should be to find , in particular , harmless substitutes for halogen flame retardants , or for cheap and widely-used PVC .
However , in the case of PVC in particular , I think it will be necessary to take a very sensitive approach to finding the right compromise between the objective requirements of environmental protection and the interests of the manufacturing sector .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members of Parliament , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur again for her hard work , owing to which an agreement appears to be emerging from Parliament .
This is very important .
So we now have a package of rules set out by Parliament thanks to which Member States can ensure that electronic products placed on the European markets are free of certain hazardous substances .
This proposal was a compromise , and we all know that compromises lead to compromises .
This is obvious , so it is also obvious that Parliament , the Commission and everybody involved has shown a great deal of goodwill .
The result is something that the majority of us can support .
The Commission has a lot to say on this issue .
We would have liked the compromise text and scope to be clearer with regard to the obligations of the Member States and the economic operators within the eight-year transition period .
The statements the Commission has made on the scope outline the way we think the compromise text should be interpreted with regard to the scope .
This is why I would like to ensure that these statements are included in Parliament 's record .
We nevertheless take very seriously our obligations to make an impact assessment of all scope changes as compared to the current directive , and we will start working on this as soon as the revised directive enters into force .
On enforcement , we find that the provisions on conformity assessment and marking are going to make a difference , as they set clear obligations both on how economic operators show that their products are compliant and on how Member States are supposed to verify compliance .
So this is not the end of our work .
I would like to thank you all for your contributions and your suggestions .
The Commission will take them on board .
rapporteur . - Madam President , first , I would like to thank all my colleagues for their comments .
It will be clear to anybody listening to this debate just what differences there were between the groups and what a difficult process this has sometimes been .
But we have the support of all the groups , and I very much hope and trust that in the vote on Wednesday , we will see that reflected .
I am also very pleased to hear that the Commission is committed to this directive , since the future of the directive itself will lie almost entirely in the hands of the Commission should the text be adopted on Wednesday .
We will have no further codecision powers and , in future , the Commission would review the scope and the future restrictions .
So I would call on the Commission to prioritise that view of the future restrictions so that we can further clean up this very important waste stream , which still creates so many problems for human health and the environment .
As we have heard colleagues saying tonight , prevention is better than cure and there are far more problem substances than those heavy metals and brominated flame retardants which are restricted under the current RoHS Directive .
There is also plenty of evidence of the need for future restrictions .
This debate has , of course , been followed with interest by a great many people , including industry and NGOs .
I believe that in this final compromise. we have remained true to the original aims of RoHS , and that we will have a more effective piece of legislation should Parliament vote in favour on Wednesday .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 24 November 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
According to recent data , 9.3 million tonnes of electrical and electronic equipment , consisting mainly of large household appliances and IT and telecoms equipment , are sold each year in the European Union .
With the expansion of the market and the shortening of innovation cycles , equipment is replaced more frequently , thereby adding to the amount of waste electrical and electronic equipment .
It is estimated that such waste will reach 12.3 million tonnes by 2020 .
The RoHS Directive , adopted in 2003 , was intended to gradually eliminate a first series of hazardous substances , and it has allowed for a reduction in the amount of substances which are disposed of and potentially released into the environment .
The review of this directive has been undertaken with the aim of introducing stricter regulations in relation to the restriction of hazardous substances .
I believe that the compromise package , which was achieved following long negotiations between the Council and Parliament , represents an important step in the direction of greater clarity and simplification of the directive .
One aspect of regulation that is particularly important is the exclusion from the scope of the directive of those substances which would have been banned without any scientific evidence , thus damaging the numerous businesses which operate in the market .
Given how important the review of this directive is , we must bear in mind that its main aim is to provide for stricter and more rigorous regulations on restricting the use of hazardous substances .
Now , I believe that this compromise package represents significant progress towards greater clarity and simplification of the RoHS Directive .
Of the many aspects which are to be taken into consideration for the purpose of regulation , I would like to draw particular attention to the exclusion from the scope of the directive of those substances - such as PVC and nanomaterials - which would have faced a ban on their production .
Not only would the ban be enforced without any objective scientific evidence ; it would also harm technological progress associated with the production of such materials .
For this reason , all in all , we can be satisfied with the agreement that has been negotiated .
On the one hand , this agreement strengthens environmental protection needs , by banning substances which are deemed to be hazardous following reliable scientific tests ; on the other hand , however , it prevents other materials , the risks of which have not been scientifically proven , from being blacklisted to the detriment of producers and researchers , but , above all , to the detriment of consumers .
Renewables have the aim of helping to protect the environment .
It is entirely contrary to their aim to create new hazards for the environment and for human health .
The RoHS Directive and the Council Resolution of 28 January 1988 on a Community action programme to combat environmental pollution by cadmium are principally targeted against the use of cadmium , as Europe is a region particularly at risk from this cumulative carcinogenic poison .
I would like to express my fundamental opposition to amendment No 12 .
This proposal excludes photovoltaic panels from the scope of the RoHS Directive .
However , this exclusion unfortunately does not have the effect of supporting solar technologies .
In fact , it legalises the production of cells based on tellurides of cadmium .
CdTe cells enable producers to achieve higher profits than is the case with silicon cells .
The approval of this proposal therefore represents support for the production of CdTe cells at the expense of silicon cells , which have a limitless supply of raw materials and do not contain toxic materials .
The situation is all the more serious for the fact that if there is an exemption from the RoHS Directive for photovoltaic cells , it will not be possible to review and reassess the decision for a number of years .
Research into non-toxic photovoltaic technologies will be accelerated only if producers of solar panels have to comply with the requirements of the RoHS Directive now , just like everyone else .
Revision of the directive on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment poses a particular challenge .
However , a recast is urgently needed in order to eradicate uncertainties in respect of the scope , the lack of clarity of the legal provisions and definitions , as well as the differences between Member States and potential procedural overlaps with other EU legal acts , for example , REACH .
The Commission 's original proposal was tailored far too much to large enterprises .
The economic capacity of small and medium-sized enterprises is taken into greater consideration in the current version .
After all , these small and medium-sized enterprises form the backbone of European competitiveness .
The derogation procedure and the relevant deadlines for a Commission decision have also been set out clearly .
The requirement laid down to review the directive within 10 years in order to adapt it to technological progress should also be highlighted .
When this review is carried out , it must , in particular , take account of the availability and reliability of alternative products as well as the socio-economic impact .
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to voice my concern about the excessive politicisation of Romania 's accession to the Schengen area , which I have noticed recently .
I feel that it is unfair to mix criteria specific to justice system reform with the Schengen area accession criteria .
Romania is prepared and meets the technical conditions , which actually must be the only criteria used as the basis for carrying out the evaluation .
Romania is not , nor will it be , an exporter of crime .
It cannot accept that some issues specifically affecting immigrant communities of Romanian origin should be applied to all Romanians .
We are aware that the vote in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs next spring will be a political one .
However , we believe that this vote must be based on an objective and fair evaluation and , in no way , on considerations with electoral connotations .
( EL ) Madam President , NATO 's new strategic doctrine , as approved at the Lisbon Summit , ushers in a new era in NATO 's efforts to meet new challenges .
It is important in this context to recognise the unique partnership between NATO and the European Union and the need for a more cohesive approach to all aspects of European security .
In any event , cooperation between the two organisations needs to be based on transparency , complementarity and respect for each other 's independence .
It is vital that we operate synergistically and avoid overlaps , especially in terms of political missions , as this wastes staff and energy resources for both EU and Nato Member States .
This is crucial if we are to be efficient and make savings .
The way in which institutional cooperation is organised between the two organisations and the creation of a reliable consultation mechanism that will promptly define the ways and means of joint action are very important issues .
I should like to call for an in-depth debate on this subject .
( RO ) Madam President , on 28 November , early parliamentary elections are going to take place in the Republic of Moldova .
It is well over a year since the Alliance for European Integration has been in power and significant progress has been made in reforming the Republic of Moldova 's society and economy .
The Alliance for European Integration has also shown the sincere desire to go down the path of no return towards Europe .
In view of these efforts and progress , the European Union has supported and is supporting the Republic of Moldova both politically and financially .
I wholeheartedly hope that the elections on Sunday will confirm once and for all the Republic of Moldova 's path towards total democracy , the rule of law , an efficient market economy and , ultimately , towards the European family of which , I hope , the Republic of Moldova will become a fully fledged member in the near future .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to complain about the miserable behaviour on the part of the secretariat of the Committee of the Regions in connection with a photography exhibition being organised by the exiled Municipality of Kyrenia , which is presently occupied by Turkish urban troops in Cyprus .
The photographs on display graphically illustrate the destruction of ecclesiastical and other monuments belonging to Kyrenia 's three-thousand year history .
This destruction had an obvious purpose : to remove all evidence that this town was inhabited by people of Greek culture and the Christian faith .
People who were expelled from their homes by force have managed , even though uprooted as refugees , to put roots down in Kyrenia 36 years later .
This exhibition was due to be opened by the Secretary General of the Committee of the Regions , who ultimately failed to appear under pressure from the Turkish occupying forces , because the exhibition refers to the invasion of Cyprus by Turkey in 1974 and to the destruction of its cultural heritage by the invading forces .
In fact , the secretariat of the Committee of the Regions asked that this exhibition be taken down .
I condemn this unacceptable behaviour .
Madam President , Ireland 's bail-out is unlikely to be the last in the eurozone , despite protestations to the contrary .
Despite the debt crisis plaguing the EMU , officials are keen to emphasise that Ireland 's problem is different from the one seven months previously in Greece .
Whereas with Athens , it was fiscal irresponsibility and public sector corruption , Dublin 's debt is due to reckless banking .
Portugal does not appear to suffer greatly from either , yet it is still struggling to keep its head above water , as is Spain .
What do these countries have in common ?
The not-fit-for-purpose single currency , founded upon idealistic ideology and not economic sense .
The old adage about putting all your eggs in one basket rings true .
Which are Europe 's most prosperous countries ?
That would be Norway and Switzerland .
They control their own resources and economies , yet still trade with their EU neighbours , knowing they can cast their nets elsewhere if the EU drags the whole project into oblivion .
A rescue of Portugal would push the combined bill to the EUR 300 billion mark , exhausting the eurozone 's entire capital .
Surely the only reasonable choice left is EU-thanasia .
( DE ) Madam President , I would also like to say a few words about Ireland .
Spiegel Online writes ' The Celtic Tiger has been taken into intensive care ' .
We need to ask why is this the case ?
There can be little doubt that the roots of the financial crisis lie in our monetary system , in other words , the way in which money is generated .
Private commercial banks pump incredible amounts of money into the system .
This promotes speculation , fuels inflation and , finally , leads to massive debt among those involved .
Consequently , we are faced with a systemic crisis that cannot be resolved by investing billions in a ramshackle banking system , even if we do so by diverting funds to the Irish economy .
What we need is a real form of money creation .
We need to return the generation of money to the public sector .
This would enable us to pour hundreds of billions back into European economies .
Moreover , the public creation of money would be compatible with a free market economy .
However , such massive decisions would require courage and strength from our politicians .
It goes without saying that the banks cannot be allowed to lead Parliament on a merry dance any longer .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the European Parliament cannot fail to mention the 95th anniversary of the Armenian genocide in Turkey .
In keeping with its decision of 18 June 1987 , the European Parliament must remember the massacre of the 1.5 to 2.75 million innocent civilians , and condemn without reservation , by the same criteria as those applied to the Holocaust and the Communist genocides , the mass crimes against humanity committed by the Ottoman Empire in 1915 against the Armenian minority and Christian community .
To date , a total of 22 states have recognised the historical fact of the anti-Armenian holocaust .
It is regrettable that Mr Morten Messerschmidt 's written report on this matter this year did not ultimately receive the necessary support .
I hereby wish to suggest that President Jerzy Buzek take the initiative to have the Armenian genocide unanimously recognised by all EU Member States and make the denial of this fact a punishable offence , and furthermore , that this issue be made a compulsory item on the agenda of the accession talks with Turkey
( RO ) Madam President , ninety-one per cent of young people aged between 18 and 27 think that the country 's economic situation has taken a turn for the worse .
Only 33 % of young people do not want to leave Romania .
Due to its policy of cuts , the current government in Bucharest is encouraging the brain drain abroad .
Every month we find that young people sent by the Romanian Government for training provided through the programme initiated by the social democrats in 2004 are released by the administration or a job cannot be found for them , even though they have all the experience and desire required to make an effective contribution to the system .
I support labour market mobility , but the government in Bucharest must create new jobs which will also benefit from these young people 's expertise .
I wish to pass on all our support to Romanian students and student associations , such as the League of Romanian Students Abroad .
( ES ) Madam President , the fishing boats that fish in the Indian Ocean are suffering a wave of pirate attacks .
In the last two weeks , there have been ten attacks on the Intertuna III , the Demiku , the Elai Alai , the Playa de Anzoras , the Albacan , the Erroxape , the Campolibre Alai and the Playa de Aritzatxu .
The attacks are happening increasingly far from the coast , because the pirates are using boats that they have hijacked as supply boats to improve their logistics .
Even with private security , these boats are very vulnerable .
They report their positions and no one intercepts them .
Coordination must improve , as the European Union Naval Force has not intervened in any of these attacks .
We do not know how they respond to these alerts .
The resolution that we adopted in November last year in Parliament must be complied with , and we need more involvement from the United Nations .
More countries need to be involved with , and more resources allocated to , Operation Atalanta , along with more effective blockades of the Somali coast and more agreements with coastal states to prosecute pirates .
Piracy has an impact on our fishing and merchant fleet , and also on the countries with whom we sign agreements , whose development or ruin also depends on the safety of fishing in that area .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to report to Parliament what has happened with regard to the exhibition ' The Promotion of Cultural Values through the Protection of the Cultural Heritage of Occupied Cyprus ' , held from 17 to 26 November through the Committee of the Regions .
On 17 November , following the opening , the head of the Communication unit , Wolfgang Petzold , ordered exhibitors immediately to suspend the exhibition on the grounds that the panels depicted captions which were different from those which had been agreed .
I had the correspondence including the request for authorisation sent to me , and I verified that there was no difference between what the office itself had authorised , and what was exhibited .
It also emerged that the curator of the exhibition was told , by the same head of unit , to remove the terms ' occupation ' and ' Turkish invasion ' .
I phoned the head of unit a number of times to clarify what took place , but neither the director in question , nor members of his staff agreed to speak with me .
A few hours after I reported these details , the exhibition was reopened .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that what took place in the Committee of the Regions was a serious and harmful violation of the rights of an EU Member State .
( RO ) Madam President , unfortunately , Romania has become Europe 's wild frontier .
Things were bad under the Communist dictatorship , but the situation is infinitely worse under the mafia dictatorship .
The main tentacles of the mafia ' octopus ' are the justice system and police , which are blighted by the cancer of corruption .
The perpetrators of more than 5 000 crimes committed in Romania since January 1990 remain unknown .
Romania is a paradise for local underworld gangs protected by the justice system and police .
However , it is also a focal point for paedophiles , con artists and the most unsophisticated foreign agents .
It is a good thing that the Berlin Wall fell down , but it is bad that it fell down on our heads , the peoples in Eastern Europe .
In December 1989 , a few major thrill-seekers awoke Dracula from his slumber .
Now we do not know how to get rid of him .
( EL ) Madam President , a black cloud , which is getting thicker and thicker , has been spreading over Europe recently .
The electoral rise of extreme right-wing fanatical , xenophobic and often racist factions and parties has marked political developments in numerous Member States , even Sweden .
It is a sign that we cannot ignore .
The unprecedented economic crisis and the growing immigration problem are combining to form a toxic cocktail which feeds extremes and excesses .
This is unquestionably an extremely complex problem which will be hard to resolve .
That is why the European centre right and social democrat parties in the European Parliament , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the socialists , have a serious responsibility and mission : to disperse the cloud before it brings a storm .
They must exhaust the potential for agreement and coordination , so that we can take more effective action to address specific problems , such as immigration , which require a team effort .
Here in the European Parliament , we need to take a strong new joint initiative against xenophobia and racism in crisis-ridden Europe .
Madam President , as an Irish MEP , I am well aware that the eyes of Europe are on my country 's economic woes right now .
The crisis in my country was caused by greed - pure greed - among the political and big business elite .
These people squandered the wealth created by an energetic and innovative population , and they must be held accountable .
However , the crisis was also caused by lax regulation of the banking sector .
That failure also extends to Europe .
One should remember last July 's banking stress tests , when the Commission effectively signed off on the future of the very banks in Ireland that are at the heart of the crisis .
How could this happen ?
I am very angry that my country has reached this point - very angry indeed .
I very much welcome the solidarity that has been shown by our colleagues across Europe , particularly in providing finance to stabilise our economy .
However , I do believe we are at a crossroads for the future of the EU .
Ireland is very much a sovereign nation and any diktats from Europe about Ireland 's taxation policy would , I believe , cross a dangerous line when it comes to the treatment of smaller nation states in the Union .
Madam President , I , too , wish to speak about the current economic crisis , but from a different perspective .
Today , we heard Jean-Claude Trichet and Olli Rehn speaking of the need for fiscal rectitude and calling on Ireland and Portugal and other countries to adhere to the Stability and Growth Pact .
Yet as part of a Eurobarometer survey , the findings of which have emerged today , over 27 000 citizens throughout the EU and 1 000 citizens in Ireland were asked for their views as to how we should emerge from the crisis .
To focus on just two issues , one question asked citizens to rank in order of preference how we could rapidly move out from the crisis .
While 29 % of EU citizens and one third of Irish citizens did favour reducing public spending , two thirds of EU citizens and 57 % of Irish citizens favoured boosting the economy first of all , or combining both approaches .
A question on policy priorities showed that over 50 % of both EU and Irish citizens reckoned we should tackle poverty and social exclusion first .
So there is a real divergence between those two sets of views .
We are not responding to citizens ' concerns adequately , and I think we need to review our priorities .
Madam President , tomorrow , 23 November , is the fourth anniversary of the death in London of my constituent , Alexander Litvinenko .
Mr Litvinenko was murdered by elements of the Russian state in an act of state-sponsored terrorism .
The three main suspects wanted by the Metropolitan police - Andrei Lugovoi , Dmitry Kovtun and Vyacheslav Sokolenko - are still free in Russia .
Meanwhile , Mr Litvinenko 's dignified widow , Marina , is denied justice .
So far , no coroner 's court has been convened to investigate the death , as would be the usual practice in the event of such a violent death .
I therefore take this opportunity to call on the British authorities to convene a coroner 's court as soon as possible to establish and publicly state the circumstances and cause of death and formally identify those wanted in connection with the police investigations for murder .
Mr Litvinenko was a British citizen murdered on British soil .
This is the least that he and his family can expect or should be entitled to .
( SK ) Madam President , a week ago , the reports on the accession process in the Balkan states were published .
It is not fair to set conditions for the start of negotiations with candidate countries for EU membership and then fail to open negotiations after their fulfilment .
Why do we not treat Macedonia fairly ?
Macedonia is a country where reforms are bringing good results .
More than 80 % of secondary school leavers in this country go on to university .
They start to learn English from the age of six .
The Commission report talks of progress in the fight against corruption , a stable government and political dialogue .
Macedonia has fulfilled all of the Copenhagen criteria .
It deserves a chance to start negotiations on becoming one of the Member States of the EU .
We can talk about the unresolved issues during the negotiation process .
A failure to do this will undermine confidence in Europe .

( FR ) Madam President , as a result of the austerity policy conducted by the Cameron government , the United Kingdom has just decided to stop funding the large tugboats designed to assist and rescue ships in the English Channel , a unilateral decision that has been condemned by the port , maritime , trading and political bodies of that area .
The announced withdrawal of the United Kingdom could have tragic repercussions for the maritime safety of this sector , which , with more than 250 000 vessels a year , is the busiest trading route in the world .
Over the last 10 years , nearly 300 incidents have been recorded there , and experts believe that the pre-positioning of high-powered salvage vessels has prevented a number of these incidents from turning into major accidents .
Since maritime safety affects the safety of EU territory and the protection of the environment , emergency towing is the responsibility of the public authority , with the financial assistance of shipowners , and must not be privatised for the benefit of private towing companies .
The European Commission therefore has a duty to take up this matter .
Indeed , Europe must afford itself the resources to implement the major integrated maritime policy that it is officially calling for .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to advise you , citizens and associations that we have submitted Written Declaration No 0086 / 2010 requesting the protection of water as a public asset .
Water is not only a common asset , but a universal human right , and the management of water services as a local public service is the basis of good government action .
These are our guiding principles and they are the same principles which have prompted thousands of Italian citizens to support all the requests for a referendum to prevent the removal of a primary asset from the public sphere .
Indeed , we believe that the initiative does not simply belong to those who have proposed it , as this is a battle to be fought by everyone .
To confirm this , it should be said that the declaration was tabled together with fellow Members from the political groups of the Greens , the Alliance of Socialists and Democrats and the European Left , and is attracting broad support throughout Parliament .
The aim is to collect signatures from at least half of the Members of Parliament , so that the declaration becomes the official position of the European Parliament and may safeguard water as a right rather than a benefit .
( RO ) Madam President , early parliamentary elections are taking place in the Republic of Moldova on Sunday .
The elections are between the democratic and Communist forces .
Victory for the democratic forces , currently united in the Alliance for European Integration , guarantees the continuation of the progress made during the last year - progress towards democratic government , rights and human wellbeing .
The democratic forces must stand together both before and after the elections .
These elections on Sunday must be free and fair , and people must have access to information .
There must be no repeat of the violent events of April 2009 .
Democratic governments are not established through fraud , violence or fear .
It is , of course , the Republic of Moldova 's citizens voting on Sunday , not us .
However , we in this Parliament support those bringing about democratic change .
They have our solidarity and encouragement .
( ES ) Madam President , recently , the Church of Our Lady of Salvation in Baghdad was attacked and 58 people were killed , mainly women and children , purely because they were Christians .
Al-Qaeda has proudly claimed responsibility for this deed .
This is not an isolated incident , but rather the culmination of persecutions of and attacks on Christians in majority Muslim countries .
There have been expulsions from Morocco , threats in Turkey and attacks in India and Nigeria .
In January , six Christians were massacred at the door of a church in Cairo .
For how long will Western democracies collude with this by remaining silent ?
Fortunately , President Buzek has made a statement on behalf of Parliament .
The statement by the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , condemning the attack , limited itself to condemning a terrorist act .
Why is the motive not mentioned , in other words , the fact that they were Christians , which was the unequivocal reason behind the attack ?
I have not heard anything from Mr Zapatero , nor have I heard anything from Prime Minister Erdogan .
What is the point of the Alliance of Civilisations ?
I am ashamed of our simple-mindedness and cowardice .
I cannot help recalling the late , misunderstood Oriana Fallaci , who announced the arrival of Eurabia and was practically stoned for having the courage to condemn what was happening in this neurotic Europe .
( BG ) Madam President , education and science are a priority objective in the 2020 economic strategy .
Whether this programme remains on paper or is translated into action on the ground depends on us .
In order to succeed , both European institutions and Member States need to take responsibility for it .
Instead , the Bulgarian Government is conducting a policy which runs not only counter to national , but also to European policy on scientific research and education .
While Europe has allocated three percent to research and development until 2020 , Bulgaria has only reached a modest 0.6 percent .
After a series of failed solutions , the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences , an institution with more than one hundred and forty years of history , set up under the harsh conditions of Ottoman rule , which now accounts for 55 percent of scientific research in Bulgaria and is recognised all over the world , is to be liquidated .
It has received over EUR 30 million for over 400 successful European projects .
Despite its involvement in European institutions at political and expert level , the Bulgarian Government clearly cannot see the link between science and getting out of the crisis .
The issue must be placed on the agenda of the Council and the Commission .
It is not just a Bulgarian issue , because it puts the fulfilment of the strategic programme and European priorities at stake .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to draw your attention to the inadequate social consultations conducted by the European Commission concerning the directive on orphan works .
Orphan works are works for which the copyright owner cannot be found .
Last week , I organised a debate in Parliament on this topic .
It showed how much interest there is in this field , and how many questions are being asked concerning the directive on which the Commission is currently working .
However , the process is still shrouded in secrecy .
Surely the experts and the bodies who are directly involved should at least know the direction in which the work is heading .
Around 40 % of our artistic output in Europe is affected by orphanhood .
The date when the directive will be published has been changed to the first quarter of next year , so there is still some time for consultations , and we must make more of an effort to involve our citizens , including experts , in the process of creating legislation so that it really can be as good as possible .
( DE ) Madam President , the democratic participation of employees in business is one of the cornerstones of social policy in the European Union .
For a month now , workers at the Atlas plants in Ganderkesee , Delmenhorst and Vechta have been striking day and night for precisely these rights .
Workers are fighting to secure a collective wage agreement that will enable good , secure jobs to be preserved .
Unfortunately , the management has refused point blank to negotiate with the Industrial Union of Metalworkers and the works council .
During the course of the industrial dispute , employees have been extremely intimidated and pressurised by management .
I wish to call on the management , specifically Mr Filipov , to open discussions and to return to the negotiating table .
Democratic participation cannot be allowed to stop at the factory gates .
A hire-and-fire system engenders fear and sows the seeds of social unrest .
There should be no place for such systems in Europe , as they are damaging to our democracy .
( FR ) Madam President , a couple of words on the presidential elections in Côte d 'Ivoire , as I am head of the Union 's election observation mission in that country .
Since the start of October , we have , in fact , had some 100 observers from 26 countries deployed throughout Côte d 'Ivoire .
The first round passed off quite well on 31 October .
There was no fraud or violence .
The announcement of the results was slightly delayed , but generally speaking , there were no major incidents .
The second round is scheduled for next Sunday .
It promises to be more tense , as there have already been clashes in the streets and the tone of the campaign has become aggressive , even towards our observers .
Moreover , these observers are sometimes prevented from carrying out their work of monitoring the preparations for the campaign .
Tempers therefore need to cool down so that voting can take place normally .
It is extremely important to protect our observers until Sunday and beyond .
The debate is closed .
Public service broadcasting in the digital era : the future of the dual system ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Ivo Belet , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on public service broadcasting in the digital era : the future of the dual system .
Madam President , good evening Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution which we hope to adopt here on Thursday sends , in my view , a very important signal , a signal which demonstrates that there is a great deal of support in this House for our typical European media model , which gives space to both commercial broadcasters , on the one hand , and public broadcasters , that is , public media companies , on the other .
This model , Madam President , is typically European , because you will not , or only very occasionally , find it in the United States or Japan , let alone in China .
In most Member States of the European Union , this dual media model has proved to offer the best guarantees when it comes to media pluralism , independence of editorials and freedom of the press in general .
However , this model is , unfortunately , coming under heavy pressure in the European Union .
That pressure is coming from various quarters .
It is coming through the heavy cuts that competent authorities , national or regional , are facing , but there is also a great deal of pressure from private media companies on public broadcasters .
They consider public broadcasters to be representative of unfair competition , especially on the Internet .
As a result of this overall situation , public broadcasters in a number of Member States of the European Union are actually struggling to keep their heads above water .
This is calling into question the delicate balance of the dual system which is being compromised .
We have to do everything we can to ensure that our European media model remains intact in these turbulent times and that we give it a firm foundation for the future , too .
A number of interventions are needed for that purpose and we have formulated these in the resolution .
The first point I would like to make , and I am not sure whether this forum is aware of it , is that , at one time , all Member States of the European Union formally committed themselves to guaranteeing freedom of the press under the framework of the Council of Europe .
That includes a clearly defined remit and funding for public broadcasting .
Long-term funding is important .
It is time that we , as the European Parliament , reminded all 27 Member States that they made those commitments back then and that they also have to keep to them .
My second point is that pluralism in the media , and freedom of the press in general , are an essential part of our democracy .
That is why we want to introduce the role of media pluralism monitor .
That , Commissioner , is a tool developed on the Commission 's initiative .
It is a very useful tool and one that can serve as a beacon in a number of Member States , in a number of regions where media diversity and media pluralism are at risk of coming under pressure .
Last but not least , I think that the biggest challenge for all media is to secure for themselves a presence online , a digital presence on the Internet .
The growing nervousness about - or , we might even say , the growing hostility to - public broadcasters ' initiatives on the Internet is disturbing .
Some people in politics , in national politics in particular , and also in the media , seem to forget that clear agreements were made last year about the online activities of public broadcasters , and it is essential that they are respected .
If we follow this line of argument , Madam President , I think that we also need to develop models which will allow search engines and Internet service providers to play their part .
To conclude , I think that we cannot afford to stand on the sidelines any longer , otherwise we will wake up to find that Google and YouTube , and Apple too , have taken over our media landscape .
That , of course , would be completely undesirable .
( SK ) Madam President , there is a need to take steps in the European Union to ensure balance and a plurality of views , which will be greatly helped by an equilibrium between public service and commercial media on the market .
With regard to maintaining cultural diversity , freedom of expression and healthy competition , we must not , of course , adopt a one-size-fits-all solution , and we must therefore respect the efforts of individual Member States to address the issue of increasing the share of public service media at the national level .
In my opinion , a balanced ratio between public service media and commercial media on the Internet as well should be a priority both for national strategies and for European media policy in the near future .
It is also necessary to encourage interested parties to cooperate creatively in order to improve the quality of information provided on the media market , and to produce innovations in this sector .
I would like to end by saying that media plurality and freedom is a cornerstone of democracy .
( DE ) Madam President , I am also of the opinion that the dual media system can also be a success here in Europe and that it is important that we should have public broadcasters , on the one hand , and the private channels , on the other , operating in free competition , in a free market economy .
Unfortunately , the reality is somewhat different .
There is evidence of a huge trend towards monopolisation , particularly in the private sector .
We need to take steps to counteract this .
This trend is particularly dangerous because it is happening against a background of grave economic difficulty .
On the other hand , we have public broadcasting companies that are failing in their public service duties by allowing party spin-doctors and handlers to decide on the subject matter and content of their editorials .
Of course , this cannot be allowed .
Let me take the example of ORF in Austria : this broadcaster operates like a branch of the civil service , but not in terms of economic efficiency .
There is no liberalism or pluralism in the media and no editorial freedom at present , or at least not as much as there should be .
What can the EU do about this ?
I am convinced that the early warning system for identifying monopolies already presented to the European Parliament some time back is a good solution to this problem .
( CS ) Madam President , I would like to make two other comments on the debate .
The directive adopted earlier on audiovisual services improves cooperation between the supervisory bodies , and provides a high level of protection for children against inappropriate shows and advertisements .
However , Member States are not disciplined in the way they implement it .
For example , in my own country , it has only been in force since June .
We also have the incomplete harmonisation of copyright law .
We need both to make it easier to obtain cross-border licences for audiovisual works from collective authors , and to release the archive of audiovisual works of uncertain copyright in the case of so-called orphan works .
I have confirmed that the Commission will submit new legislation next year , but it wants to restrict the legislation only to musical works and not to audiovisual works .
I therefore call on the Commission to state whether it will correct this fundamental error , or whether we will have to correct it as Members in committees .
This problem is dealt with by item 33 of the report .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to begin by supporting the efforts of the rapporteur to launch a debate in the European Parliament on the media environment .
I think this is a very useful theme , particularly in the period of digitalisation , a period when revolutionary changes are under way in this environment .
The media environment definitely varies between the individual countries .
There are countries where the media environment is dominated by commercial media , with public service media essentially forming just a kind of background .
In some places , the commercial media are weaker or broken up and diffuse , so that they do not create a concentrated pressure or a concentrated media environment , and the public service media are then more able to provide more information and to influence public opinion to a greater extent .
In any case , however , we see that political bodies often interfere in the activities of public service media in particular , just as owners interfere in the activities of commercial media , and our information and public awareness are then influenced to a considerable extent .
In order to achieve media freedom , genuine freedom that is independent of money , whether private money or state money , it is necessary to strive hard for journalists to be free , and not subject to some form of monitoring or self-monitoring which would , in effect , oblige them to be loyal to their employers .
In my opinion , this is the greatest problem to arise in the media in our time , and we must make changes here in the future .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission welcomes the European Parliament 's report entitled ' public service broadcasting in the digital era : the future of the dual system ' .
The report is a well-balanced text as it supports the existing dual system , based on coexistence between public service broadcasters and commercial broadcasters in Europe .
As the audiovisual media services directive recalls in one of its recitals , this coexistence is a feature that distinguishes the European audiovisual media market from others and the report fully recognises this .
The protocol on the system of public broadcasting in the Member States , annexed to the EU treaties , recognises the Member States ' freedom to define the public service remit to organise public service broadcasting and its funding , as long as such funding does not affect trading conditions and competition in the Community .
Therefore , the Member States determine the form and conditions of funding of their public service media so long as EU State aid rules are respected .
We agree with the main thrust of the report , i.e. that public broadcasters should be able to use the opportunities offered by digitisation and the diversification of distribution platforms , in line with the principle of technological neutrality .
This was acknowledged in the revised communication from the Commission of 2009 on the application of State aid rules to public service broadcasting .
We have some comments on two elements of the report in particular .
First , regarding monitoring the Council of Europe standards , there is no EU responsibility for the political independence of public service media .
Furthermore , EU Member States cannot give a mandate to the European Audiovisual Observatory without the agreement of the non-EU members .
The Commission could not do so either .
Second , the report suggests that certain Member States have failed to take any action in promoting European works in broadcasting .
This is not supported by figures from the Commission 's recent report on the application of the directive 's provisions .
According to that report , broadcasters across Europe are doing well overall in terms of the promotion of European programmes .
Public service broadcasters should be at the forefront of innovation , driving the development of new formats and quality , as regards both the programme itself and technically , if they are to keep up with trends and challenges from elsewhere .
It seems that we fully agree on these points and I look forward to cooperating with Parliament on these issues within the legal framework provided by the treaties .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 November 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
At the time of transition from the analogue to digital TV system , coupled with the growing importance of new media , including 3D format , we must bear in mind a number of factors in the policies which we are devising .
Firstly , I believe that it is useful for us to take measures to facilitate the transition to the digital system , while also considering the possibility of offering vouchers or other measures to compensate the general public .
Another important measure would be to organise traineeships for journalists and public broadcasting managers , given the sums steadily allocated to this area by the private media .
Furthermore , I think that it is worthwhile us considering in the future the opportunity to set up a European public radio service .
At the same time , I believe that it would be useful for public TV broadcasters in Member States to contribute programmes of European interest to the Euronews channels .
Given not only how widespread 3D productions have become , but also the warnings issued by doctors about the impact on viewers ' health , I call on the European Commission to devise urgently a study which will take into account the possible risks which 3D TV can pose to Europeans ' health under current technical conditions .
I should like , first of all , to congratulate Ivo Belet on his excellent report on this highly important subject .
I would also like to thank him for accepting my ideas and proposals on it .
I believe that we have come up with a well-balanced report which aims to guarantee fair competition between public and private media .
On the strength of a long tradition , national budgets , i.e. the taxpayer , support public TV broadcasters based on the assumption that public TV stations are there only to protect the public interest , while private broadcasters are there to protect private , commercial interests .
However , the practice in Bulgaria and in the whole of Europe has long since shown that this is not entirely true for public or for private media .
Drawing on many years of experience in the media sector , I proposed some amendments to this report , which aims to put public and private media on an equal footing in order to enable them to provide better quality information of importance to the public .
European citizens have the right to receive the best information both on European and on national issues .
This requires the efforts both of public and of private media , while regulatory authorities have to make sure that they operate on an even playing field . I thank you for your attention .
Civilian-military cooperation and the development of civilian-military capabilities ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Christian Ehler , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on civilian-military cooperation and the development of civilian-military capabilities .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at an international level , the Member States of the European Union have undertaken to make a significant contribution to civil and military crisis management capabilities throughout the world .
However , in many cases , we simply pay lip-service to this undertaking , which is formulated several times in the Helsinki Headline Goal as well as elsewhere .
Let me put it in black and white : 25 % of the positions approved by the Member States for the European Union 's currently active civil missions , such as EULEX or EUPOL , are unfilled .
The objectives and structures for the civil and military capabilities of the European Union repeatedly formulated by the Member States could hardly be further from reality .
That is why the European Parliament has decided to produce an own-initiative report on the development of civil and military structures and coordination in the European Union .
Specifically : Parliament once again states in this report that the particular civil and military capabilities of the European Union are one of the most important instruments in its foreign policy and common security and defence policy .
We have taken an unusual route in facing up to Parliament 's responsibilities in the context of the Lisbon process .
We did not start with a report , but instead began by creating the empirical basis for this report .
We have formulated very specific proposals based on these figures , which is why we have the support of the broad majority of the Committee on Foreign Affairs : on a strategic level , we have made concrete proposals for the establishment of a structure of equal partnership between the military and civilian arms of the new European External Action Service ; while , on an operative level , we have resolved to establish a permanent European headquarters , to be staffed with personnel by the Member States , to deal with the issue of creating an attractive system of incentives for national experts to participate in such operations and the build-up of personnel reserves for the future .
We have made specific proposals for the training of civil and military personnel .
There are concrete proposals for how start-up missions are to be financed , for example , the establishment of a start-up fund according to Article 41 of the treaty .
Proposals are on the table for the instruments of crisis management , in particular , the question of greater future cooperation between police and military forces .
One example of this is the European policing troop .
However , the question arises as to how these two instruments can be linked together in specific operational cases and how we can manage the issue of separating purely military and civil operations .
We have made proposals for the future of the battle groups .
We are calling for a new approach to this issue .
We want to see the battle groups being financed in accordance with the Athena mechanism .
We are calling for the further development of the capabilities of the battle groups in line with the Oslo directives , the strengthening of the ability of the battle groups to secure civil missions , and a widening of the definition of the missions of the battle groups .
We are considering the issue of research and technology , the question of dual use , and the inclusion of civil and military missions in the security research programme as part of the European Union 's research programme .
We are dealing with concrete questions in relation to equipment and stockpiling , as well as international cooperation with the United Nations and NATO .
Our main concern here is the avoidance of duplication , the improved use of existing structures , the question of the consolidation of shared air transport capacities and the question of the implementation of the Berlin Plus Agreements for improved cooperation between the two organisations in the event of a crisis .
In other words , Parliament has lived up to its new tasks and obligations .
The report was supported by a broad majority from all groups in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and we see it as an important contribution to the future establishment of civil and military structures in the European Union .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the first and most important point we must clarify is whether we consider it important for civilian and military forces to work together appropriately .
For me personally and for my party , Jobbik - The Movement for a Better Hungary - the answer is clearly yes : we consider cooperation between civilians and military authorities to be important .
Now , a very good example of this in Hungary was the Magyar Gárda ( Hungarian Guard ) , which was founded in 2007 and was able to work well - if you will - with the military authorities , be that in floodwater defences , in helping the victims of the red sludge flood , in giving blood or distributing bread , in other words , in social matters .
You may rightly ask what reward they have received - state honours or recognition perhaps ?
They have received nothing , and instead of thanking these people for their self-sacrifice , the Hungarian Government made the baffling decision to disband the Hungarian Guard .
For this reason , in order that we may start cooperation between civilian and military forces , we need to honour individuals who participate in organisations like the Hungarian Guard .
People who wish to take part in such organisations out of a love for their country and nation , protecting their environment , must be allowed to work and must be valued members of society .
( DE ) Madam President , the combination of civil and military powers is nothing new .
Take , for example , the Command Centre , which has been in place in Council for some time now .
Military and civil information has already been collated here .
The Situation Centre is now to move to the External Action Service .
I think it important to emphasise above all that the European Union has gained a high profile on the international front for its civil mechanisms , something that has brought the European Union a great deal of positive recognition .
However , I believe we need a clear separation of civil and military powers .
At this point I would like to pick up on something that Mr Szegedi mentioned a moment ago .
I would like to express my grave misgivings about the march organised by the Hungarian Jobbik party in Austria 's Burgenland province recently , at which rifles and fixed bayonets were in evidence .
I do not believe that this is in any way acceptable .
I would like to express my clear opposition to such actions .
There can be little doubt that they run contrary to the European spirit .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( HU ) Madam President , I would like a very , very short answer .
What my fellow Member says is simply a lie .
Neither Jobbik - The Movement for a Better Hungary - nor the Hungarian Guard has ever committed any crime - anyone can easily check this out - and has never defied any law , and therefore this is simply part of neoliberal political propaganda which tries to show them in a bad light , for neither the Hungarian Guard nor members of Jobbik have ever come into any conflict with the law , and we intend to continue to act in accordance with the law .
( DE ) Madam President , I never suggested that the Jobbik party had been guilty of criminal wrongdoing .
However , I did claim that a targeted mobilisation took place with rifles and fixed bayonets in Burgenland .
You have not denied that this was indeed the case .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I will focus on the report , since it is an extremely useful and important report .
I would like to thank Mr Ehrenhauser for his contribution .
The report is useful because it rightly focuses on the key element of civil-military cooperation , which is exactly the Commission 's priority .
It deals with the main points related to the EU 's comprehensive approach in crisis management .
The establishment of the European External Action Service is the exact expression of this priority .
The very concept of the service that the High Representative is putting in place points in the same direction as the one suggested in the report , in particular , through the inclusion of the structures of the Common Security and Defence Policy in the External Action Service .
We fully support the development of civilian capabilities in order to have a proper balance between resources .
The appropriate modalities for recruitment are now agreed , and appropriate expertise can be brought into the External Action Service .
As everyone knows , this was not possible before .
A number of points in the report have been taken into account , and specific actions have been launched .
This relates , in particular , to fostering civil-military synergies , better usability of the EU battle groups , training , financing , and cooperation with key partners , in particular , NATO and the United Nations .
We also support the reinforcement of relations between the EU and the United Nations .
We have already done a lot together .
The High Representative again met with the UN Secretary General in Lisbon last Saturday .
The relationship between the EU and NATO is an important issue , as was illustrated just yesterday at the NATO summit in Lisbon .
We also favour implementing all practical measures which can reinforce concrete cooperation between the EU and NATO and ensure , in particular , cooperation when both are deployed in the same theatre .
The Commission and the High Representative herself are looking forward to working together with the European Parliament on this important issue of civil-military cooperation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 23 November 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Civil-military cooperation and the development of civil-military potential is one of the most important components of the common security and defence policy .
Unfortunately , many aspects relating thereto remain at the planning stage .
In discussions on the subject , Member States agree that significant resources should be provided for this .
In reality , the plans have not been implemented and we still do not have fully formed structures .
In view of the growing threat posed by natural disasters , terrorist acts and conflicts beyond the borders of the EU , I hope that this report will contribute to the exploitation of civil-military potential and civil-military cooperation .
The report contains practical recommendations in this field , inter alia , with reference to the creation of civil-military structures within the European External Action Service , the use of battlegroups and the European Gendarmerie Force , optimisation of crisis management and the use of funds from the next framework programme .
The aim of all this is to make better use of funds so that civil-military cooperation may fully materialise .
A further significant aim is to avoid duplication of efforts during missions where NATO is participating in tandem with European forces .
I hope that the report will be a significant incentive to start working towards the formation of effective civil-military structures .
Baroness Ashton should ensure that the suggestions contained in the report are implemented as quickly as possible .
The European Union must respond rapidly in crisis situations , thereby necessitating more efficient coordination of its civilian and military structures .
Setting up a permanent EU operational headquarters , placed alongside the Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability , would maximise the benefits of civil-military coordination .
With regard to the request in the report for Member States to make available civilian capabilities in order to achieve real progress as quickly as possible , I want to stress that , on the civilian front , Romania actively contributes to fulfilling the Civilian Headline Goal 2010 .
As a result of its considerable involvement in EU civilian missions , Romania has achieved third place in the European rankings in terms of participating in such missions and contributing sound and varied expertise through its police officers , military police officers , soldiers , diplomats , judges and human rights experts .
Romania is also at an advanced stage in the process of adopting a national civilian capabilities strategy .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23 : 45 )
Opening of the sitting
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Natural disasters in the European Union
I shall begin with some very sad information regarding the floods in Europe .
Yet again this year , Europe has been hit by a flood disaster .
Recently , Belgium , France , the Netherlands and northern Italy have suffered - at the moment there is flooding in central Italy - as well as the south-west of England and several other countries .
Perhaps , when you take the opportunity to speak , because I will open the floor in a moment , you will give other examples , too , of serious floods which have afflicted Europe .
There have been fatalities , as well as material losses valued at many millions .
Eight years ago , the European Union Solidarity Fund was established to help countries which have been hit by natural disasters .
The money set aside in this fund has so far been used in 33 serious natural disasters .
We share , today , the pain of the victims ' families and of those from whom the water has taken everything they possessed .
We know these are terrible , exceptional events in the life of every person affected .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over recent weeks , severe floods have struck several European countries , bringing the populations of the affected regions to their knees .
Last week , four Belgian citizens lost their lives in the provinces of Waals-Brabant , Oost-Vlanderen and Henegouwen , on the border between the capital and the northern part of the country .
As far as the authorities are concerned , it was the worst flood of the past 50 years .
In two days , as much rain fell as normally falls in one month .
It was so bad that the army had to intervene to evacuate the hardest hit areas .
Similar situations arose in the western part of France , where many roads were impassable to traffic and caused gridlock to the transport system .
Seed could not be sown in autumn due to the continual rain that prevented access to the land .

Twenty days ago , my own country , Italy , was also hard hit in the regions of Veneto , where two deaths occurred , Friuli-Venezia Giulia , Liguria and Calabria , with one fatality in each , and the province of Salerno in Campania and Tuscany , where three people died , with dozens of injured people having to be extricated from the mud and rubble and one person who is still missing in Rovigo .
The damage amounts to more than EUR 1 billion for the most immediate work alone , to which must be added the funds necessary for structural works .
More than 4 500 homeless , 280 municipalities and more than 500 000 people affected , farming areas devastated and 150 000 dead livestock .
I would like to highlight two aspects .
The first is the exceptional mobilisation of the aid machinery and the world of solidarity that sent thousands of volunteers to support the people struck by the first stage of the emergency .
They deserve the thanks and appreciation of our institution .
The second aspect is linked to the long-term effects that this catastrophe will trigger .
The fabric of the European manufacturing industry is made up of small and medium-sized enterprises that have lost everything : machinery , vehicles and materials .
The same applies to the thousands of farms that have seen their crops destroyed but also the tractors , machinery and seeds rendered useless by the mud , with stables and stock farms flooded and thousands of cattle and poultry drowned .
These farms , which were already struggling with the economic crisis , are now destined for bankruptcy .
Over time , the floods will lead to the destruction of the productive system , with unemployment and depletion of the affected lands .
Europe must therefore play its part as a matter of urgency by assuring the governments of those countries affected of its willingness to mobilise the Solidarity Fund .
Even if it means overriding the strict criteria for fund activation and even without the approval of the 2011 budget , we must respond immediately to our fellow citizens who are still experiencing , even now , the effects of such a great crisis , and who are entitled to feel that Parliament is behind them and the European Union is providing substantial support .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I would like to show our solidarity with all of the regions hit by natural disasters , and give our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims of the storms .
2010 began with the world in shock at the scale of the tragedy caused by the disaster that struck the autonomous region of Madeira , in Portugal .
Shortly afterwards , storm Xynthia buffeted France .
Extreme meteorological phenomena also affected Spain , Belgium , Germany and the Netherlands , causing substantial damage .
In Central Europe , summer floods are becoming increasingly frequent and devastating .
Thousands of people have had to flee their homes in the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Austria , Poland , Italy and the United Kingdom , and numerous factories have had to cease operation .
Every year , hundreds of thousands of hectares of forest in southern Europe are consumed by fires .
It is thought that climate change is exacerbating the situation and that natural disasters which cause terrible damage in terms of loss of lives , environmental damage and reduced economic activity are on the rise .
It is vital to prevent , research and properly manage the risk .
According to the UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction , better urban planning in coastal zones and the preservation of ecosystems can reduce the impact of natural disasters .
On the other hand , civil protection mechanisms should be strengthened , the EU 's response instruments simplified and the rules for implementing regulations made more flexible .
Mr President , you have spoken about the Solidarity Fund .
It is incomprehensible that the Council has maintained the block on the new regulation on the Solidarity Fund , which was approved by Parliament .
I would also point out that Parliament recently approved the proposal for the creation of a European Drought Observatory as a centre for knowledge , mitigation and monitoring of the effects of drought .
Greater investment in prevention and more care in the preparation and training of personnel can also make all the difference .
Mr President , of course , our first sympathies lie with the victims .
In my country , four people have drowned and I hear that in other countries , too , hundreds and thousands of people have suffered enormous financial and emotional losses to their businesses and homes .
Our first thoughts go out to them , of course .
In recent weeks , months , even years , a large number of Member States have encountered problems with water , that is , with flooding .
I have a question for the Commission .
Do you think that , in assessing these events , it would be useful to bring together experts from various Member States , from various regions , and give them the opportunity to tell us what their opinions are about what has happened , so that we can get a better insight into the causes ?
It is a very complicated matter , but , in my view , if we can get to the bottom of the causes , we will also be able to discuss remedies with those experts .
In my view , a risk analysis of each river basin , such as those we have carried out for the environment in the Water Directive , would be appropriate .
We also need to consult them about preventative measures .
How can we prevent such a disaster happening again ?
Because , we are still expecting some heavy rain and it will be concentrated in particular areas ; that has , after all , been the cause of the flooding .
Finally , if we then experience a new emergency , we will need to ensure that we are able to take better coordinated measures to improve water disposal .
I would like to ask the Commission to bring experts together so that we can properly assess the recent disasters .
Mr President , I , too , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , should like to offer my condolences to all the families and all the people who have been affected by these tragic floods , to all those who have lost loved ones , and to all those who have sustained material losses .
However , I should also like to mention and thank all the fire-fighters , rescue workers and volunteers who have been very active over the last few weeks in all the affected regions .
The victims will have to be assisted and compensated not only in the very short term , but also in the months to come .
We will also have to come up with a consistent and innovative policy that tackles the root causes of the problem , and I propose three types of measure to the Commission .
Firstly , we must carry out renovation and construction projects to make the soil less impermeable , because every time an industrial site , shopping centre or housing estate is built , it must be designed in such a way as to prevent the soil from becoming slightly more impermeable .
This provision does not just apply to flood zones .
Secondly , we must review our agricultural practices .
Intensive agricultural policies have made the land more vulnerable to sudden changes in the weather .
We should therefore strengthen all agri-environmental measures along these lines .
Lastly , there is the matter of alerting and coordinating towns so that they can prepare for and deal with such incidents when they occur .
We feel that communication and mobilisation have not been fast enough at times , and thought will no doubt have to be given to more active procedures for coordinating the dissemination of weather warnings .
I therefore propose that the European Union should review all of its policies - prevention policies and active policies in all other areas - and should develop ones that can be of help in this matter , otherwise , when the next rather extreme weather events occur in a few months ' time , we will find ourselves back here offering our condolences to the victims - to people , families and businesses .
I believe we should avoid that , and we can do so in all of our policies .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , my group also extends its sincere condolences to those affected .
I have very personal experience of this ; indeed , it was the flooding in my own region which first brought me into contact with the European Parliament and indeed inspired me to become a Member eventually , so the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund in that event was certainly a big event for me .
Only this week , we have had further flooding in Cornwall , which is in my region .
My point has already been made by Mr Sterckx , but I think it bears repetition .
I think that early warnings are important , but we all know how quickly the weather moves and how quickly the weather changes .
I wonder if it is really a good use of money to put a lot into early warnings on weather , which are already really there .
It is about what you do when you get the warnings .
As Mr Sterckx has said , Europe could certainly add a great deal of value by having a situation in which we could learn from each other .
I know in the case of Gloucestershire , where I came from , we were greatly helped after the floods by connections most particularly with Austrian regions , where they had major experience of flooding in highly elevated areas .
We did not have that .
I think it would be a very good idea for the Commission to focus on setting up some regional connections so that we can learn from each other about how we cope with this , because it clearly is not going to go away .
Mr President , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I would like to express my sympathy for the victims and for those affected .
All the groups in Parliament are in agreement on this .
We also agree that we must provide aid quickly .
A lot of sensible things have already been said .
It is not necessary for me to repeat them , but I do fully support them .
There is one further aspect that I would like to highlight and that is the long-term damage .
We must not forget that many of the consequences will have a more lasting impact on the natural environment than we may currently anticipate .
Therefore , it seems important to me for the Solidarity Fund and the measures that we are taking to be targeted at these long-term consequences of natural destruction .
I would like to make one last point .
We can sit here and discuss this issue , but the most important thing for us to do is to provide support , so that people can begin to organise help for themselves , because they have a better understanding of the local conditions than we do here in Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I would like to express my solidarity with all citizens affected by the flood .
I would nevertheless like to talk about my own region , a region of 5 million inhabitants where 500 000 people were struck by the flood , with 131 municipalities involved , 7 000 inhabitants displaced , 140 km2 flooded , three hospitals and medical facilities evacuated and two deaths .
Farming was hard hit , and 23 % of the enterprise system of the Veneto also felt the full impact .
This is just to give you an idea of the size of this catastrophe .
Europe must do more .
Europe must mobilise the Solidarity Fund and we know that if the budget is not approved , the fund cannot be mobilised .
It is all very well for us to sit here talking about great strategies , development plans and mythical programmes : Europe should also invest more in the research and prevention of hydrogeological risk , promote responsible land planning and provide incentives for the use and development of early warning systems .
It should invest more in hydraulic defence works , because our rivers are at risk and they continue to endanger the health of our citizens .
I therefore hope wholeheartedly that Europe , for once , will come up with a response and let its voice be heard , because it is often accused of being too far removed from its citizens .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Both natural disasters and industrial disasters , as we have seen from the recent tragedy of the toxic sludge spill in Hungary , are , unfortunately , a relatively frequent occurrence in Europe .
The credibility of the European Union as an organisation showing solidarity in need depends on an ability to provide effective and particularly rapid assistance to affected areas and their citizens .
The most important issue here is time .
The rules governing any assistance should therefore be as flexible as possible , especially in the case of disasters of a cross-border nature .
The condition of achieving a defined expected level of damage , regardless of the size of the affected territory and the intensity of the damage , seems unsatisfactory .
It is actually impossible to predict everything .
I therefore fully support changes aimed at the effective and rapid mobilisation of resources .
Being able to help our own citizens is , in my view , a significant positive element in the perception of the EU .
How better to prove that Europe is here for its citizens ?
10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women and peace and security ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission concerning the 10th anniversary of the adoption of UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women and peace and security .
I would like to welcome to the Chamber the representative of the Council and the representative of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have the honour of taking the floor in this debate on behalf of Baroness Ashton , Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
Allow me , first of all , Mr President , to thank the European Parliament for its continued interest in the topic of women , peace and security , and to point out - although you obviously know this - that Parliament was the first institution , just one month after the adoption of resolution 1325 , to call for its implementation by means of a resolution within this institution .
Ten years later , we can conclude that progress has been made .
We now have a significantly enhanced international framework , in particular , thanks to the adoption , in 2009 , of resolutions 1888 and 1889 .
The appointment of the first United Nations Special Representative on violence against women in armed conflicts was an important step .
What is more , there are currently more than 20 national plans throughout the world .
However , the situation persists , and the reality is that the protection of women in conflict situations and their participation in peacekeeping and reconstruction processes still fall short of the pledges made and of the needs on the ground .
Violence , and particularly sexual violence , against women and girls in conflicts continues to destroy many lives and , all too often , with complete impunity .
The European Union is firmly committed to implementing resolution 1325 and subsequent resolutions .
Today , we have a sound EU policy on women , peace and security , covering all aspects of the Union 's external relations , from crisis management up to and including humanitarian aid and development cooperation .
I should like to mention here a few specific achievements : one of the actions entails exchanging good practices .
To this end , experts from the EU institutions and the Member States regularly participate in a task force .
This process has led to an increase in the number of programmes at national level .
10 Member States now have a national action plan and two other plans are being drafted .
The European Union has a series of programmes designed to meet the needs of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations , such as the funding of medical care for victims of sexual violence .
In less than two years , this programme has funded projects in 67 countries , with over EUR 300 million provided in total .
The European Union has started using a gender tracker to track gender mainstreaming in development cooperation programmes .
It has gender advisers and gender focal points in each of its 13 common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) missions , as well as gender focal points in more than 80 EU delegations .
We are currently finalising a report in which conclusions are drawn from the integration of gender and human rights issues in common security and defence policy .
The European Union is also working closely with civil society in order to promote the participation of women in the areas of peace and security .
In 2011 , we plan to launch some specific projects to support women 's networks in crisis-affected countries , with an estimated budget of EUR 2 million .
Several EU delegations have organised Open Door days to mark the 10th anniversary of resolution 1325 and to meet local women 's groups , such as those in Kosovo , Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Iraq , for example .
In mid-October , the European Union and the African Union organised a seminar for civil society in Addis Ababa , with a view to making recommendations for joint European Union-African Union actions .
Furthermore , as regards renewed and measurable commitments , we plan to develop , by the end of the year , some standard training elements on gender , human rights and children 's rights which will be used to train the personnel of CSDP missions ; to develop , by 2013 , local strategies to implement resolution 1325 in development cooperation in at least 60 % of conflict and post-conflict countries ; and , lastly , to report regularly on the implementation of the EU 's women , peace and security commitments , by using the 17 indicators that were adopted in July 2010 .
The first report is being finalised as we speak .
On 26 October , the European Union took part in a debate at the Security Council to mark the 10th anniversary of resolution 1325 .
The Belgian Presidency had previously organised three ministerial , high-level and expert meetings in Brussels , New York and Geneva in order to raise awareness and make recommendations .
The European Union has accordingly made strong calls for increased international monitoring of resolution 1325 , in particular by emphasising all the indicators developed by the Secretary-General .
The European Union therefore now calls for the swift , operational implementation of those indicators .
Mr President , thank you very much to the Belgian President-in-Office of the Council for his words on this subject .
The Commission fully supports what the representative of the Council has just said , and I would like to add three specific points .
Firstly , I would like to say that I entirely agree with what the President-in-Office of the Council said : there is clear progress , with more than 20 national action plans established worldwide , as well as the appointment of the first United Nations Special Representative for violence against women in armed conflicts .
The second point I would like to make to all of you is that the Commission believes that more work needs to be done on preventing violence against women and girls in conflicts and , in particular , against sexual and gender violence , something which continues to happen and which is destroying many lives .
Thirdly , the European Union must set an example by applying resolution 1325 and the resolutions implementing it .
We need to continue to pay attention to the needs of women and children affected by armed conflicts , and also in post-conflict situations , through programmes financing , for example , the provision of medical services for the survivors of sexual and gender violence , by working alongside civil society to promote the participation of women in building peace and security and , of course , by working closely with the United Nations on drawing up the indicators that the Secretariat-General has developed .
The European Union must also take other steps ; for example , the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative , Baroness Ashton , has appointed the first female EU Special Representative for Sudan , Dame Rosalind Marsden .
Mr President , the adoption of resolution 1325 by the UN Security Council ten years ago obviously represented an historical step on the part of the international community , taken in the wake of the tragic experience of the Yugoslav Wars .
Wars take their greatest toll on the innocent civilians , and in times of armed conflicts , civilians largely consist of women .
Our experience has shown that armed conflicts have thus far been accompanied by the rape of women , and it is no coincidence that the Geneva Convention also acknowledges that this often amounts to genocide .
Even after the conflicts , stigmatisation and the consequences of violation continue to devastate the lives of the victims , as the scars left by physical and psychological abuse remain for life - if the victim ever recovers from them at all .
It is therefore no overstatement to request that the prevention of violence against women become an integral part of public safety and defence policy , and that there be means by which acts of violence committed against civilians can be brought to an end .
The efforts made by the UN in this regard can obviously not remain without appropriate response , as even today , women are being raped in their thousands in war zones , and are then cast out by their families , thus becoming double victims .
Recently , over 8 000 women were raped in eastern Congo within a span of five days , but there is also the issue of refugee camps , such as Camp Ashraf , where women are not safe to this day .
It is also justified to request an increase in the participation of women in peacekeeping forces , as the presence of women under these specific circumstances is of extreme importance .
We believe that it is important for women to play a more active part in peace processes .
We cannot allow them to simply be passive participants or even victims of such processes .
I am pleased to note that the Commission has taken serious steps in this respect .
Mr President , it is 10 years since UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women , peace and security was adopted .
It is an important anniversary , more topical than ever , because women , like children , are still the biggest victims of war .
The thousands of cases of rape in war zones prove that rape and sexual abuse are systematically used as a weapon of war to humiliate and demoralise the opponent .
In numerous cases , soldiers , guided by their superiors , systematically commit rape which , if committed in public , inflicts an even greater injury on the opposing side .
The victims of these practices , generally women , are stigmatised , rejected or even murdered by their own community in an effort to restore honour .
We must all pull together in this fight .
This disgrace to humanity , these war crimes , must stop .
At the same time , we must increase controls everywhere , including by the blue berets , because we have a great deal of direct and indirect responsibility .
Strict sanctions need to be imposed on everyone involved in such practices .
Training , controls , discipline and a clear message are needed .
Finally , we need to show the international community that we mean what we say .
As resolution 1325 states , women can and must participate equally in the promotion of peace and security .
Our common objective must be to put women in a stronger position , with the facility to take recourse to the international courts , with programmes for their economic , social and mental reintegration .
Their emancipation and protection are the sine qua non in putting a stop to the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war .
Mr President , exactly 10 years ago , women 's rights as a fundamental element of human rights first became a topic for discussion by the UN Security Council following a call for gender equality in conflict and crisis situations .
This was a milestone on the road to the introduction of a mandatory requirement under international law for the participation of women at decision-making levels in peace processes and security policy .
The Secretary General at the time , Kofi Annan , made an urgent call in 2005 for national action plans to be drawn up for the implementation of resolution 1325 .
We have already heard that only 20 states have so far done this , including European countries such as Sweden and Great Britain , but also African countries , for example , Liberia and the Côte d 'Ivoire .
I believe that all the EU Member States should adopt action plans of this kind .
This also applies to countries such as Germany , where I come from , which has so far refused to compile an action plan .
The gender perspective has definitely become more important at an international level .
A new UN Special Representative on Sexual Violence has been appointed and the UN Entity for Gender Equality has been established .
However , we must be aware that all of these measures are very much in their early stages .
This is about providing support for women and girls who have been the victims of sexual violence .
We must intensify the resolutions and the aid programmes that are already in place .
However , this is also about support for identifying and prosecuting the offenders , which must always be linked to the reform of local judicial systems .
Mr Chastel 's message on behalf of Baroness Ashton concerning the provision of EUR 2 million to support this resolution is a very positive one .
I would like to make it clear how important it is to involve local women 's rights NGOs , so that the money goes to where it is really needed .
Mr President , women and children are victims in wars and conflict situations .
Violence , rape , torture and sexual assaults are weapons that are used against women and children in these situations .
Women have now been recognised as victims , and indeed they are victims .
They have been recognised , among other things , as a result of the appointment of Margot Wallström to the post of UN Special Representative .
However , women are not just victims ; they are important players in peace and security work for the prevention of conflicts .
Their participation in the work to establish peace and democracy following wars and conflicts is essential .
They play an active part in the reconstruction of the countries .
Despite the fact that it is ten years since the adoption of the UN resolution , women are still only recognised as victims of violence .
They are ignored in connection with the important reconstruction work for establishing peace and democracy .
Despite the fact that we now know what an important part women play in this work , it is still the men who have all the influence over the decisions .
It is time that we recognised the capability of women , including in connection with the peace and security work .
The EU must demand that the gender perspective is taken into account when providing assistance and subsidies for reconstruction work .
Madam President , UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women , peace and security is one of the latest serious documents in which all of the nations of the world declare their respect and reverence for the fairer sex .
Every provision of the resolution has its own profound sense , and responds to problems which life often brings in relationships between men and women , when women and children frequently become the victims of force , unbridled violence and injustice in crisis situations .
The advanced civilised countries subscribe to their commitments arising from UN Security Council resolution 1325 and strive , through various measures , to create the greatest possible space for applying these in national and international institutions involved in conflict resolution and the organisation of peace processes .
However , serious problems persist over respect for the human rights of women and children in many countries in the developing world , especially in central Africa and several parts of Asia .
The actions of barbaric military regimes are based on a different scale of values than the one recognised by the civilised world , and the human dignity of civilians , women and children means nothing to bands of murderers .
In my opinion , this is an area we should look at and focus greater attention on as soon as possible .
It is therefore also necessary to take measures in EU policy to exert greater and more intensive pressure on those regimes which do not respect the basic human rights of their citizens and inhabitants .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that all of us could easily answer the question as to which major group of people is essentially excluded from decision making , or is only minimally involved in it , while , at the same time , having to bear the consequences of political , economic and financial decisions to a very large extent .
Yes , fellow Members , I am referring to women , and not only in connection with armed conflicts , which is the topic of today 's sitting , but also in connection with the economy , because it is , after all , women who must put food on their families ' tables , and it is women who suffer through poverty , together with their children , to an especially significant degree .
To me , this is the core message of this UN declaration - that women should be given considerably greater opportunities in decision making , so that they can become shapers , rather than victims , of their fates .
In what ways do armed conflicts affect women ?
Let us look at the example of Gaza .
Even now , it is women who are nursing and tending to those injured as a result of the brutality of the State of Israel , it is women who nurse and tend to the children who have become disabled as a consequence , and it is women who suffer significantly from the effects of the bombing and destruction of infrastructure , the bombardment of roads and schools .
We should keep this in mind when we take account of the torments women have to endure in armed conflicts .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in conflict areas , the use of violence against women is a deliberate tactic .
Rape is a widespread , systematic and organised practice .
It is a weapon of war .
We must , of course , condemn this violence .
Condemnation aside , however , we must go beyond mere declarations , otherwise they just become a mantra .
We must find ways to act .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , I am asking you to consider three courses of action .
The first course of action : I believe we should be convinced of the need for the European Union to promote local women 's organisations in all those conflict situations in which it intervenes .
Respect for the basic principles of freedom and justice will increase if it can be founded on women .
Wherever women are granted rights in the world , respect for human dignity and the values of equality and fraternity - which are EU values - will be promoted .
The second course of action : when we Europeans contribute aid to help rebuild countries , I believe we should consider making it a requirement for governing powers and local authorities on the ground - which we help - to introduce quotas to ensure the participation of women at decision-making levels .
I am thinking , for example , of the Palestinian Authority , which we help , which is funded almost entirely by us .
The situation in the Middle East could only benefit if we demanded that the Palestinian Authority introduce quotas allowing for women to hold positions of political responsibility .
Lastly , the third course of action : wherever we intervene , by civilian , police or military means , I believe we must undertake to give women a significant and appropriate role within our own troops and operational delegations .
This will only serve to make us more effective and , as many reports suggest , it will probably mean that populations are more willing to accept us .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it has now been 10 years since the United Nations Security Council adopted , for the first time in its history , a resolution highlighting the specific situation of women living in combat areas and their role in resolving conflicts .
However , today , 10 years on from that resolution , thousands of women are still being raped in war-torn countries , such as Congo for example .
I myself have strongly criticised the impunity enjoyed for many years by the perpetrators of these atrocities .
What is more , these barbaric acts are committed even though United Nations forces are sometimes , or even often , present on the ground .
I believe that we are sorely lacking in political ambition and adequate funds .
In particular , I would emphasise the need to train the field-based personnel of European and international organisations and to raise awareness among the suffering populations .
We have to make everyone understand that taking gender considerations into account will lead to improvements in all areas .
We must put an end to the impunity too often enjoyed by those who commit violence against women , and we must establish a proper complaints procedure in this regard .
We must also increase the financial resources available within the European institutions for work on gender and human rights issues , in particular , so as to implement mechanisms and assess the progress made by the European Union .
I note that , as Mr Chastel said , efforts have indeed been made , in particular , through the exchange of best practice and participation in a task force .
Moreover , 10 Member States now have a national action plan .
I hope that the 17 other Member States will soon have one of their own .
Lastly , I would point out that I have high hopes for the future External Action Service .
I hope that women and men will participate in it equally , in particular , on the ground .
We must never forget the important role women play in resolving conflicts or the need to establish communication that is based on trust between the forces of international institutions and local populations .
( PT ) Madam President , highlighting the effect of wars and conflicts on women and children is of the utmost importance at a time as critical as this , when wars in Iraq and Afghanistan are dragging on , severe conflicts are being fuelled , such as in the Israeli-occupied territories of Palestine , or the Western Sahara occupied by Morocco , inequalities are increasing , poverty is being exacerbated by neoliberal policies , and new threats are arising , as happened this weekend in Lisbon with the NATO summit and the adoption of its new strategic concept .
In response to this , a peaceful demonstration took place last Saturday in the streets of Lisbon , organised by the ' Yes to peace , no to NATO ' campaign , which includes more than 100 organisations .
Tens of thousands of people , men and women , marched calling for peace and social justice , which is essential for security , and shouting and demanding the dissolution of NATO , nuclear disarmament and respect for people 's rights in the defence of peace .
In the general strike which is to take place in Portugal tomorrow , men and women will again protest against anti-social policies .
These affect everyone , but they are particularly discriminatory towards women .
The protesters will demand new policies which respect the dignity of workers and promote development and social progress , a prerequisite for peace .
( SK ) Madam President , I , too , would like to emphasise the historical importance of Security Council resolution 1325 for peace and for security policy .
It was the first time that the UN emphasised the importance of the protection of women and their full involvement in creating peace , maintaining peace and preventing conflicts .
It must be said that great efforts have been made over the past 10 years to achieve this aim .
However , abuse of women is often still a major characteristic of conflicts .
What is more , there has been an alarming increase in frequent and systematic violence against women both during and after conflicts .
I will not give any concrete figures , but it is surely worth mentioning the horrific events that have taken place in the Democratic Republic of Congo , Darfur , Rwanda , Liberia , Sierra Leone and Bosnia .
I have personally met and spoken with women who were victims of violence during the war in the former Yugoslavia .
Their stories are horrific .
They were raped , tortured and humiliated .
Many were ostracised even after the conflict was over .
So not even the cessation of conflict will guarantee an end to violence against women .
We should always bear this in mind .
Protection of women and enabling their participation in the creation of peace and security is the main aim of resolution 1325 .
Unfortunately , this has yet to happen in many cases .
I firmly believe there is a real chance that we can change things .
However , the political will of all is required if we are to create the actual conditions .
In fulfilling this task , I also see the opportunity for a positive contribution from High Representative Baroness Ashton and the European External Action Service , which could greatly strengthen the role of the EU in implementing this important resolution .
( DE ) Madam President , women and children continue to be disproportionately hard hit by wars and their consequences .
However , women 's rights must not be misused in order to give legitimacy to military interventions .
The example of the Republic of Congo shows that military measures do not help to protect , secure or establish women 's rights .
Unfortunately , exactly the opposite is true .
The situation of women in Afghanistan today is worse than ever as a result of the war .
The promise made in resolution 1325 can only really be honoured by avoiding conflict and taking only civil measures in war and conflict situations .
Therefore , I believe that it is completely unacceptable to distort this resolution with the aim of increasing the number of women involved in warfare .
I am calling for the EU to stop providing support on principle , including aid for equipment and training , to regimes and military forces which send child soldiers into armed conflicts , violate human rights or commit systematic acts of sexual violence .
( PT ) Madam President , the resolutions of the Security Council and plans for supporting development have already been mentioned , with emphasis on the advances that have been made , but the fact is that women continue to be the main victims of armed conflicts .
They are victims , yet not decision makers .
Women should participate in the entire process of preventing and resolving conflicts .
If there were more women in senior positions of policy making , including economic decision making , there would certainly be more peace and security in the world , and we would all benefit from greater development and better living conditions .
That is why we also need more women involved in decision making at all levels .
As has already been said here , women should participate and be players throughout this process ; it should not be conducted only by men .
Madam President , when speaking about women in conflict zones , we have to consider that despite increased efforts and good signs , such as the appointment of former Commissioner Margot Wallström to the office of special representative of the UN Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict , as well as the recent creation of ' UN Women ' , there is still a need for further action , greater awareness and practical political actions in this field .
I would strongly highlight the fact that partnerships between parliamentarians , EU and UN Member State governments , institutions and civil society are vital for building support for the agreed goals and objectives of the action programme of the international conference on population and development as regards the Millennium Development Goals .
In the context of gender equality , we have to make a joint commitment to pushing this issue forward , ensuring better representation of women in an effort to prevent war , restore peace and cope with post-conflict situations , taking into account that women can play a significant role in peacekeeping if they are properly supported and genuinely included .
In conclusion , I would like to point out that the EU has a crucial role to play in advancing these objectives to achieve an equitable and lasting solution .
It is our primary responsibility and important political role to work together to address the situation of women in conflict zones by means of preventing war and maintaining international peace and security .
Madam President , I want to give my support to resolution 1325 .
I turn the House 's attention to the situation in Northern Ireland , where we have a very active women 's sector - a sector that has been a force for good within the country .
Before coming to this House , I represented West Belfast in the Northern Ireland Assembly and the Shankill area of Belfast in local government .
These are areas that have been ravaged by over 30 years of violence inflicted through a terrorist campaign by Irish Republicans and intra-community violence .
Throughout that time , groups like the Women 's Centre have been a cohesive force , enhancing community capacity and forging links with other women 's groups in other communities .
They are ordinary women who have proved themselves to be leaders and an excellent role model for other countries and communities that find themselves faced with terrorism and violence .
Today , groups like the Shankill Women 's Centre , the Foyle Women 's Network and Training for Women are not only forging the way ahead in community relations in Northern Ireland , but are also giving women opportunities in the labour market through education and training .
This is the way forward , colleagues .
( RO ) Madam President , I hope that this debate which we are having today will not only be an occasion for marking the anniversary of resolution 1325 , but also a new beginning and new approach to this issue , which persists virtually in the same forms that led to the adoption of resolution 1325 .
I do not believe that declarations are enough , especially declarations which convey a different picture of reality .
I believe that action is needed and it is the European Union 's task , as part of the current security policy , to create an initial code of conduct to be used in both conflicts and post-conflict operations , although we have a convention , in the form of the Geneva Convention , which condemns violent conduct during conflicts .
I believe that a code of conduct of this kind would provide added value for the European Union , marking a step towards resolving this issue .
The other aspects of involvement must undoubtedly be supported by consistent financial assistance based on a strategy for our development projects .
( SK ) Madam President , we are marking the 10th anniversary of UN resolution 1325 , and there are almost daily reports of other resolutions and declarations aiming to help women .
However , I have my doubts as to whether we are monitoring their fulfilment sufficiently .
More and more documents are being produced , but the situation of women is improving only very slowly .
It is our duty to work for compliance with and the protection of the rights of all women , so that they can be fully integrated into society , regardless of their situation , origin or status .
Their role begins in the family , not only because they are irreplaceable in raising children to respect human dignity for all , but there are also women who , aware of a threat to their families , get involved in preventing and solving military conflicts .
However , until women feel safe in their families and in their countries , it is impossible to talk about peace , and not only in countries where there is no war .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I clearly agree with Parliament on a very large number of points .
How could I fail to agree in particular with Mr Juvin 's and Mr Tarabella 's calls for the creation of the European External Action Service to represent a major opportunity to strengthen EU policy on women , peace and security ?
During the process of establishing the service , the ongoing challenge of ensuring greater representation of women at every level , including within personnel units , and especially at the highest level , must be recognised .
Baroness Ashton is very clearly working on this .
She has taken some steps in this direction , for example , by appointing Rosalind Marsden as the EU 's first female Special Representative to Sudan .
In September , she appointed 29 people to senior positions within the delegations , including seven female heads of delegation , which is nothing short of a 50 % increase in the number of women at this level .
At the same time as the EU undertakes major efforts to strengthen its capabilities in relation to the participation of women , peace and security , we believe that it is also important to take steps to raise awareness within other organisations and countries .
This goes hand in hand with specific training activities .
Many of you have spoken on this issue too .
Within the framework of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , the Union supports the United Nations in the implementation of resolutions on women , peace and security in countries and regions that are particularly affected , such as Pakistan , Afghanistan , Georgia , Armenia , Azerbaijan and the Fergana Valley , which spans Uzbekistan , Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan .
Lastly , the European Union continues to believe in the importance of increased delegation of responsibilities at international level .
The Union believes that the Security Council should establish a working group to examine the progress made in implementing resolution 1325 and to make recommendations to the Council in order to meet the challenges and remedy the shortcomings that exist and to speed up the implementation of that resolution .
The Union has therefore called on the Security Council to redouble its efforts in the fight against impunity .
Targeted and progressive measures should be imposed against any party to a conflict that is responsible for serious violations of women 's rights .
I am convinced that the European Parliament will continue to support the efforts made by the Union and the Member States in this area .
I have received six motions for a resolution from the various political groups on this subject .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 November , at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
All the assertive efforts undertaken - the resolutions and national and international plans for improving the level of protection for women in conflict zones - have failed to eliminate this barbaric weapon which is frequently resorted to in modern warfare : sexual violence .
On the contrary , impunity provides conditions conducive to the spread of this practice which is diametrically opposed to our values .
I have repeatedly spoken out , along with others , against the acts of mass rape perpetrated in the Congo , Liberia and other conflict zones , especially in Africa .
The thousands of women falling victim to sexual abuse and violence are also being condemned to bear in the future the social stigma and burden of terrible diseases , such as HIV .
The International Day against Violence against Women , which we mark on 25 November , must also remind us that women are victims of domestic violence , which is occurring with alarming frequency , marital rape , sexual harassment and human trafficking .
Gender-related violence , whether committed in the home or armed conflict zones , is one of the most serious human rights violations and must be opposed and punished accordingly .
Over the years , the traditional role of peace missions has changed .
It is now not only monitoring ceasefire agreements or ensuring that borders between states are respected .
Currently , missions are engaged in a range of ' soft ' activities - promoting human rights and democracy in a wide variety of ways , supporting the organisation of elections and restoring the rule of law .
On the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 , attention should be drawn to the particular role of women in these processes .
In many cases , they are far better predisposed to carrying out the tasks of peace missions .
Among other things , I am thinking , here , of work with the victims of sexually motivated violence and violence based on sexual discrimination .
Women work in women 's prisons , they help with social reintegration and they also conduct numerous forms of training .
We talk a lot about increasing the participation of women in politics and business .
In none of these areas has it yet been possible to achieve full equality of opportunities .
This is why it is necessary to return to these issues and look carefully at the way in which legislation which has been adopted is brought into force , so that on the 15th or 20th anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 , it will be possible to say that all of its provisions have been implemented .
State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Bernhard Rapkay , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines - C7-0296 / 2010 - 2010 / 0220 ( NLE ) ) ( Α7-0324 / 2010 ) .
Madam President , Mr Almunia , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to congratulate you , Mr Almunia , and your offices .
The impact assessment that you have presented is very good .
It is based on facts , it is conclusive and it gets to the point .
It is a pity that the other members of the College of Commissioners have not read this impact assessment , because if they had read it , they would not have been able to present this proposal , which has nothing at all to do with the impact assessment .
I wonder how the College of Commissioners picked the year , for example .
There is absolutely no mention of this in the impact assessment .
The only thing which might explain it is that 2014 is exactly halfway between 2010 and 2018 .
That is what it must be .
However , it may be that they have also not understood the content .
None of the arguments in favour of this proposal can be seriously considered because they are not correct .
There is the argument that the State aid scheme adopted in 2002 , which is about to expire , was a phasing out arrangement for coal mining .
Of course , this is totally incorrect .
It was a successor arrangement .
I know this , because I was there and I was the rapporteur for Parliament in 2002 .
This is when the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) expired after 50 years and a successor arrangement was needed , not only with regard to aid , but also other issues .
If this had been a phasing out arrangement , what would have happened , for example , to the ECSC 's assets ?
It was not a phasing out arrangement , it was a successor arrangement .
At the time , we agreed with good reason on a period of eight years for this successor arrangement , after which we would look at the issue again .
Therefore , this argument is incorrect .
The second argument which is put forward is the question of sustainability .
We are all in favour of this and we know that coal , of course , produces large quantities of CO2 emissions .
However , a decision made by the Commission cannot abolish the laws of science .
What will happen next ?
Domestic coal will be replaced by imported coal .
That is the only thing that will happen .
Imported coal emits just the same amount of CO2 as domestic coal .
The problem is simply that if we no longer have reference points , we will not be able to use them in the development of new , state-of-the-art technologies for mining and power stations .
Europe is a leader in this area and has an export advantage .
I do not believe that we should just give this up .
The third argument is that aid is harmful and that the money would be better spent on other things .
It is not possible to say anything against this argument or against the attitude of market radicals .
You cannot oppose an ideology with facts .
However , the statement that this would be too expensive , for example , should be looked at in the light of what it would really mean if mining were to be stopped abruptly , and 2014 would be an abrupt stop .
It would result in an increase in the costs of combating unemployment and , above all , in the costs relating to long-term pit closures .
This is a very complicated and complex subject .
The costs of long-term pit closures continue to be incurred years and even decades after coal mining comes to an end .
The costs have to be paid out of the public purse .
However , some Member States have a system in place which ensures that the state is not responsible for these costs .
Therefore , this argument also does not hold water .
For this reason , I recommend that you think this over again as soon as possible and that you pay attention to what is said in the impact assessment .
Otherwise , the result will be regional and socio-political distortions , which we do not want .
This is why the 2018 proposal is highly sensible .

Madam President , thank you very much to Mr Rapkay for his report on behalf of Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The Commission has closely analysed both the report and the amendments proposed for this debate with great interest , and we have taken note of the fact that the report specifically supports extending the deadline for closing uncompetitive mines to 2018 .
The Commission is also aware that in recent debates that have taken place in the Permanent Representatives Committee ( Coreper ) , the majority supported the 2018 deadline , as Mr Rapkay 's report suggests .
When we prepared the proposal for a regulation and analysed this situation , we in the Commission were , of course , fully aware of the social and regional impact of the closure of coal mines in certain regions of the EU .
However , when drawing up the regulation , we also took into account the fact that some of the mines are not competitive and have only survived so far thanks to constant injections of public money and public subsidies .
Therefore , in our proposal for a regulation , we allowed the Member States to grant additional operating aid , but on this occasion , for the specific purpose of facilitating the gradual closure of uncompetitive mines .
I would like to discuss three points that are considered in the report .
Firstly , the proposal to grant operating aid or investment in order to make the mines competitive .
There was already a similar provision in the previous regulation concerning aid to the sector .
However , the previous regulation largely failed to achieve the desired effects and , rather than guiding the coal mines towards profitability , it created a moral hazard to some extent .
The mines were subsidised in the vain hope of achieving profitability .
Now we have to deal with the consequences : we need to extend this special system for coal production because the mines concerned have not achieved profitability , nor have they been closed .
In any case , the mines that have credible forecasts of profitability do not need State aid and can obtain the required capital from the capital or financial markets .
Secondly , I would like to explain why , in our proposal , we consider it to be necessary to have a plan to minimise the effects on the environment .
Article 3 ( 1 ) of our proposal mentions this point .
State aid distorts competition .
Therefore , the treaty contains provisions for declaring it incompatible in a whole range of cases .
Operating aid can only be authorised if it is likely to have positive effects .
Our regulation proposes a plan to mitigate the environmental impact of the use of coal in order to offset the negative effects of the aid .
Finally , my third point is that when the objective of the operating aid is to contribute to a transition towards closing uncompetitive mines , it is clear that this closure must be gradual and cannot take place only when the deadline arrives .
This gradual nature must be clearly set out in the closure plan , and the plan must also include a diminishing proportion of that aid during the transition period .
Our proposal therefore establishes a linear reduction in aid by a percentage that clearly aims for the removal of aid at the end of the transition period .
Having said all this , I would once again like to thank Mr Rapkay and everyone who contributed to the report that we are considering .
We will consider Parliament 's position on the report , and we are continuing the debates in the Council , naturally in consultation with the Belgian Presidency .
In light of Parliament 's position and based on what the Council 's position turns out to be , the Commission will , of course , give its opinion in the next few weeks .

Madam President , Mr Almunia , ladies and gentlemen , no one disputes the fact that coal is an important part of our energy supply .
It is also indisputable that the mining industry must be competitive and that subsidising it is not the correct approach .
The question now is whether 2014 or 2018 is the right deadline .
Mr Rapkay put forward a number of intelligent arguments which I will not repeat .
I have only one request to the Commission .
In all the committees in Parliament which were involved , there is majority support for making competitiveness a criterion .
When it comes to the deadline , we must simply ensure that there is the necessary flexibility to allow the Member States to keep the pressure on the people , the jobs and the economic structures at a manageable level .
The only argument which has been mentioned and which , incidentally , conflicts with the Commission 's impact statement that initially seemed to be in favour of 2018 , was that environmental policy reasons could play a role here .
I would like to emphasise once again that it makes no difference to the climate whether we burn imported or domestic coal .
My request to the Commissioner is to consider , if Parliament and the Council can come up with new arguments of this kind , whether this four-year deadline could lead to the Commission being a little more flexible .
This is how I understood the reference just now to the Commission considering the issue and I am grateful for this .
Madam President , on behalf of the REGI Committee , we welcome the Commission proposal , although we have recommended certain amendments .
We also recommended extending the deadline for closing uncompetitive mines .
Without this change , there would be a risk that entire regions affected by mine closures would fall into poverty and would face serious social problems .
Among other things , we also proposed adjusting the use of cohesion resources for regions affected in this way .
The committee also believes that the closure of uncompetitive mines is not the only acceptable way of using State aid for such mines , as it should also be used to facilitate development targeted on achieving competitiveness .
If a mine becomes competitive by a certain date , that is surely a desirable situation , which is in the interests both of the region concerned and , eventually , the Union as a whole .
The importance of coal-fired power stations rests , among other things , on the fact that they are practically the only plants capable of responding immediately and flexibly through increased production when there is a sudden increase in demand for electricity , independently of other factors .
If the greater energy security of the Union is to be more than just an empty slogan , we cannot manage without stable and competitive coal mines and a coal industry .

Madam President , I would like , first of all , to encourage Mr Almunia to stick with his original proposal of 2018 .
This proposal was well-founded and was based on economic , regional , social and energy policy grounds .
I do not understand why the College of Commissioners has introduced environmental reasons which are completely irrelevant .
As previous speakers have said , it makes no difference whether we burn imported coal or coal that we have mined and subsidised ourselves .
Our climate footprint is largely the same in both cases .
In fact , it is probably much worse for imported coal because this has to be transported here from Canada , Australia or other regions of the world .
This is why the justification is wrong .
I would like to thank Mr Rapkay for producing this proposal in close cooperation with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
I believe that it concerns a Council regulation .
There is a loophole in the Treaty of Lisbon which means that regulations on the basis of competition law do not form part of Parliament 's codecision procedure .
Instead , the process , which does not involve a proper assessment , is still based on Regulation No 17 dating back to 1965 .
Therefore , we now need - at least as far as our statement is concerned - a broad majority vote , so that coal , which is one of the most important energy sources still available to us in Europe , remains competitive in future .
Our group will give Mr Rapkay 's report its unrestricted support .
We want to encourage Mr Almunia to prompt the Commission to put forward a new proposal of 2018 and we want to amend two points in the report that has been adopted .
One of these concerns the question of the way in which the aid is to be gradually reduced .
We are of the opinion that this should be left to the Member States over this eight-year period .
The second point concerns the fact that the regulation as a whole will be phased out in 2030 .
That is also the stage which the Council 's discussions have reached on this regulation .
Only when Parliament makes a clear decision in favour of 2018 will we be able to carry out an appropriate evaluation of the social , political , energy policy , economic and regional grounds .
Madam President , this is not a straightforward matter .
It is therefore important for us in Parliament to establish a well-balanced position .
There are two main aspects to take into consideration .
On the one hand , it is unreasonable , in the long term , to continue to keep this uncompetitive form of mining alive artificially .
For reasons relating to both the environment and competition , it is unsustainable to use public subsidy programmes to ensure that unprofitable coal mining continues .
It is therefore logical for the subsidies for this activity now to be phased out .
On the other hand , the abolition of subsidies will have a huge impact , not only on the tens of thousands of coal miners who will be forced to look for new jobs , but also on their families and everyone else who depends on mining .
It will be a very difficult adjustment for the people living in the regions affected .
Weighing up these two aspects is not easy .
Nevertheless , I think the Commission has found a reasonable balance in its proposal .
The subsidies will be discontinued , but this will be carefully managed , taking into consideration both jobs and the environment .
The regions concerned will suffer a difficult setback when the subsidies are discontinued but , at the same time , the proposal provides the opportunity for comprehensive social and environmental measures with a view to making this regional adjustment process as efficient as possible .
It is extremely important for all of these opportunities to be fully utilised by national and regional authorities .
Large-scale investment in active labour market initiatives and comprehensive environmental restoration measures is essential if the end result is to be acceptable for these regions .
So far , the debate has focused on three issues .
Firstly , the argument has been put forward that the coal mines that become competitive during the closure period should be able to continue to operate .
In my opinion , it would be wrong to include this option , because the aid that is to be granted must be used in the right way and based on definitive closure .
Secondly , an end date for the closure aid has been discussed .
In this regard , it is important to note that the current regulation has been in existence since 2002 and that everyone was aware that the exemptions from the competition rules would expire this year .
There was therefore nothing very surprising in this .
I can be flexible when it comes to the exact year .
Thirdly , opinions have been divided regarding the environmental and sustainability elements in Parliament 's position .
I believe that these elements should be as clear as possible , and they should definitely be more prominent than they are in the text produced by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
It is very important that we send out the right signal in this regard .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I have to say that I am very touched by the new romance between the EPP and the S & D Group , but I do feel that the intimate and loving embrace between Mr Rapkay and Mr Lange is keeping Europe firmly stuck in the past .

We are talking about the seventh extension of the special State aid regime .
Mr Rapkay himself has indicated that he was rapporteur back in 2002 .
Who will give us a guarantee that we are not going to have the same debate in 2018 ?
Because the reasons that were valid back in 2002 that are valid today , will still be valid in 2018 .
Therefore , my group , without reserve , endorses the position of the Commission .
We have requested a separate vote on Amendments 25 and 27 , and we call on all colleagues in the two big groups to vote against those amendments and support the position of the Commission to phase out the support by 2014 .
I know that votes took place in the different committees , but I also know that there are many colleagues in the two big groups who feel deeply uncomfortable with the current position .
I think they should realise that they have all the freedom in the world to vote according to their conscience , because it is not actually the European Parliament that decides .
So they should vote in order to state their views .
We are not negotiating ; we do not have to compromise .
We can give a very strong political signal in support of the Commission , and therefore I think this European Parliament should act as a counterweight to the very strong political pressure from the Member States on the Commission and show that this Parliament is looking to the future and not to the past .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has no objection to public funds being invested , provided that they act as a catalyst for the transformation that our society , our industry , our economy must go through to become fairer and , above all , more sustainable .
We must remember that aid for uncompetitive coal mines goes against these objectives .
It props up an industry that is not sustainable either economically - otherwise it would not need subsidies - or environmentally .
As Mrs in ' t Veld emphasised just now , for several decades , the coal industry has been calling for this transition to be extended , with no end in sight .
Equally , my fellow German Members , for several decades , many European countries have been striving to put an end to what is an unsustainable industry .
This is true of my country , France , and it is true of many other countries too .
We therefore support the Commission 's proposal and , by extension , the proposal for subsidies to be used so that the workers concerned can be redeployed in a decent and dignified fashion .


However , under the pressure of what you have heard today , the Commission is preparing to beat a rather inglorious retreat , Mr Almunia , under the pressure exerted by , among others , your colleague Mr Oettinger , whose behaviour in this matter has not been that of a Member of a College responsible for defending the general interest , but of an official representative of the specific , sectoral interests of one particular country , Germany .
What is more , he makes no secret of it !
To conclude , I should like to say to you that , as long as the European Union , as long as the Member States put all their energies into supporting industries of the past , with public money , which - and I hope the Irish crisis reminds us of this - has become extremely scarce , as long as we support , with this public money , 19th-century industries , we will not enable Europe to take the lead in 21st-century industries .
Meanwhile , the world is changing , and changing fast .
Madam President , the proposal presented by the European Commission was evidently written under the dictates of climate policy and without consideration of the social consequences - particularly the consequences in the field of energy - in countries such as Germany , Spain and Poland .
We must remember that the world coal market is changing before our eyes .
Demand for coal , and the price of coal , are rising .
Therefore , mines which today are unprofitable , will , perhaps , be profitable in the future .
The departure from coal also presents very serious problems for energy security in such countries as Poland , which generate as much as 95 % of their electricity from coal .
The departure from coal in such situations can involve only one alternative - a still greater dependence on gas , which is imported from only one direction .
Therefore , before we decide on political pressure in favour of abandoning coal in such cases , we should ensure diversification and also security of gas supply , because this is , today , the only real alternative for the energy sector in countries which use coal for this purpose .
These are the reasons why we will support the compromises presented by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , where we have proposed that the regulation give the possibility to national budgets - which are not EU budgets , after all - to maintain mines in countries in which this is necessary , and also the compromise which suggests that the regulation could be in force until 2030 .
I think the initial proposals of the European Commission were significantly closer to precisely this position .
Only at the final stage did the European Commission decide to propose the unrealistic deadline of 2014 .
( DE ) Madam President , it is not only justifiable for us to continue supporting the coal industry , but , in my opinion , it is also absolutely essential .
We must go on providing support not only until 2014 , but also beyond that time .
It is our duty to protect the citizens of the European Union from the many negative impacts of globalisation .
This also includes offering workers in industries which are not fully competitive on the world market long-term retraining to allow them to take on other jobs .
You do not need to be an expert to realise that specialised workers are needed in the mining industry .
Many miners work in the pits for their entire lives .
Therefore , in my opinion , we need plenty of time in order to be able to offer all of them new jobs .
It may no longer be sensible to give older miners the option of retraining .
We must enable mining regions to become gradually less dependent on the mining industry without their prosperity being significantly reduced .
These regions still have considerable economic potential if they are given the opportunity of restructuring their economies .
The drastic reduction in the subsidies for coal mining over recent years has represented an ordeal for many mining regions .
A number of areas were not able to react quickly enough to the changes in economic conditions because of their strong links with the mining industry .
The result has been increased poverty .
This does not have to be the case .
We can protect many European regions from major economic and social damage and , therefore , we must vote in favour of these regulations .
( SV ) Madam President , when it comes to State aid for the coal industry , my view is that we should do everything we can to make the European economy as competitive as possible , and we should do this in many different areas .
We must have a goal when it comes to the automotive industry , the engineering industry and the medical industry .
In order to be successful we need to transform our economy to enable it to meet the demands of modern competition and the global economy .
In light of this , I have serious doubts about the intention now to extend the state subsidies for unprofitable coal mines .
It will mean that , at state level , we will be tying up money in undertakings which are not profitable , which are unable to support the jobs that we are talking about and which will not help to improve the environment .
It will also mean that the transformation we need in order to be able to become truly competitive will be slower .
It will mean that we fail to develop within other areas and also that , in a few years time , people will still be employed in industries that do not offer long-term security and the opportunity to make a living , and those regions that we are now talking about will still remain dependent on coal mining in what are unprofitable coal mines .
Against this background , I believe that we should support the Commission 's proposal , and we will vote in favour of it .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Almunia , we need to bite the bullet now , rather than prolonging the agony .
This is what comes to mind when I think about the subject that we are discussing today .
I support the Commission proposal to phase out State aid in 2014 for the pits which are not competitive by that date .
The cost of each job in the coal mining industry is much higher than the average .
This money is not being spent on developing sustainable and competitive employment for the future .
Therefore , I believe it is right to phase out state subsidies for uncompetitive mines in 2014 .
We must invest the money which becomes available in research and development and in education and training .
This is the only way in which we can maintain our technological head start and remain competitive in the global economy as a whole .
( RO ) Madam President , I think that both the mine closure proposal and the suggestion to reduce subsidies would be too premature and that they would have undesirable socio-economic and regional repercussions .
We must not forget that Europe 's mining sector provides approximately 100 000 jobs , 42 000 in coal mining and 55 000 in related sectors , and that certain regions in Europe are totally dependent economically on this sector .
A large number of people in these regions work in mines or have jobs relating to this sector .
These measures could have adverse consequences , to the extent of leaving communities in absolute poverty .
This is why a strategy for retraining the workers affected by the mine closure plans must be devised quickly .
At the same time , special support is required from the European Union 's Structural Funds in order to provide mutual assistance to the regions which will suffer as a result of these measures .
In addition , mine workers and their families may lose their confidence in the political process where such decisions are made which affect them directly , if they are made at an inappropriate time .
We need to focus our attention just as much on sparsely populated regions , which will suffer the most in socio-economic terms .
I do not believe that 2014 is a realistic deadline for closing the mines .
On the other hand , the deadline of 2020 specifically proposed by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy did not receive sufficient positive feedback .
This is why I think that we can find common ground with 2018 .
I wish to mention another point , which is that the coal industry is an integral part of European policy and is the EU 's own source , thereby guaranteeing supply security .
A transition period is required which will allow these mines , and those mines which could become competitive , to become gradually more competitive , in order to ensure access to European coal and avoid an adverse socio-economic impact .
( CS ) Madam President , in my opinion , there is no dispute over the fact that subsidies to particular segments of the economy distort and destroy economic competition , and that State aid is therefore damaging to the healthy functioning of the market , not only in the short term but also in the long term .
We are talking here about regions that will be , or might be , affected by a high level of unemployment , but , on the other hand , we need to remember the regions that have already gone through restructuring in this sector of the economy , and which have endured high unemployment and coped with it .
In today 's vote , the ECR therefore supports all proposals that will result in individual Member States having sufficient time to implement the extensive retraining of workers , to organise the removal and elimination of environmental burdens associated with coal extraction , and also to be able to absorb all of the social upheavals in time .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is a shame that Parliament has a right to nothing more than consultation when what we are talking about is the future of 180 000 European families and the European Union 's indigenous energy source par excellence .
Subsidies are not a general route to competitiveness , but making European coal competitive through subsidies is strategically necessary , first of all , because 60 % of European energy is imported , and out of the remaining 40 % , a large proportion is nuclear - which the majority of this House does not support - and secondly , because of price increases : the European coal price is moving closer and closer to the international coal price .
Moreover , I would like to ask you : what is competitive coal ?
Ask yourselves whether all the coal that the European Union imports includes the social and safety costs of the mines that are included in the cost of European coal .
Is this the model that many of you want for Europe ?
Do you agree with the importation of products from outside our continent that do not comply with the principles of Union preference and do not incorporate social rights ?
Do you reject this same idea for European coal ?
The longer this period is , the better , so that we can introduce the clean combustion and storage technologies that already exist in the European Union .
Without European coal , if we cause European mines to close , there will be no incentive to continue reducing emissions from thermal power stations , which will continue to burn imported coal and to produce CO2 .
What do you prefer : do you want CO2 to come to us from outside the European Union or do you want it to be possible for CO2 to be treated and stored using our own European technology ?
I do not believe that rejecting the possibility of EU coal , as you are doing , is liberalism : I believe it is hypocrisy .
( RO ) Madam President , coal is an important component in the European Union 's energy mix .
The coal mining sector provides 280 000 jobs in the European Union , especially in mono-industry areas .
This is why it is important for the Union to supply the largest proportion possible of its coal requirements from domestic production , obviously at a competitive price , based on streamlining the coal extraction and processing procedure .
Unless State aid is granted , production will fall by 20 % , resulting in 100 000 lost jobs .
State aid for the hard coal industry is an absolute necessity for uncompetitive mines .
They are uncompetitive due to their obsolete technical equipment .
State aid would allow these facilities to be retrofitted to ensure job security .
Compared with the Commission 's proposal , we are in favour of moving the mine closure deadline .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy voted for 2020 and we will support the compromise which the rapporteur , Mr Rapkay , has successfully reached , along with fellow Members in other political groups .
We support the removal of Article 3 ( 1 ) ( h ) , especially the percentage stipulated for gradually removing the aid granted so that Member States which are going to grant State aid to uncompetitive coal mines have the maximum flexibility possible .
However , I think that Member States should also present plans for the economic and social development of mining regions , which are often mono-industry regions .
The aim of these development plans should be job creation and investment in energy efficiency and energy production from renewable sources .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Rapkay , for his report and the work he has done .

( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to congratulate Mr Almunia on the open debate that has taken place in the Commission .

There are good reasons why you and the Commission President , Mr Barroso , took part in the debate in the College of Commissioners with a very different year in mind .
I am pleased that the Commission is able to discuss issues so openly from a regulatory perspective and then to reverse its decision .
That is both admirable and remarkable .
It is a good thing that you are supporting the new decision here .
There are a number of good grounds for this decision .
Nevertheless , the Member States which are affected have been making plans .
There are plans in place and I can only say that I am pleased that the review clause has been removed , which stated that we would have to open up the whole can of worms once again from 2012 onwards in the largest Member State affected , in other words , Germany .
This means that your debate in the College of Commissioners has also had a very successful outcome .
I know that 2018 will eventually come around .
I am also pleased about the fact that the mining industry has the security to plan ahead and I will vote accordingly .
However , I can see that regulatory policy is the winner here .
( RO ) Madam President , I have already listened to the views of my fellow Members who emphasised how important coal is to the European economy 's energy security .
I would like to introduce another argument .
In some countries , including Romania , in years affected by drought - which have been growing in number - there is a fall in the production of hydroelectric and nuclear energy .
The only resource which my country and other countries have had at their immediate disposal for increasing energy production has been coal .
We have a number of mines which are not profitable , but they have restructuring programmes extending beyond 2014 .
As a liberal , I am against subsidies being granted to commercial companies , but not in the case of companies which have definite restructuring programmes .
As a result , I am going to support the amendment which proposes a longer transition period for discontinuing the subsidies granted to unprofitable coal mines .
( RO ) Madam President , although subsidised coal accounts for only a small proportion of the European Union 's electricity production , the immediate and simultaneous closure of hard coal mines will have a considerable social impact in certain areas of Europe .
We are talking here about a large number of people working in this branch of the industry who will not be able to be re-employed immediately in other sectors , thereby causing unemployment and the emergence of disadvantaged areas .
I think that immediate measures are needed to retrain these people , using EU funds .
Until this happens , it is absolutely imperative to extend the date until State aid can be granted for the closure of production units , at least until 2018 .
I also think that it must be up to the relevant Member State to determine the level of reduction in State aid after a certain period and Member States must not have minimum limits imposed on them .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Almunia , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say a few things to our Liberal friends and to Mrs in ' t Veld in particular .
Competition will not be distorted , because the coal-fired power stations will continue to operate using imported coal , which will increase their carbon footprint .
In other words , the argument does not make sense , whichever way you look at it .
In addition , this cannot be continued after 2018 , for example , in Germany 's case , because the treaty , which applies to those involved and not just to the state , requires everything to come to an end in 2018 , so that the long-term costs of pit closures do not have to be borne by the state .
The long-term costs , which will amount to many millions over several centuries , will be paid by a foundation .
If the foundation were to collapse , it would cost the state a lot of money for an indefinite period .
Having developed such a clever concept with a clear end point , it is important to do justice to it and not to attempt to come up with theoretical definitions of the market which are completely unrelated to the reality of the agreement .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , who has been to my region of Asturias which , many years ago , shaped the origins of Spain and of Europe , and which , thanks to its coal and to its people , is at the forefront of modern society .
Mining areas need to continue in this commendable revitalising effort without encountering obstacles from the European Union .
Instead , they should have its encouragement .
We need to remove the threat of indigenous coal mining coming to an end , and instead enable this strategic sector to survive in a reasonable manner .
We also need to help the sector to achieve competitiveness within a reasonable period , without penalising the businesses later .
Above all , we need to achieve pollution-free extraction soon .
The substantial investments in clean coal must go primarily to benefit Europe and its own mining areas .
It is absurd for those who oppose European coal to defend or tolerate coal from other parts of the world , which is produced with greater environmental impact , a huge lack of safety and salaries that are not competitive .
This situation will discriminate against our own territory and it is simply intolerable that it should arise .
Let us maintain our mining sector by taking advantage of new technologies .
( ES ) Madam President , competitiveness is important , but it cannot be the only criterion .
Our energy dependence means that only coal can guarantee us a secure supply as an indigenous source of fossil fuel , and the economic and social importance of mining in several European regions means that the closure of the mines must not be seen as inescapable , be it in 2014 or 2018 .
If we continue to be dependent on coal as an energy source , in 2018 , we will have to continue to guarantee the energy supply , either using aid - if the mines are not competitive - or without aid - if they are competitive .
We must also consider not only the economic competitiveness of coal , but also its competitiveness in employment and environmental terms .
European coal is safe coal , and we have to see this , especially at a time when accidents in mines are the order of the day outside Europe .
Moreover , European coal is coal that can be clean .
Therefore , in the amendments to the Rapkay report , we ask for an indefinite extension to the aid for costs related to CO2 capture and to any other technology that enables coal to be burned more cleanly .
( CS ) Madam President , this measure confirms the old saying that a financier has a hold on the state like a rope has a hold on a man who has been hung .
I would like to say three things .
First , I think that money should go to support those competitive mines at risk , which account for 5 % of mines throughout the European Union .
We should also prevent imports of subsidised coal from abroad .
Thirdly , we should prevent any interference from lobbyists .
I would like to mention an example from the Russian Federation , where the oil lobby has brought about the closure of mines in the Vorkuta region , with disastrous social consequences .
This must not happen in the EU .
( ES ) Madam President , in order to mitigate the social and energy impact and to ensure secure energy reserves , we have tabled three amendments in plenary with the following aims : firstly , for the overall volume of aid per year to diminish , but with no percentage limit or limit per business .
In this respect , we are grateful for Mr Langen 's position regarding removing fixed references and each Member State being able to decide according to their interests .
The second aim is for aid to cover exceptional costs to be extended to 2030 .
Such proposals will help to alleviate the energy dependency of numerous EU countries , including Spain .
They would ensure the continuation of indigenous production and the preservation of thousands of jobs on which significant regions of Spain and of Europe as a whole are largely dependent .

( RO ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Rapkay for all his efforts .
I , too , think that it is of paramount importance for the transition period to be as long as possible - 2018 , as has been proposed .
I suggested longer still for the closure of uncompetitive mines or possibly for making some of them profitable , as the majority of the population in mining areas are involved in this activity .
It is absolutely imperative to have plans for professional retraining and socio-economic recovery .
Closing the mines prior to fully implementing these plans will result in extremely severe social problems A long time is required to implement plans for professional retraining and cleaning up these areas environmentally .
During the current crisis in particular , it would be appropriate also to apply to the European Structural Funds , given the social , economic and environmental importance to the European Union .
( RO ) Madam President , our fellow Members in this Chamber have mentioned that this is a recurring debate in the European Parliament .
It is indeed a recurring debate , but taking place in different economic and social conditions from before .
We are in a global recession and the European Union is in crisis .
No one believes that we have emerged from this crisis yet , with many Member States still facing the reality of recession .
Under these circumstances , I do not believe that we - in this Parliament - need to contribute to the situation by adding a further 100 000 unemployed to those we currently have in the European Union .
Secondly , we are discussing a new European energy strategy - another background factor .
I believe that our approach in this new strategy must not be to increase our dependency on a single hydrocarbon source , but to increase our economic independence .
Finally , the 21st century economy has been mentioned .
I believe indeed that we need to be involved with this economy but , at the same time , we must focus on diversifying current potential .
In this respect , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Rapkay .
( PL ) Madam President , in view of the specific nature of the regulation which we are debating , today , let us not forget that there are Member States of the European Union whose energy production is based mainly on coal .
Therefore , the changes proposed during work on the regulation must be put into effect in a way which allows the speed of change to be adapted to the possibilities of absorption by the citizens and social structures .
I welcome the compromise which has been achieved .
In view of the role of coal in ensuring energy security , it is necessary to stabilise its extraction at the level required .
The role of coal as a fuel in the energy balance will continue to be crucial for the energy sector by stabilising Europe 's energy security .
I hope the Council will share our concern and listen carefully to the position agreed by the European Parliament .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Almunia , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to refer briefly to two points .
One of them concerns competitiveness , which is raised in a number of different areas of the report .
I would like to ask you to remember how many mining accidents we hear about in the media .
This is due to the fact that mining and , in particular , coal mining is going on all over the world , but unfortunately , the safety standards elsewhere are very low when compared with those in German or other European pits .
This may seem like overstating the case , but personally , I do not think much of competitiveness which is bought at the expense of miners ' lives .
However , if we are looking at the consequences for industrial policy of an early exit from coal mining , I would like to say that the European mining equipment industry is competitive .
I would like to invite all those people who believe that mining is an industry of the past and , in particular , Mr Klinz , to pay a visit to a mine .
They will soon realise that mining uses high-tech solutions and that it is a question of whether or not we want this industry to continue to be profitable .
I know that this is not what the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe wants .
I am afraid that the mining machinery industry will follow mining production and move out of Europe .

Madam President , I repeat what I said in my opening speech : the Commission and I are taking very good note of all the arguments that have been put forward here by all of you , and we will take very good note of Parliament 's position once Mr Rapkay 's report is adopted .

I think that we need to distinguish - as practically all the speeches have done - between coal as a primary energy source and the regulation to govern public aid for uncompetitive coal mines , which is a different thing .
Our proposal , which we are debating today and which the Council will debate in the next few weeks , deals with the second issue , in other words , uncompetitive coal mining rather than the use of coal , which is a separate debate that we have had and will , of course , continue to have in Europe .
Our position is that we need to bring an end to uncompetitive coal mining that requires continuous use of public subsidies , within a fixed period .
This position is clear , and it is not the first time that it has been expressed .
As some of you have recalled , it dates back a long way .
The problem is that the deadlines that were established over time have not been respected by everyone .
The aim of our proposal is to ensure that these deadlines are respected once and for all .
This is a time when , unlike the context in which past debates took place , we have to take into consideration aid for coal mining .
We need to take into account two additional issues .
The first is the challenge of climate change , which we have debated on numerous occasions and for which the European Union has very specific targets .
The second issue is the impact of the crisis and the resulting borrowing on government budgets , budgets at the national level , as this is placing even more pressure on public finances .
These are not , however , the only issues that should be considered .
We also have to consider - as you have in practically all your speeches - what the deadline should be for removing public aid for coal mining under non-competitive conditions .
There is a debate around this issue , and we have listened to the different positions in the debate in Parliament .
There is also a debate in the Council , and we are going to wait for the Council meeting at the beginning of December to see what the Council 's position is .
There has certainly been a debate in the Commission , and there will be another .
As you know - as Mr Langen mentioned earlier - this is a Council regulation .
Parliament 's opinion is very important , but the treaty states that , on matters of public aid , the regulation is a Council regulation .
The Council will establish its position .
Currently - at the last meeting of the Permanent Representatives Committee - it has a majority position in favour of a deadline for the permanent removal of this aid in 2018 , which is longer than the Commission 's proposal .
Our rules state , however , that unless the Council decides unanimously , the Commission proposal cannot be legally modified .
Whatever decision the Council reaches , it is practically certain that it will not be unanimous , but the Commission is going to listen very carefully to the Council 's position , just as it is listening very carefully to Parliament 's arguments and will listen to Parliament 's position when it votes .
The Commission will adopt its final position based on its analysis of the respective positions of the Council , according to its prerogatives established in the treaty , and also of Parliament , and based on the debate on the Rapkay report .
I just have to say that the Commission does not agree with the arguments in favour of unlimited aid for uncompetitive coal mining and would like to remind you that , if there were no new coal regulation based on the Commission 's proposal , what would enter into force from 1 January 2011 would be the general State aid framework , which is considerably stricter than the Commission 's proposal , the proposal that will emerge from the debates in the Council , or the opinion that will emerge from Parliament .
Madam President , Mr Almunia , that is exactly the problem .
You are right when you confirm to Mr Lange that it is a Council regulation .
However , it also depends on whether the Commission hears the arguments put forward in the Council and here in Parliament .
You must drop this very stringent proposal , as you have done , so that it is possible for a sensible , democratic approach to be taken , which involves a majority decision that does not require unanimity .
I would like to make a second remark to Mr Chatzimarkakis .
The review clause which you referred to is completely irrelevant in this case .
The disputes which took place in Germany were only intended to save the face of the Minister for Economic Affairs there , nothing more .
Now , I would like to look at the concern expressed by Mr Almunia .
No one here and not even the report itself is questioning the fact that this is a phasing out arrangement , Mr Almunia .
Whether it is sensible in terms of energy policy or technology is another question .
What Mr Geier said is absolutely correct , but we are not calling that into question .
The only question is whether we should do this relatively abruptly in 2014 or whether there are sensible transitional arrangements for 2018 .
Otherwise , we are not questioning anything .
The situation is not as described by Mr Lambert , for example , who read out his speech and then left .
He should have stayed here , because he might have learned something .
It is not the case that there are Member States who have done nothing at all .
That is not true of Spain , of Poland , of Romania or of Germany .
In 1990 , more than 200 000 people were working in the mining industry in Germany .
Now , 20 years later , the figure is around 20 000 .
This represents a drop of 90 % , leaving only 10 % of the jobs still in place .
There have been a number of pit closures between 2002 and the present day during the period of this regulation , which is still in force .
Let us not behave as if nothing has happened .
The question is whether or not we need a sensible transitional period to be able to achieve this without causing socio-political damage .
I can only say , yes , we do need one .
This four-year period should not be an issue , because no one is calling that into question anyway .
Please take that message back to the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11 : 30 .
( The sitting was suspended for a few minutes )
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
While drafting this document , the rapporteur has achieved an important success - finding an answer to two questions : one concerning the environment and the other social protection .
From Romania 's perspective , and I believe that this is a point of view also shared by Germany , Poland , Spain or Hungary , the mining industry is an important component of the domestic economy .
The coal mine closures may have a major social impact , contributing to the rise in unemployment and exacerbating the depopulation of regions which only have one industry - mining .
At the same time , mine closures will also have a significant impact on the energy sector .
I know that all these are arguments for and against this measure .
However , the current reality leads us to a single conclusion : to extend the deadline for closing coal mines which are not competitive in order to support them in finding viable alternatives for all those involved in this sector .
The European Commission is trying - at any price and in a way which is not justified by economic rationale - to reduce coal extraction .
These efforts have been artificially stimulated by the increase in costs of generating energy in coal-fired power stations .
I refer to the costs of emissions .
It is a policy which undermines the economic foundations of those countries in which most energy is derived from coal .
Such a strategy testifies to a lack of understanding of the need to have a coherent fuel and energy policy which prefers economic effectiveness and competitiveness .
It also testifies to the lack of a unified energy policy guaranteeing security of energy supply and a lack of regulations based on uniform criteria for the entire common market , which would lead to fair competition while retaining minimum social costs .
We are dealing , today , with a brutal violation of those principles .
The question is , what kind of industry does the Union need - an industry which benefits the Union , or one which is supranational , corporate and which invests its taxes in tax havens ?
Primary industries and power generation require many years of investment and concentration of capital , which means they need to be subsidised .
Furthermore , they do not have to be profitable at any price .
Cheap energy and fuel are essential for secondary industry to be competitive , including the machine industry .
So we are talking about net profitability .
I would like to say that the Union 's economic problems during the crisis are not only the result of dishonest global financial speculations , but there is also a lack of a sound , uniform and fair industrial policy in the Union itself , particularly a fuel and energy policy .
There are several arguments against such a rapid discontinuation of subsidies .
I refer primarily to social and economic consequences on a regional scale .
It is important that we spend subsidies to facilitate mine closures properly : to ensure that the employees concerned are retrained and redeployed in other sectors of the labour market .
Appropriate environmental rehabilitation is also imperative .
Without these , there is a risk that the EU will save less money on discontinued subsidies than it will have to spend on damage mitigation .
It must be considered carefully whether it is useful to close coal mines at all , if all we achieve in doing so is that the remaining power plants must substitute domestic coal with coal imported from outside the common market .
Is it expedient to close coal-fired power plants , one of the cheapest sources of electricity , when the alarming signs of energy shortage are beginning to be noticeable around the world ?
We must also think of the increasing energy demands of the European Union , as well as the role of coal in energy security .
We must not allow facilities like the Hungarian Vértes Power Plant and the Oroszlány mine to close without carefully drafted and detailed plans .
These plans must resolve the situation of the employees , the rehabilitation of the environment , and must demonstrate , through well-founded impact assessments , that closure is inevitable and represents the best option to reduce pollutant emissions .
The green growth programme must not entail any measures that would cause severe economic and social problems .
The European Union 's attempt to reduce the use of coal is only right and proper .
Since the longterm aim for Europe and the human race is nondependence on fossil fuels , we need to realise that European coal mines will , sooner or later , have to adapt to change .
Globalisation means that there will be significant price pressures on coal .
For this reason , production will transfer to countries where labour is cheaper and the areas in the EU where coal is produced will see jobs and income drain away , as mines can no longer respond to the competition .
Although this is an unwelcome development , the actions of the authorities cannot conflict with the basic principles of the market economy .
Unprofitable production should not be kept on a life support machine forever .
We must remember that structural change on this scale will inevitably have farreaching and dramatic social consequences .
Mine closures often mean the end of an area 's main source of livelihood .
This is reflected in the ability of cities and towns to provide their residents with services and the decline of entire communities .
It is in everyone 's interest if major social changes such as those associated with the gradual closure of mines take place with the right controls in place and over a sufficient period of transition .
Coal will nevertheless play a key role in our lives in the foreseeable future .
It will still be needed , for example , in the steel industry , and studies of its use as a raw material for polymers have been encouraging .
Furthermore , an excellent costbenefit ratio has been achieved with combined heat and power using coal .
We should not therefore succumb to the illusion that winding down coal mines is a sort of political end in itself .
In the future , a profitable mining industry must be a possibility - in the EU too .
There are various reasons for supporting coal aid : strategic reasons , regional sustainability reasons and social reasons .
With regard to the strategic reasons , we need to take into account the fact that the market is changing rapidly .
Therefore , abandoning coal without having a viable alternative would not be appropriate .
The environmental argument is not relevant either , as imported coal is equally as polluting as indigenous coal .
Moreover , we should not forget that , on many occasions , the mines from which we import coal do not comply with social rights .
With regard to regional sustainability , in many cases , the mines are in sparsely populated areas that are entirely dependent on the industry to maintain the region , and we risk turning our lands into deserts .
The final and most important reason is the more than 180 000 families that could be affected .
In Spain , in my region of Aragon , we are pioneers of renewable energy sources , with almost 60 % energy independence .
The only resource that we can store is coal , and we need more time in order to improve our technologies and apply them to mining , thus transforming our indigenous coal into clean , sustainable coal .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 : 05 pending voting time and resumed at 11 : 30 )

Despite all the fine speeches on climate , Europe will still be clinging onto its coalblack past by adopting this report .
Under the Europe 2020 strategy , the EU would like to move swiftly towards a low emissions future based on renewable forms of energy .
These will merely be words , however , if , in the future , Parliament allows the Member States to squander billions on its coal mines .
The current rules on aid would have expired in December , but in the Commission 's proposals , they would be extended until 2014 .
The coalblack gloom is intensified by the fact that Parliament wants the rules on aid to be extended all the way to 2018 .
Two years ago , aid from the EU Member States to industry that produced and used hard coal , that is to say , anthracite , was as much as EUR 2.9 billion .
That only shows that there is still many times more aid for fossil fuels than there is for renewable energy sources , and this despite the fact that our targets on climate would call for just the opposite policy .
1 .
Mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund : Ireland - floods in November 2009 (
2 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Noord Brabant and Zuid Holland , Division 18 / Netherlands (
- Before the vote :

( NL ) Mr President , the question of aid for the Netherlands from the European Solidarity Fund is , fortunately , still on today 's agenda , but if it had been up to Mr Daul , my fellow Member from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , we would not be having this vote today , and the Netherlands would be being punished for rejecting the 6 % increase to the EU budget and the introduction of European taxes .
The delegation of the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) finds it totally unacceptable that Mr Daul should have even entertained such an idea .
This is a grave insult to the Netherlands as a Member State .
It was precisely this point that was debated yesterday and the debate is closed .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the last Conference of Presidents , we decided to put the Matera report on today 's agenda .
No one asked for that report not to be put on the agenda .
Therefore , the question asked by the President is as follows : faced with an individual such as this , are we going to be able to have frank discussions , as we have been used to having for five years ?
That is the question I am going to ask on Thursday morning .
Moreover , if the European Conservatives and Reformists continue to make this person participate in the Conference of Presidents , we are going to change the way we work .
That is all I have to say .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are called upon to vote on a package of aid for Holland , which has requested the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for an overall sum of EUR 10.5 million .

This transfer of internal funds to the Union budget can still be carried out under the ordinary procedure .
Future requests for aid , and the number is growing steadily , risk being blocked , however , due to failure to approve the 2011 budget .
If the twelfths system enters into force from January , it will not , in fact , be possible to make the transfers and proceed with the necessary payments .
Under these particular circumstances , with Europe as a whole facing economic difficulties , Parliament hopes for a great sense of responsibility from Member States that have put up resistance in Council to approving an austerity budget that is in line with the prerogatives of the Treaty of Lisbon .
3 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Drenthe Division 18 / Netherlands (
4 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Limburg Division 18 / Netherlands (
5 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Gelderland and Overijssel Division 18 / Netherlands (
6 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Noord Holland and Utrecht Division 18 / Netherlands (
7 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Noord Holland and Zuid Holland Division 58 / Netherlands (
8 .
Aid granted in the framework of the German alcohol monopoly (
9 .
Duty-free treatment for specified pharmaceutical active ingredients bearing an ' international non-proprietary name ' ( INN ) from the World Health Organisation and specified products used for the manufacture of finished pharmaceuticals (
10 .
EC-Ukraine agreement for scientific and technological cooperation (
11 .
EC-Government of the Faroes scientific and technological agreement (
12 .
EC-Japan agreement on cooperation in science and technology (
13 .
EC-Jordan agreement on scientific and technological cooperation (
14 .
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and Solomon Islands (
15 .
Common system of value added tax and duration of obligation to respect a minimum standard rate (
16 .
ECB annual report for 2009 (
17 .
Civilian-military cooperation and the development of civilian-military capabilities (
18 .
Long-term plan for the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay and the fisheries exploiting that stock (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I would just like to say that in the Committee on Fisheries , I voted against this report because I believed that some of the amendments that were drawn up in cooperation with the sector had not been adopted .
However , since I feel it is much more important for the sector to have a long-term plan for anchovy fishing , I am going to vote in favour , and I am going to take this opportunity to ask the Council , which has so many reservations , to accept Parliament 's codecision capacity granted by the Treaty of Lisbon and to please set a date today for negotiations to begin , because if this plan does not move forward , it is the sector that will suffer the most .
19 .
Multiannual plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the fisheries exploiting that stock (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I note that Amendment 29 has been withdrawn by the Socialists for reasons that I cannot understand , so therefore - to ensure that we can vote on this - on behalf of the ALDE Group , I confirm that we will take over this amendment .
I deem this to be very serious and would ask Members to consider the fact that , while many might not fully understand the science of this , if we do not accept the Socialist amendment and accept the PPE amendment , it means that we are going against the advice of scientists and are creating two total allowable catch areas within a single stock .
I advocate that we vote against the PPE and that we adopt the Socialist report now that the Socialists have withdrawn the amendment , for reasons perhaps better known to some of those in the southern part of Europe .
Mr Gallagher , in other words , you are invoking Rule 156 ( 5 ) , and you are taking over Amendment 29 as in the voting list , which means that we have to vote on it .
20 .
Prohibition of highgrading and restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea , the Belts and the Sound (
21 .
Use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture (
22 .
State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines (
Voting time
Τhe next item is the vote .
Formal sitting - Georgia
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , honoured guests and friends .
I would like to extend a warm welcome to the President of Georgia , Mikheil Saakashvili .
( Applause )
This is not President Saakashvili 's first visit to the European Parliament .
He was with us four years ago , and he was also in Brussels in 2004 , just after being elected President of Georgia .
Today is a special day - today , 23 November , is the seventh anniversary of the Rose Revolution , the bloodless watershed which brought change to the situation not only in Georgia but the whole region of the South Caucasus .
Mr President , for almost 60 years , the European Union has been moving in the direction which Georgia has now also chosen - that of lasting peace , welfare and unthreatened liberty .
President Saakashvili received his initial education in Kiev .
He then studied at European and American universities , and has always been associated with Strasbourg - he studied here , has received honours here and it was also here , as far as I know , that he met his future wife .
So it is a special place for Mr Saakashvili .
The last seven years have not been easy for Georgia .
Georgia 's territorial integrity has been violated .
I would like to recall that in May this year , we adopted a resolution calling on Russia to respect the conditions of the ceasefire and to withdraw its forces from Georgian territory .
( Applause )
Four years ago , Mr Saakashvili said in this Chamber that Georgians are not only one of the oldest nations of Europe , but that they are also intensely interested in European integration .
They regard this as the kind of approach to international affairs which they prefer .
I am sure this enthusiasm is no less today than four years ago .
We , here in the European Parliament and the European Union , attach great importance to democratisation .
The standards of democratisation and democracy are very high , and the standards of the free market are also high .
Human rights , the rule of law and freedom of the press all require reforms - reforms of the constitutional system , electoral law and the justice system .
A moment ago , I was talking about these matters with the President of Georgia , and we agreed that it is not an easy process , but that it is essential if we are to be similar to each other and if we are to work more easily with each other .
I am pleased , too , that Georgia has quickly overcome the economic crisis .
The European Union also played a part in this - we extended a helping hand .
Today , Georgia is again at a stage of rapid economic growth .
We in the European Union are keen that Georgia should be stable and that it should develop well , but we are also keen for this to happen in the entire region of the South Caucasus .
Georgia could be the perfect model of transition to a democratic and free market system , full of protection for human rights and the operation of the rule of law .
This is why what Mr Saakashvili has to propose to us and to say , today , is so important .
We are glad you are with us , and we would like to ask you to speak .
The floor is yours , Mr President .
( Applause )
President of Georgia . - Mr President , I am humbled by the immense honour that your invitation signifies for my country , and I would like to thank you and all the political groups for this exceptional opportunity .
Mr President , as we noted in our preliminary discussions , I was last here four years ago , so it is like the Olympic Games .
I have come back four years later .
Hopefully , I will perform better this time than last time .
I came here to deliver a message of hope and to make a solemn pledge .
I came here to affirm that peace - a just and lasting peace - is possible in my region , and that we need Europe to contribute to it .
For centuries , the Caucasian Mountains have been a geopolitical mystery and a beguiling paradox : a region where individuals and souls were free , but where citizens were oppressed ; where cultures were tolerant , but where governments created artificial divisions ; where people never cease to feel deeply European , but where walls erected by empires turned Europe into a faraway mirage ; where men and women were striving for peace , but wars seemed unavoidable .
I came here to tell you that we must put an end to those times , that cooperation must replace rivalry , and that negotiations must prevail over the rhetoric of war .
In all the troubled corners of our world , the European Parliament is a symbol of hope .
It is striking proof that even the cruellest of conflicts can be overcome and that peace is worth any political risk .
This very place would not exist if , in the middle of ruins , surrounded by death and legitimate claims for revenge , brave leaders did not choose to end centuries of wars by launching the most ambitious and fascinating political experiment of our time : European unification .
This Parliament , which is divided not by nationality , but into political groups - fulfils the vision so eloquently expressed by Victor Hugo at the 1849 International Peace Congress in Paris .
Allow me to quote the great poet in his own language :
( FR ) The day will come when all of you , all the nations of the continent , without losing your distinctive qualities or your glorious individuality , merge into a greater union , and embody European fraternity .
The day will come when the only battlefields are markets open to trade and minds open to ideas .
The day will come when cannonballs and bombs are replaced by votes , by the universal suffrage of the peoples , by the venerable arbitration of a great sovereign senate which will be to Europe what Parliament is to the United Kingdom , what the Diet is to Germany and what the Legislative Assembly is to France .
Most of Hugo 's contemporaries thought he was an infantile dreamer , even when he gave this speech .
It took more than a hundred years and two world wars for history to hear his voice .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is time for Hugo 's voice to be echoed and heard in my region as well .
It is high time for this voice of brotherhood to overcome the sounds of cannons and calls of hatred .
It is high time for the European peace to be extended to the Caucasus .
( Applause )
And it is our responsibility , as political leaders , to conceive bold initiatives in order to make this happen .
Ladies and gentlemen , exactly seven years ago , the Rose Revolution initiated a new journey towards the European family of an old nation , my beloved Georgia .
On 23 November 2003 , hundreds of thousands of citizens of all regional , religious and social backgrounds peacefully took over the streets and the Parliament .
Not a single window was broken and not a single thing was stolen from the building .
They did more than overthrow a corrupt , backward-looking regime .
They triggered what economists in London some weeks ago called a mental revolution .
As some of you in this Assembly know well , there have been two ways of getting out from communist regimes after the liberating collapse of the USSR - the European one and the nationalistic one : the rule of law and the rule of fear .
To sum up : Václav Havel and Slobodan Milošević .
Once the tyranny of the Party was over , the divisions , the corruption , the verticality , the bureaucracy , the cynicism and the authoritarianism that were the pillars of Soviet society remained intact .
Seven years ago , Georgia was formally an independent state , but it was still part of this world of fear and hatred .
The borders of the Soviet mentality were not abolished , and the Soviet Union still existed in the minds and the souls of the people .
Only a mental revolution could lead to the European transformation of our societies .
This is the message that we Georgians brought to this region .
This is the message that unleashed so much anger towards us among those nostalgic for the Empire , but this is the message that turned Georgia into a laboratory of reforms for our region .
When we led the Rose Revolution , we were members of student organisations , opposition parties and civil society groups , all united by a single dream : to turn a dysfunctional post-Soviet country crippled beyond imagining by corruption and crime into a European democracy .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Soviet Union was based on the principle of the right to rule .
People were artificially opposed to each other at every level of society and in every field .
In every republic , the different religious , social and ethnic groups were made to be constant rivals , and politics was understood as an art of manipulation , fear and hatred .
This explains why former communist leaders turned so easily into nationalists - in the Balkans as well as in the Caucasus , in eastern Europe as well as in Russia .
Seven years ago , Georgia was still divided into isolated communities which feared each other .
Some extremists were using the weakness of the State to reject minorities .
Our first task was therefore to embrace multiculturalism and differences .
We have developed an affirmative action programme in all spheres , from higher education to law enforcement bodies .
The Soviet Union had another characteristic - absolute centralisation .
Seven years ago , Georgia was still centred completely on its capital , and we initiated a vast decentralisation programme , invested in regional development infrastructures and spectacularly empowered local authorities .
As a result , regions that were once abandoned became the most striking examples of our development .
Until the Rose Revolution , all key regional principles were appointed by the President , so while others were restoring the famous vertical power cancelling the autonomy of all the regions , we systematically transferred power to regionally elected bodies .
This policy has recently led to the first direct election of the mayor of the capital Tbilisi - last May - and the decision to move the Constitutional Court to the city of Batumi and the Parliament to Georgia 's second-biggest city - Kutaisi - in the centre of Georgia .
The Soviet Union was all about control and corruption - an overweight and inefficient state .
Our first step was therefore to dissolve the KGB and fire the entire police force ...
( Applause )
... as well as customs officers and tax agents , but also to open our economy and our educational system .
The vision that guided all these steps was captured by a single symbol .
Beside every Georgian flag in every official building , we installed a European flag .
We did this to show where we were aiming to take Georgia with our reforms .
Of course , our peaceful revolution has had its share of failures and shortcomings .
Of course , we have made mistakes but , as the great inventor of European cosmopolitanism and one of my favourite philosophers , Immanuel Kant , wrote about the French revolution , ' You cannot be ready to be free until you are actually free ' .
What Immanuel Kant meant , ladies and gentlemen , is that no book can teach you in advance how to govern - or even behave - in freedom .
You can only learn this from your own successes and failures .
We have had failures and we have learnt from them , but we have also had surprising successes .
Georgia has just been singled out by the World Bank as the number one economic reformer in the world over the last five years and now ranks twelfth in the world and number one in central and eastern Europe - and certainly in the post-Soviet world - for ease of doing business .
Once the epicentre of the post-Soviet mafia , Georgia made more progress against corruption than any other country in the world from 2004 to 2009 , according to the EBRD and Transparency International .
Indeed , on the TI listing , Georgia went up about 70 places and , by coincidence , around that time , Russia went down about 70 places .
We met in the middle and I do not remember them saying hello , but that is what happened .
I value these rankings only because they reflect and rebuild the social and moral transformation that happened in my country - the mental revolution to which I referred earlier .
Georgian citizens have stopped thinking of their state and country as a post-Soviet state .
They see it , judge it and criticise it as a European democracy .
Such a change goes far beyond the leaders and parties that led the Rose Revolution .
It is something that nobody owns and nobody can suppress , neither us nor anybody else .
Such a revolution leads to this amazing fact in our part of the world : that institutions are systematically more popular than political figures .
We just had a huge police reform and , according to the last poll we took - a Gallup poll - the police came out with an 86 % confidence rating , a figure which used to be 5 % .
The same for the Presidency , the same for Parliament , the same for other institutions in the country : it was exactly the inverse of what happened previously .
That really tells you that the institutions are more popular than the leaders and that the country is moving in the right direction .
There is a great deal more to do .
Obviously , we are more committed than ever to pursuing our paths of reform .
We are aware that democracies are always a work in progress .
Of course , our alternative democratic model was not welcomed by everybody .
It met fierce opposition among those revisionist forces who still perceive the fall of the USSR as the worst catastrophe of the 20th century .
They imposed a full-scale embargo on my nation in 2006 .
Before that , there was a full-scale energy embargo in 2005 .
They deported our citizens , repeatedly bombed our territory prior to 2008 and finally invaded in 2008 .
As I speak , these forces still occupy 20 % of Georgian territory , in blatant violation of international law and of the 12 August ceasefire agreement brokered thanks to the efforts of my good friend and great European leader , French President Nicolas Sarkozy , who was then President of the European Union .
As I speak , Georgia still has up to 500 000 IDPs and refugees who cannot return home because some people , animated by an old imperialist mentality , decided to welcome the 21st century by organising ethnic cleansing campaigns and building a new Berlin Wall dividing my country .
How did we respond to these aggressions ?
First , we fully implemented the ceasefire agreement and went beyond our obligations , without once using Russia 's refusal to comply as a pretext .
Last August , the Head of the European Union Monitoring Mission , Hansjörg Haber - a German - publicly praised Georgian restraint and our engagement strategy as constructive unilateralism .
When tanks and missiles are standing 50 km from a capital , it would be high time for many governments to cry that they are besieged , there is no time to have freedom and it is a luxury to have democracy - which they cannot afford - and start to crack down on their opposition and call for so-called unity of society .
We did exactly the opposite .
We are building , in these circumstances , democracy at gunpoint .
In front of the iron curtain which the occupation forces have built around the region of Abkhazia , in the small seaside town of Anaklia , which was a violent no man 's land just a few years ago , a new tourist resort is being built as we speak , with beautiful hotels and sandy beaches .
Some suggest that we should stop and wait until the situation is resolved and only start building when the ground is more solid , less shaky and less dangerous .
Our philosophy is the complete opposite .
We are constructing buildings not because they are on strong and solid ground but because by building them , we will eventually make the ground stronger .
In Anaklia , a new phase of development started in 2005 after it had already been destroyed twice by the conflict , in 1993 and 1998 .
In 2008 , it once again witnessed total destruction .
All the new buildings were burnt down by invading Russian troops , including discos , cafés , youth hostels and other hotels .
A few weeks later , construction started again .
A great poet and a famous Russian dissident , Alexandr Galich , one of those eight heroes who demonstrated on Red Square in 1968 against the invasion of Prague , was the author of this great phrase : Отечество в опасности !
Наши танки на чужой земле ! , which means that ' the homeland is in danger , our tanks have invaded a foreign country ' .
He wrote another splendid line about Georgia , which again I shall quote in Russian : Прекрасная и гордая страна !
Ты отвечаешь шуткой на злословье ! , which translates roughly as ' splendid and proud country , you respond to mud-slinging with a smile ' .
( Applause )
The last time I visited Anaklia , I saw a row of discotheques as lively as you can see anywhere in Europe , where young people danced just as they would in Ibiza or St Tropez .
The only difference was that the ' 18 ' Disco where we went was the last disco on the beach .
Exactly five metres from there is a wall beyond which the occupying army is stationed , and then there is almost 100 km of darkness and emptiness .
Let me ask you : what is more absurd than a new Berlin Wall on a sandy subtropical Black Sea beach ?
In short , we understand that peace is in our supreme interest , and we are convinced that there is no alternative to peace .
By jeopardising peace , we would place at risk everything we have achieved and everything we want to achieve in the coming years .
I have come here to announce a new step in our policy of constructive unilateralism .
I am here to take an initiative that I hope , with your help , will defuse the tensions and allow serious negotiations to start .
Before coming , I reflected a lot .
I also consulted with our friends - American and European allies and people in the region - and the Georgian Government already considers itself bound by the 12 August ceasefire agreement and has always understood that the ceasefire clearly prohibits the use of force .
But in order to prove that Georgia is definitely committed to a peaceful resolution of its conflict with the Russian Federation , we are today taking the unilateral initiative of declaring that Georgia will never use force to roll back the Russian occupation and to restore its control over the occupied areas .
It will only resort to peaceful means in its quest for de-occupation and reunification .
Even if the Russian Federation refuses to withdraw its occupation forces , even if its proxy militias multiply their human rights violations , Georgia will only retain the right to self-defence in the case of new attacks and invasion of the 80 % of the Georgian territory that remains under the control of the Georgian Government .
I will address the relevant letters to the Secretary-General of the UN , the Secretary-General of the OSCE and the leadership of the European Union , stating clearly that we commit ourselves not to use force in order to restore control of all our illegally divided country , neither against the occupation forces nor against their proxies - even though the UN Charter might allow us to do so .
My pledge here before you constitutes a unilateral declaration of a state under international law .
This initiative is far from easy for a country that is partially occupied and has 500 000 IDPs and refugees .
It constitutes and expands our policy of constructive unilateralism .
I am ready for deep , comprehensive dialogue with my Russian counterpart .
We will , of course , continue to participate in the Geneva talks , hoping that our pledge today will persuade the Russian Federation to stop blocking these discussions .
But we need political dialogue to start as well .
For this to occur , the international community must make it clear to the Russian leaders that the situation today is totally irregular and unsustainable .
In order to push them to discuss a compromise , it is essential clearly to state the reality of the situation on the ground .
This is why we are asking that the Russian military build-up within the international borders of Georgia be qualified as illegal occupation of a sovereign territory .
Many European nations , as well as the United States , have already done so .
Because if this is not a military occupation , then what is it ?
Is it military tourism when you have tens of thousands of troops , missiles and tanks deployed illegally against you , and a part is removed from your populated territory ?
Equally , the brutal campaigns that have expelled hundreds of thousands of Georgian citizens from the occupied territories should be qualified as illegal acts of ethnic cleansing .
If we fail to denounce this ethnic cleansing , why would the occupiers ever even consider allowing them to return back to their homes , towns and villages ?
Ladies and gentlemen , if the first victim of war is always the truth , the truth is always the most solid foundation of peace .
Our constructive unilateralism and the pledge I have just made will not have the expected impact if our European friends do not speak out the truth .
If you do not speak out the truth , then who will ?
I came here today humbly to tell you that , basically we - and maybe the whole region - depend on you .
Ladies and gentlemen , our region has known too many wars in recent history .
It is time - to paraphrase Hugo once again - to replace cannons with round tables .
Our region has had its own Warsaw , its own Coventry , its own Oradour-sur-Glane , and it is time to build on our common rejection of war and destruction .
It is time to say that we must never have another Grozny , a regional capital of 400 000 inhabitants that has been totally erased from the surface of the globe .
It is time to say that we must never again see people expelled from their homes and deported on the basis of their nationality , faith or origin , as happened in my own country as well as in other countries in the region .
I am ready to work with the Russian leadership to ensure that this does not happen again and that the consequences of the war are reversed and conditions for peace established .
Walls like the one dividing Georgia will not be brought down by bombs but by the commitment of citizens to build a free , united , democratic country and by the commitment of the world community to enforce international law , and this is the ambition we will never give up .
We will never give up our ambition to reunite our country and establish it as a free democratic nation by peaceful means .
It is noticeable that , despite the enormous pressure and multiple threats from Moscow , not a single former Soviet Republic has recognised this dismemberment of Georgia .
It shows - to the great surprise and fury of some people - that the old times are definitely over .
It shows that the former captive nations of Soviet times have , with all the hurdles and problems , become strong independent states that determine their own policies .
No one , in short , is going back to the USSR .
Ladies and gentlemen , our region has made a choice .
A war has been launched to stop this movement , but tanks cannot reverse the sense of history , and it is time for the long and dolorous hangover of imperialism to end peacefully .
I call , therefore , on the Russian leaders to make the choice of the future .
They could play such a major positive role in the ongoing transformation of our common region , accepting other countries as partners and not as vassals .
We all want - and I personally want - Russia as a partner and not as an enemy .
Nobody has a greater interest than us in seeing Russia turn into a country that truly operates within the concert of nations , respects international law , and - this is often connected - upholds basic human rights .
This is why I wholeheartedly support the efforts of European and American leaders to engage Russia in a more constructive relationship .
Our conflict has done nothing to harden feelings between our two peoples ; I want to tell the Russian people that they will always be welcome in Georgia as partners , tourists , students , businessmen , journalists or simply as friends - but not as occupation forces .
( Great applause from the floor )
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to end this speech with a quote from the President of the first Georgia Republic , Noe Zhordania .
As you might know , Georgia was the first European social democratic republic ever proclaimed in 1918 , and we are very proud of this .
We have strong women 's rights and other strong social rights enshrined in the constitution .
A few days before the Red Army invaded Georgia , Zhordania explained our European choice : ' What do we take from the cultural bow of European nations ?
More than 2 000 years of national culture , a democratic system and natural wealth ' .
Russia offered us the chance to go back and have military lives .
We told Russia that we are going to Europe , and we want Russia to go together with us towards Europe .
Today , another Georgian President is addressing you with the same message of love for European ideas and values .
It is rare that a nation is given the same opportunity twice in history .
I came here today to tell you that we will seize this opportunity and do whatever we can to achieve our European destiny .
President Saakashvili , your message today was very important for all of us , but it was very important as well for the future OSCE summit in Astana , Kazakhstan , in one week 's time on 1 and 2 December .
First of all , it was of crucial importance to the whole of your region , to the Caucasus , both the southern Caucasus and the northern Caucasus .
We have always known that you are brave men - now we can also say that you are prudent men .
Courage and prudence should always go together .
1 .
ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2009 (
2 .
Civil , commercial , family and private international law aspects of the action plan implementing the Stockholm Programme (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , due to the change in the agenda approved yesterday by this House , I would firstly like to express my approval for the fact that the Committee on Legal Affairs has unanimously approved the draft report that we are voting on today .
The fact that the construction of the European judicial space finds such a broad consensus in Parliament is important .
The Stockholm Programme envisages that everyday life should be intrinsic to the process of constructing a Europe of citizens and not merely of political forces or institutional representations .
It sets out to resolve the everyday problems of Europeans by the real and unified creation of an effective market of labour , goods and services , entrepreneurial activity without internal borders and without red tape , to strengthen the common basis of rights of succession , contracts , consumers , timely payments , the family , children and more .
It will also be the duty and responsibility of the justice system , national judiciaries , solicitors , accountants and workers who operate within individual States to build Europe , to interpret the laws that unite our continent .
Our past is marked by different judicial and legal traditions - Common law and Civil law - with differences between the French or German systems and histories that are sometimes very different .
We respect national prerogatives and the principle of subsidiarity , but we realise that in order to build Europe - and fortunately we are still on that road - we need progressive convergence that is based on the great constitutional tradition of fundamental rights for which Europe stands .
Mr President , the Action Plan that we will approve sets out to construct , reinforce , extend and disseminate a solid European judicial culture , a European legal mindset .
That is why I will vote in favour .
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , would you trust an economic forecaster who had recently said this : ' The euro has done more to enforce budgetary discipline in the rest of Europe than any number of exhortations from the IMF or the OECD ' ?
Or this : ' The euro has already provided great internal stability for the eurozone ' ?
Or this : ' If we get rid of sterling and adopt the euro , we will also get rid of sterling crises and sterling over-valuations .
This will give us a real control over our economic environment ' .
All three of those quotations come from our former colleagues in this House , Nick Clegg and Chris Huhne - now , alarmingly , ministers in the British Government .
We , on the other hand , who oppose the euro - there is no way of putting this modestly - have been proved absolutely right .
We always said that an ECB rate determined by the needs of the core would be disastrous for the periphery .
I am not expecting any humility from those who got it so disastrously wrong .
I am sure they will still be wheeled out by the BBC as disinterested experts , and I am sure that we will still be portrayed as doctrinaire hardliners .
Believe me , I am not gloating for the sake of it .
A friend of mine just said that there is nothing more irritating than being wise during the event .
But please listen to us next time .
The single currency forces nations to adopt the wrong monetary policy , with calamitous outcomes for the bailout receivers and to those paying .
Mr President , I share the concern my colleague just expressed about this obsession with harmonisation .
When we look at the moves towards a common VAT tax base , we hear MEPs across this House arguing for more and more harmonisation when it comes to tax , forgetting that what we really need here at EU level is more tax competition .
We also need this at global level to ensure that when it comes to the economy and economic competitiveness , we are not taxing our citizens out of productive capability and productive forces - what we are actually doing is ensuring that we have enough entrepreneurs and innovators in a country , and one of the best ways we can do that is by tax competition .
This obsession with harmonisation has led us to a single currency that does not take account of national differences and differences in economic cycles .
This is why countries are suffering ; this is partly why Ireland is suffering ; and it is time we moved more towards competition , rather than to common tax bases .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report examines the annual report and the activity carried out this year .
Economic and financial and , to a growing extent , political actions are still extensively dominated by the international financial crisis .
Events in Greece and in other countries of the area naturally have complex causes .
The problems are largely of internal origin because they stem from a lack of structural reforms .
Without a shadow of a doubt , the European monetary union has not operated in the way it was designed to work .
The principles of the Stability and Growth Pact have not always been respected and infringements that seemed minor initially have proven , over time , to be a serious threat to the pact as a whole .
We must therefore learn a lesson from the situation .
We need to re-balance the European monetary union , achieve greater transparency and more effective management of the crisis in the financial markets and rebuild public trust from the bottom .
This is an enormous challenge , but also an opportunity that we have a duty to grasp .
Mr President , we can see the way in which the Irish Republic has been brought to its present predicament by the euro .
As early as 2001 , Irish economists were alarmingly warning that Ireland desperately needed to raise interest rates to choke off the unsustainable boom .
But of course , there were no Irish interest rates ; there was only the European Central Bank , which , by giving the core members what they needed , was giving the peripheral members a double dose of what they did not need , namely , artificially cheap money .
The problems of Ireland are going to carry on for as long as it is in the single currency .
The bailout may allow it to limp on until the next time that its monetary policy needs to diverge from those of the rest of the eurozone .
It is crazy , at a time like this , when my own country already owes GBP 850 billion , that we should be borrowing another GBP 7 billion to send to Ireland .
That money will not only be useless , it will be actively harmful because it will trap the Republic of Ireland in its present discontents .
If we want to be helpful , we could offer our friends and neighbours the far more immediate and practical assistance of allowing them a temporary currency union with sterling , allowing them to treat their loans as being denominated in pounds , and allowing them then to export their way back to growth .
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to emphasise the importance of training .
In other respects , this motion for a resolution is excellent , but I would like to point out that , from the perspective of gender , the EU and other countries involved in these civil crisis management operations would do well to look to the north and learn a lesson from Sweden and Finland too where it concerns training .
I would also like to stress that it is very important that cooperation actually works and that we also conduct surveys and studies on how well these operations have succeeded .
There are still flaws in the system at the moment .

Mr President , I want to explain the reason why I voted against Amendments 30 and 31 to Article 5 of the Gallagher report : for the very simple reason that it would separate the Bay of Biscay TAC from the rest of the area .
The justification was simply that there are many small local fishing boats in that particular region that do not have a big impact on the stocks of mackerel in the waters .
The argument I would make is that every coastal community , virtually in every country , could make the same argument in order to protect the interests of their fishermen .
The Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee does not seem to suggest that we can separate the fish stocks in the waters .
Fish are a transient species , they move around , and this separation is not in accord with the Lisbon Treaty .
The plan for the long-term management of the stocks within the North Atlantic should not be fiddled with .
If we have a common fisheries policy , it should be common for all , no exceptions , no exemptions , and the long-term consequences of this are quite serious .
( ES ) Mr President , I voted in favour of Amendments 30 and 31 , because both the distribution by area of total allowable catches ( TACs ) and the establishment of TACs need to take into account the characteristics and objectives of the different fleets - small-scale and industrial fleets - so that the fishing opportunities that they have had until now can be maintained .
Changing them could mean changes in the fishing framework , and could even cause disputes with local fisheries , which mainly use horse mackerel to provide quality fish to the public .
TACs need to be differentiated by area , both in the case of horse mackerel , and in the case of other fish populations that are also covered by the common fisheries policy .
( PL ) Mr President , the problem of declining fish stocks is affecting not only us Europeans , but also fishermen and consumers throughout the world .
The lack of suitable fishing grounds is a threat to food security .
It may also upset the balance of aquatic ecosystems and , as a result , of the entire environment of our planet .
In relation to climate change , the Baltic Sea is particularly at risk of the disappearance of certain species of fish , and errors in European fisheries legislation , which imposes bans on fishing , are exacerbating this situation .
This is why it is so important to carry out an appropriate revision of the common fisheries policy , which guarantees sustainable fishing in the waters of our region .
I endorsed the report for these reasons .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report .
I , too , am concerned that we need to ensure that fish stocks last and that fishing is genuinely sustainable , in the Baltic Sea region too .
The reduction in fish stocks is currently a major cause for concern .
Here , obviously , the focus was mainly on flounder and turbot , and this was clearly a technical reform in the main , one which was needed when the Treaty of Lisbon had entered into force .
In other words , the old system was being sanctioned .
The scope of this debate should now be widened .
I am concerned about wild salmon stocks , especially in the Baltic region , and I think that we should ensure that these stocks could also be reestablished there and that we should start to give serious attention to making sure that fishing in the Baltic Sea is practised in a sustainable manner .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal that introductions and translocations involving the use of closed aquaculture facilities should be exempted from the permit requirement was bound to be accompanied by a more rigorous definition of the requirements that these facilities must observe .
I therefore lent my full support to the report by Mr Ferreira .
I would nevertheless like to take this opportunity to emphasise the lack of adequate support for scientific research and technological development in the field of native species rearing .
Greater support for this sector is essential to the sustainable development of European agriculture .
Only in this way will we be able to diversify food production and supply , guaranteeing an improvement in quality and greater environmental safety .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the single market is one of the pillars of the European Union .
There is no doubt that , under the same general conditions , enterprises can produce and sell their products and services without public support , but not all sectors and not all areas are operating under conditions of parity .
It is therefore fair , as in this instance , to correct situations of economic disadvantage and allow productive businesses to remain on the market and maintain employment levels , as in Sulcis for example , where 500 families would have found themselves without work , without income and without dignity .
We must realise that when we speak of coal , we are talking about areas that have no alternative to mines and should be allowed the opportunity to adopt production technologies that are competitive and compatible with the free market and with the environment .
Logically , postponing the deadline to 2018 must represent an imperative to ensure that institutions and companies take immediate action to develop technological , financial and environmental compatibility conditions that are in line with the challenges that await us .
( FI ) Mr President , when we speak about State aid , we also need to remember that , in some cases , it can distort competition .
When , in the context of the Single Market , there is talk specifically about coal mines and aid for them , it has to be said that we in Europe should be looking at a more sustainable future .
Coal is now one of the most harmful fossil fuels : it actually kills hundreds of thousands of animals over the course of a year as a result of different emissions .
For that reason , I hope that we in Europe will achieve a situation where we could gradually reduce the use of coal as a source of energy and switch to renewable energy sources .
I understand that it will mean that there will have to be a period of transition of some kind in areas where coal production is closely linked to employment , but basically , we should be moving more in the direction of renewable technology and energy .
( FI ) Mr President , I do not think that the EU should support polluting coal mines .
We should be supporting the acquisition of renewable energy and its production .
We cannot put our foot down on the accelerator and apply the brakes at the same time .
I am with the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe on this matter , but in the final vote , I made a mistake .
I formally corrected it , but I also wanted to say so here .
( PL ) Mr President , I am speaking because Poland is one of those countries which have had to face the biggest problems in terms of a sudden reduction in expenditure and extraction potential in the coal industry .
Ten years ago , we introduced a radical programme of mine closures , but to replace the Polish coal , 10 million tonnes of Russian coal is being imported .
I want to give my assurance that the emission of CO2 from Polish coal is the same as from Russian coal .
However , it is good that we have a national aid programme and that the Commission allows this .
I endorsed this report .
However , I am of the opinion that we do have to maintain a balance .
The objective is not to close mines just for the sake of closing mines ; it is to ensure energy security - and we are treating mines as if they were businesses .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly has succeeded in establishing itself as a key player in international North-South cooperation due to the quality of its work .
Strengthening the parliamentary dimension of cooperation proved essential for the purposes of guaranteeing good deployment of funds , satisfying people 's needs and achieving the Millennium Development Goals with regard to health and education .
Some time ago , the European Commission introduced the practice of subjecting national and regional strategy papers to parliamentary scrutiny by both the European Parliament and national parliaments .
I voted in favour of this report because I intend to support the work carried out to date by this House , a role that is even more important today as we oversee negotiations over economic partnership agreements .
In 2009 , the European Commission submitted , together with the ACP countries , certain proposals for a second review of the partnership agreement and I hope that we can guarantee its survival and development as an essential institution in this process of cooperation and democratisation of the rest of the world .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mrs Joly on her report .
Today , we inhabit a world where human history seems to be travelling along separate tracks .
In some continents , the days are spent basking in the light of innovation , technology and objective wellbeing while , in others , people spend their hours , from dawn to dusk , in a desperate search for the minimal means of survival .
In 2009 , the Joint Parliamentary Assembly strove actively to ensure that its numerous proposals could be translated into substantial commitments and goals to be achieved .
The European Union proved itself resolved to undertake timely , targeted and coordinated action to support the hardest hit countries , particularly the poorest and most vulnerable .
On 1 December , the twentieth ACP-EU plenary session will be held in Kinshasa .
During this , an important report on the Millennium Development Goals will be discussed .
As rapporteur and also deputy chair of the assembly , I will be fully committed to ensuring that the measures adopted are not empty words but become a solid commitment to continuing along the path towards a fairer world and , above all , a world without poverty .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly has proved itself an essential tool for building an open and democratic dialogue , successfully involving ACP national parliaments , local authorities and non-governmental organisations .
I agree on the general approach of the report , and consider the invitation to the Commission to provide greater information to the parliaments of ACP countries to be particularly useful .
It is essential to actively involve these parliaments in preparing national development strategies .
I give my support to Mrs Joly .
Before we can talk about establishing a tax on international financial transactions , though , we need to carry out a study on its potential impact .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of the Stockholm Programme adopted by the European Council in December last year , is to create a European space of freedom , safety and justice , to be achieved over the next five years , with the aim of ensuring that citizens can enjoy all their fundamental rights .
The ultimate aim of Union law must therefore be to facilitate mobility and to guarantee that these same citizens can create a European judicial space as quickly as possible .
The action plan proposed by the European Commission envisages a set of measures that stem from the new instruments made available by the Treaty of Lisbon for the purposes of reconciling the needs of citizens of the single market with the different judicial traditions of Member States .
I voted in favour of this report because , having stated the necessary premises , it calls on Member States to commit themselves actively to its implementation , emphasising the sectors that must be treated as a priority , namely , civil aspects , mutual recognition of official documents and judgments , a common framework of reference , debtors ' assets and common judicial training
I emphasise once again my conviction that the European Parliament must be associated with this process of harmonisation after a careful examination of the legal systems in force at national level .
Nowadays , the harmonisation of legal systems and the respective scope of civil and criminal law on numerous matters is correlated with and has become an integral part of discussions in international trade negotiations because it raises a set of legal questions that have not yet been resolved .
( NL ) Mr President , European cooperation in the area of freedom , security and justice ( AFSJ ) remains a sensitive issue and one which needs to be addressed carefully .
Cooperation between judicial authorities may be necessary in order to prevent crime and bring justice and legal certainty to the European internal market .
However , cooperation within the framework of AFSJ carries with it the hidden risk that Europe will occupy itself with matters which actually fall within national competence .
Paragraph 40 of the Berlinguer report emphasises mutual recognition of marriage and family law without any reference to Article 81 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
This article states that each Member State shall remain sovereign in matters of family law with cross-border implications .
I have declined to endorse this report , both because this European principle has not been explicitly observed and because the European Conservatives and Reformists ' amendment in that regard has been rejected .
( SK ) Mr President , I abstained from the vote because I am not convinced that Member State subsidiarity is respected in the area of family law .
The European Union must fully respect the division of powers between the Union and the Member States when creating legislation .
For this reason , I fully support an approach which consistently takes account of the various legal approaches and constitutional traditions based on the specific conditions of individual states , particularly in areas relating to the fundamental values of a given society , such as the values embodied in family law legislation .
The aim of the EU approach should be to better understand and secure the needs of all citizens in all states , and not to create some kind of monochrome society .
It is therefore essential not to overstep by force the necessary framework of the measure , which might threaten the fundamental values of the Member States in specific areas of civil and family law .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to say that coal is a raw material which is very important for the welfare of society and energy security .
Despite research which has been carried out and despite the search for alternative energy sources , demand for coal continues to rise .
It is obvious , therefore , that efforts should be made to ensure permanent access to coal reserves .
However , when a mine becomes unprofitable , keeping it in operation with the use of State aid upsets the market , interferes with competitiveness and destabilises , as a result , the economy of the country concerned .
What is needed , therefore , is suitable legislation enabling the effective and also the safe closure of such a mine .
The draft regulation ensures achievement of these objectives , guaranteeing to maintain the competitiveness of the energy market and to stimulate the development of closely related industries .
Needless to say , I endorsed the report .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the report by my German colleague , Mr Böge , on the proposal for a decision on mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund to the tune of EUR 13 million in order to help Ireland , which was hit by serious floods in November 2009 .
The amount of aid seems derisory to me ( 2.5 % of an estimated EUR 500 million of total damage ) , and it has come far too late .
I suggest that we ask ourselves whether , rather than granting derisory sums , we ought not to use part of them to finance a European civil protection force to come to the aid of States that are stricken by disasters that they are not equipped to deal with ( fires , floods , natural disasters , cross-border disasters , and so on ) , or to carry out international cooperation efforts in the event of serious disasters such as that which occurred in Haiti , for example .
I strongly agree with what the report says about supporting the Commission 's decision to allocate EUR 13.02 million from the EU Solidarity Fund for the benefit of Ireland in order to restore infrastructure and to implement flood prevention measures in affected areas .
The floods in Ireland in November 2009 did considerable damage to homes , farms , businesses , infrastructure , roads and water sources in affected areas .
This money from the Commission will help defray some of the costs that arose at the time of the crisis .
The extent to which this money is directed to investment for putting measures in place to prevent flooding in the areas concerned is also extremely important .
I voted to provide funds from the EU Solidarity Fund to Ireland .
In 2009 , heavy rain led to severe flooding which caused serious damage to the agricultural sector , residential properties and businesses , to the road network and other infrastructure .
Support for Ireland was approved by way of exception because the extent of the damage caused by the floods did not meet Solidarity Fund requirements .
With the changing climate in Europe and throughout the world , there is an increasing number of natural disasters resulting in loss of human life and major damage .
The European Union must therefore establish measures to provide the required funding in a timely manner when such disasters occur .
In its March resolution , the European Parliament clearly expressed its position that in order to solve the problems caused by natural disasters more effectively , there needs to be a new Solidarity Fund regulation .
I believe that the review of the regulation must aim to establish a stronger and more flexible measure , the application of which would enable us to react more effectively to the new challenges of climate change and to swiftly deliver aid to the victims of natural disasters .
in writing . - Considering the illegitimacy , undemocratic structure , corruption and megalomaniac ulterior motivation of the European Union in general and the Commission , in particular , we of the UKIP cannot condone the Commission 's monopolisation of public funds for any purpose whatever and believe , consequently , that any monies it directs to the repair of last year 's flood damage in Ireland will not be properly used and will merely conceal the need for relief funding that is correctly disbursed and directed by democratically elected governments .
The European Union Solidarity Fund , which is intended to help countries forced to cope with natural disasters , has been mobilised 33 times since its creation eight years ago .
It has proved its usefulness , and mobilising it for the November 2009 floods in Ireland , which everyone remembers , is , in my view , entirely justified .
in writing . - ( BG ) I would like to explain why I voted in favour of this proposal .
I believe it absolutely necessary for us to show understanding towards problems such as this , as something like this could happen to any one of us .
By acting in this way , we show our unity and empathy at times of natural disasters .
I am certain that our aid will be spent in the best way possible and will help overcome the consequences of the flooding in Ireland .
I regard Ireland 's application for assistance from the Solidarity Fund following the torrential rain which led to major flooding in November 2009 as important and welcome .
The flooding caused severe damage to the agricultural sector , residential properties and businesses , to the road network and other infrastructures .
Overall , I voted in favour of this report , given that Ireland has submitted a request for assistance and the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund to respond to a disaster caused by severe flooding in November 2009 , and due to the fact that this flooding caused considerable damage to many homes , farms , roads and water supply networks , and that the financial aid provided under the fund will enable the Irish authorities to recoup some of the costs incurred in responding to the emergency .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund in favour of Ireland following the floods that caused severe damage to the agricultural sector , homes and businesses , the road network and other infrastructure .
Although the total losses remain below the normal threshold , the request made by Ireland falls under the criterion of ' extraordinary regional disaster ' , which sets out the conditions for mobilising the Solidarity Fund ' under exceptional circumstances ' .
It would be desirable for the Council to unblock the new regulation on the Solidarity Fund , which has been approved by Parliament .
As I stated previously , I believe that solidarity among EU Member States and , in particular , European support for states affected by disasters , is a clear sign that the EU is no longer just a free trade area .
At a time when many are questioning the soundness of our joint project , special aid instruments such as the European Union Solidarity Fund show that we are capable of remaining united in adversity , even in situations that place high demands on human and material resources .
The floods that took place in November 2009 seriously affected Ireland and caused severe damage estimated at more than EUR 520 million .
I therefore believe that the mobilisation of the fund is fully justified in order to help those who have suffered most from this natural disaster , and I congratulate the chair of the Committee on Regional Development for the speed with which she issued its opinion , thereby avoiding undue delays in the parliamentary procedure .
This report allows for the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( ESF ) to help Ireland address the disaster caused by heavy rain and flooding in 2009 . This flooding caused severe damage to the agricultural sector , homes and businesses , the road network and other infrastructure .
Although the total losses remain below the normal threshold , the request made by Ireland falls under the criterion of ' extraordinary regional disaster ' , which sets out the conditions for mobilising the Solidarity Fund ' under exceptional circumstances ' .
The report approves the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( ESF ) to help Ireland tackle the disaster caused by rain and floods in 2009 .
In recent years , EU Member States have been hit by a considerable number of disasters .
Over the first six years of the ESF , the Commission received 62 requests for financial support from 21 different countries .
Of these , approximately one third came under the category of ' major disasters ' .
Many of these requests did not receive any support .
Other disasters did not result in requests to deploy the fund , although they had a considerable and , in many cases , long-lasting impact on the people affected , the environment and the economy .
The rules for mobilising this fund need to be adapted to allow more flexible and timely mobilisation , addressing a wider range of disasters with significant impacts and reducing the time that elapses between the disaster and the point at which the funds are made available .
Yet it is also important to point out that in the first place , there must be a commitment to preventing disasters , putting into practice the recommendations recently approved by Parliament .
I welcome the decision of the European Parliament to approve the Irish Government 's application for financial help from the EU Solidarity Fund for flood relief .
The floods in Ireland caused great damage in the country , especially in the Northwest .
Under the EU Solidarity Fund , Ireland will receive EUR 13 million .
This money will be used to cover some of the cost which local authorities had to pay at the time of the crisis at the end of 2009 .
The total cost of the damage done is EUR 520.9 million , and - believe it or not - that amount is below the threshold in force under the Solidarity Fund .
The European Commission gave its approval to the EUR 13 million going to Ireland , however , because the Commission recognised that the flooding that hit Ireland at the end of 2009 was a unique regional disaster .
in writing . - I was pleased to support this proposal and would like to express my country 's appreciation for the solidarity funding allocated to our country as a result of November 2009 flooding .
I attended a Floods Forum in Ireland last week and there were many expressions of gratitude when I mentioned it was to be voted in Parliament today .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Solidarity Fund .
I believe , in fact , that the fund is a valuable tool for enabling the European Union to show solidarity with the populations of regions affected by natural disasters , by providing financial support to help ensure a swift return to normal living conditions .
The application approved during today 's vote was made by Ireland , and it concerns the heavy rain that caused severe flooding in November 2009 .
The flooding caused severe damage to the agricultural sector , residential properties and businesses , the road network and other infrastructure .
The Irish authorities estimate the total direct damage caused by the disaster at EUR 520.9 million .
Although this is below the threshold provided for by the regulation , the Commission examined the application on the basis of the so-called ' extraordinary regional disaster ' criterion .
Under this criterion , a region can benefit from assistance from the fund where that region has been affected by a natural disaster , mainly a natural one , affecting the majority of its population , with serious and lasting repercussions for living conditions and the economic stability of the region .
Lastly , I would add that the fund has been mobilised for a total amount of EUR 13 022 500 .
in writing . - I welcome this report agreeing to release EU funds to assist the victims of flooding in Ireland .
Ireland applied for assistance from the European Solidarity Fund following heavy rain which led to severe flooding in November 2009 .
The flooding caused damage to the agricultural sector , residential properties , businesses and road networks and infrastructures .
After evaluation of the application , the Commission has proposed to mobilise the EU Solidarity Fund for a total amount of EUR 13 022 500 .
It is worth noting that this is the first agreed proposal to mobilise funds in 2010 and the amount proposed will leave at least 98 % of the European Solidarity Fund available for allocation in the rest of 2010 .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and the victims of the relocations that occur in a globalised world .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of businesses , and it is crucial in facilitating their access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has been used by other EU countries in the past , and it is now right to give this assistance to Ireland , which has submitted a request for assistance from the fund following heavy rains that caused flooding in November 2009 . The flooding caused severe damage to the agricultural sector , homes and businesses , the road network and other infrastructure .
In recent years , we have seen an increasing number of environmental disasters .
In particular , heavy rainfall has frequently caused floods which have devastating consequences for the environment and result in damage that costs huge amounts of money to rectify .
The European Union Solidarity Fund is being mobilised to repair the damage caused by the floods in Ireland in 2009 ( to the agricultural sector , housing , businesses , the road network and other infrastructure ) .
The overall cost of the damage which is a direct result of the disaster is estimated to be around EUR 520 million .
The contribution of EUR 13 million from the EU budget will help with the reconstruction work .
I have voted in favour of providing this support .
The Commission did well to mobilise EUR 13 022 500 of the Solidarity Fund with the parallel submission of a draft amending budget ( DAB No 8 / 2010 ) following the application for assistance submitted by Ireland in connection with the flood of November 2009 , which caused massive damage to the national infrastructure amounting to some EUR 520.9 million .
National disasters and calamities must be a priority and I hope that in the future , the European Commission will take prompter , more immediate action .
The Irish floods took place in November 2009 and Parliament did not give its approval until today , more than one year after the event .
The Veneto region has recently experienced a flood and I very much hope that the Commission 's action will be speedier and more timely than in the past .
I voted in favour of Mr Böge 's report because I believe that the European Union has a duty to provide help and support to regions affected by natural disasters and catastrophes .
I believe that the concept of solidarity is connected to the idea and values underpinning the European Union .
It is one of the core values that brought the Union into being and ensured that it prospered and enlarged over time .
This is the reason why this allocation is not only justified and well founded but practically a duty .
I therefore hope that such assistance will also be provided to the Italian regions severely affected by the recent floods , which brought local economies to their knees .
I agree with Mr Böge , whom I congratulate , on the need to mobilise the European Solidarity Fund in favour of Ireland on the basis of point 26 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 March 2006 .
The latter allows the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund within the annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
This is the first proposal to mobilise the fund in 2010 .
I support and emphasise the rapporteur 's recommendations to the Commission and , given the difficult economic situation in Europe and , in particular , in Ireland , I agree that we must show solidarity .
Lastly , I should like to stress here that , given that there has also been a disaster in northern Italy , we must take immediate action to help those stricken regions , too .
in writing . - We have supported this resolution based on the fact that the Commission proposes to mobilise the European Solidarity Fund in favour of Ireland on the basis of point 26 of the interinstitutional agreement ( IIA ) of 17 May 2006 .
The IIA allows the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund within the annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
This proposal is the first proposal to mobilise the Solidarity Fund in 2010 .
In parallel to this proposal , the Commission has presented a draft amending budget ( DAB No 8 / 2010 of 24 September 2010 ) in order to enter in the 2010 budget the corresponding commitment and payment appropriations as foreseen in point 26 of the IIA .
Ireland applied for assistance from the fund following heavy rain leading to severe flooding in November 2009 .
The flooding caused severe damage to the agricultural sector , residential properties and businesses , to the road network and to other infrastructure .
The present proposal on mobilisation of the European Solidarity Fund ( ESF ) states the need to provide aid to Ireland due to the floods of November 2009 , which caused huge losses in the agricultural and industrial sector , in infrastructure , particularly roads and water supply , and in residential areas .
In view of this , and recalling the disaster that struck the island of Madeira in February 2010 and the effects of the Xynthia windstorm on Europe , I welcome the Commission 's proposal to grant a total of EUR 13 022 500 in aid to Ireland , based on the ' extraordinary regional disaster ' criterion .
This criterion is used whenever it is shown that the damage caused has affected the majority of the region 's population and that it has had serious and lasting repercussions on living conditions and economic stability in the region in question .
However , I would like to reiterate the need to review the current ESF system in order to make it swifter and more effective in mitigating the permanent effects of natural disasters .
in writing . - I have voted in support of the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund : Ireland - floods in November 2009 .
As was the case in my home country of Poland , ravaging floods have torn apart so many communities and families that it is vital to lend support to our friends in Ireland .
The funds will come from the Solidarity Fund , which is allocated for major catastrophes such as this .
The funds will go to those communities that were hit the hardest and lend support to those families and business that were most affected by these floods and assist them with rebuilding and recovering some of the revenue lost because of the devastation of their businesses .
It is important that the EU continues to support its Member States in their time of need and truly invokes the idea of solidarity .
As a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I simply had to vote in favour of the six resolutions tabled by Mrs Matera in order to help Dutch workers made redundant as a direct result of the global economic crisis .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is an effective tool that is focused on the long-term reintegration of workers suffering from the harmful effects of globalisation .
I therefore believe that the use of this tool , in specific cases , is entirely justified .
During the discussions on the budget , some people wanted the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to be immediately scrapped : we can see in this instance that it is still very useful in certain cases , since the consequences of the global crisis are still being felt today .
Here is the explanation of my vote .
Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of 821 redundancies in 70 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Nord Brabant and Zuid Holland , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree with the request to the institutions involved in the process to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( ESF ) .
Aid to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation must be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In the light of the structural changes in international trade , it is vital that the European economy is able to effectively implement the instruments to support workers affected in this way , and to retrain them with a view to assisting their swift reintegration into the labour market .
Financial assistance should therefore be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities that normally belong to the companies , nor is it intended for the funding and restructuring of companies .
I am voting in favour of this report , given the request by the Netherlands for assistance in respect of 821 redundancies in 70 enterprises operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the regions of Nord Brabant and Zuid Holland .
821 redundancies in 70 companies in the graphics sector in the Nord Brabant and Zuid Holland regions of the Netherlands show that the global economic and financial crisis does not spare sectors which , at first glance , appear to be more sheltered from its effects .
This hints at the worrying reduction in the number of printing and publishing companies in the Netherlands and , consequently , the very downturn in the economy as a whole .
The European Commission deemed this request for printing and recorded media reproduction companies justifiable , and was backed overwhelmingly by the relevant parliamentary committee .
I therefore believe that all the conditions are present to enable me to support the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in this case .
I hope that this temporary support will help redundant workers to integrate more successfully into the labour market .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , the proper use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , developing a new , qualified workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
This plan for intervention in the Netherlands to help 821 people made redundant from 70 companies operating in the regions of Nord Brabant and Zuid Holland falls within the same framework .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects in implementing measures that speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
Six more applications have been made to mobilise the Solidarity Fund , corresponding to the closure of hundreds more companies in Europe .
Altogether , more than 3 000 workers have been made redundant .
Initial estimates as to the number of people who would benefit from the fund at the time of its creation have long been exceeded .
Above and beyond the systematic mobilisation of this instrument , what is needed is a clear break with the neoliberal policies that are causing an economic and social disaster within the countries of the European Union before our very eyes .
Palliatives are indeed needed for the disaster , but the causes need to be addressed first of all .
Every new application to mobilise this fund increases the urgency of the measures that we have been advocating , which are aimed at fighting unemployment effectively , boosting economic activity , eradicating jobs with no security , and reducing working hours without cutting pay .
These are measures that also combat the relocation of companies .
Finally , as on other occasions , we cannot omit to point out the injustice of a regulation that offers greater benefit to countries with higher incomes , particularly those with higher levels of salaries and unemployment support .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of the Netherlands because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 821 workers made redundant by 70 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Nord Brabant and Zuid Holland , amounting to a sum of EUR 2 890 027 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which backs a Commission proposal to mobilise EUR 2 890 027 from the European Globalisation Fund in order to support the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant as a result of the economic crisis .
This application concerns 821 redundancies in 70 enterprises ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) over a nine month period .
The European Globalisation Fund was created to help mitigate such unfortunate events .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and the victims of the relocations that occur in a globalised world .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of businesses , and it is crucial in facilitating their access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is now appropriate to provide aid to the Netherlands , which has submitted a request for assistance in respect of 821 redundancies in 70 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Nord Brabant and Zuid Holland .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was set up with the purpose of supporting the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant due to the current process of world market globalisation .
EGF aid applications are evaluated by the Commission , which , in this case , was in favour of the eligibility application .
Now , the approval of the budget authority is required .
The application examined by the report , which is the nineteenth during the 2010 budget , refers to EGF mobilisation for a sum of EUR 453 632 ( we note that the annual fund must not exceed EUR 500 million ) requested by the Netherlands for 140 redundancies in the press sector in the Drenthe region .
The economic crisis is putting many companies in difficulty and more and more employees are losing their jobs .
We must protect these workers .
My vote could not be anything else but in favour .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund would benefit 70 different enterprises and save 821 jobs .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
Once again , we find ourselves in this Chamber to approve an exceptional allocation within our own borders .
Only , in today 's sitting , we are approving six allocations .
I say this with regret , since this type of measure is associated with crisis situations and with a series of problems that have repercussions for the economy , the labour market , workers and their families .
Fortunately , however , we have this resource available to us .
It is precisely in these kinds of situations that the European Union demonstrates its values and the qualities that set it apart .
European solidarity and the defence of European needs are values that must be safeguarded and protected .
This is the message that Parliament and the European Union wish to convey , and I hope that there will be greater sensitivity in the transmission of that message , not least to combat lazy anti-European demagogy and to show , instead , just how essential support and assistance at European level really are .
The request submitted by the Netherlands for assistance under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in relation to 821 redundancies from 70 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Nord Brabant and Zuid Holland fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .

In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily widened to include its intervention in situations like this , in which , as a direct result of the global economic and financial crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , and I hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will contribute to the successful integration of these workers into the labour market .
I voted for the European Parliament resolution on the mobilisation of the EGF for granting aid to the redundant workers .
In December 2009 , the Netherlands submitted a request for assistance to use the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in connection with the redundancies which were made in eight regions , in enterprises operating in the graphics sector .
The application concerns 821 redundancies made in 70 enterprises involved in printing and the reproduction of recorded media .
The redundancies were made in the period between 1 April and 29 December 2009 in the two contiguous regions of Nord Brabant and Zuid Holland .
The economic and financial crisis has also caused a drop in demand in the printing and publishing sector of about 32 % for printed advertising material and of between 7.5 % and 18.2 % for magazines and newspapers .
The printing and publishing industry in the Netherlands went through a major restructuring process in order to be able to continue to compete with similar sectors in Turkey , China and India .
I believe that the procedure for allocating these funds must be simplified to facilitate the affected enterprises ' access to the EGF .
Here is the explanation of my vote .
Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of 140 redundancies in two companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the NUTS II region of Drenthe , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree that EGF aid is not a replacement for actions that are the responsibility of firms under national legislation or collective agreements , nor does it finance the restructuring of firms or sectors .
Despite lending my support to all the requests to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund presented by the Netherlands concerning the severe wave of redundancies which has plagued two areas of the graphics sector - printing and reproduction of recorded media and publishing - I believe that the Dutch authorities could provide more details about the scope of the measures and their accuracy , so as to allow these measures to be assessed more effectively .
I hope that the sector can recover and that the redundant workers , particularly the older ones , are able to rebuild their lives and resume their place in the labour market .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , the proper use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , developing a new , qualified workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
This plan for intervention in the Netherlands to help 140 people made redundant from two companies in Drenthe falls within the same framework .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects in implementing measures that speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of the Netherlands because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 140 workers made redundant by two companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the NUTS II region of Drenthe , amounting to a sum of EUR 453 632 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which backs an application to mobilise the European Globalisation Fund concerning 140 redundancies in 2 enterprises ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) over a nine month period in the Drenthe Division in the Netherlands .
It forms part of a package of six interrelated applications dealing with redundancies in eight different regions of the Netherlands .
There has been a substantial decrease in demand in the printing and publishing sector due to the economic crisis .
I welcome the solidarity we are showing with the workers facing a difficult time .
I voted for Barbara Matera 's draft reports on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for the benefit of the Netherlands , as I think that the European Union must offer support to redundant workers , providing them with dynamic , efficient financial assistance .
Against the backdrop of the current economic and social crisis , our actions must be targeted at granting aid to those who need it .
We are all aware that the priority must be to protect EU citizens from the effects of globalisation and economic recession .
I think that the Union can make a significant contribution to combating the impact of the economic crisis and reducing unemployment among its citizens .
On this occasion , I would like to draw attention to the fact that EU Member States can and must ask for the aid granted by the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
In this context , I want to point out that my country , Romania , exemplifies the spirit of solidarity in the European Union in crisis situations , whether we are talking about Greece , the Netherlands etc . , as confirmation of the fact that we are , together , one big family : the Family of a United Europe .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and the victims of the relocations that occur in a globalised world .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of businesses , and it is crucial in facilitating their access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is now appropriate to provide this aid to the Netherlands , which has submitted a request for assistance in respect of 140 redundancies in two companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the NUTS II region of Drenthe .
in writing . - ( DE ) Growing numbers of people are being made unemployed as a result of globalisation measures .
In the nine-month reference period from 1 April 2009 to 29 December 2009 , there were 140 redundancies in two companies in the Dutch region of Drenthe .
Now , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is being mobilised to provide a contribution of EUR 453 632 .
I have voted in favour of the report , because it allows the EGF to fulfil its obligations .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund would benefit two different enterprises and save 140 jobs .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
This application is based on Article 2 ( c ) of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) Regulation , and is part of a larger package of six interrelated applications , all of which concern redundancies in eight different NUTS II regions in the Netherlands from companies operating in the graphics sector , which has been hard hit by the global economic and financial crisis .
More specifically , this concerns 140 redundancies from two companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the NUTS II region of Drenthe , a province which is facing a very difficult situation , both because it has the third highest unemployment rate in the Netherlands ( 7.5 % ) and because it has a per capita income that is significantly below the national average .
I therefore believe that in this case , all the conditions are met for the mobilisation of the EGF , and I hope that the assistance will be made available to the redundant workers swiftly and efficiently .
Here is the explanation of my vote .
Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of 129 redundancies in nine companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the NUTS II region of Limburg , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree with the Commission 's proposal of an alternative to unused European Social Fund resources as a source of payment appropriations for mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created separately as a specific instrument , with its own objectives and deadlines , and that it is therefore necessary to identify appropriate budget headings for transfers .
The field of printing and reproduction of recorded media , which forms part of the graphics sector , has been particularly eroded in the Netherlands , as shown by the various applications to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
The region of Drenthe , which has the third highest unemployment rate in the country , has not remained immune to this trend .
It is worth emphasising the need for this fund to be mobilised quickly and effectively , without excessive red tape , so as to contribute to better training for the workers made redundant , and thus facilitating their reintegration into the labour market in better conditions than those in which they left .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , the proper use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , developing a new , qualified workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
This plan for intervention in the Netherlands to help 129 people made redundant from 9 companies operating in the region of Limburg falls within the same framework .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects in implementing measures that speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of the Netherlands because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 129 workers made redundant by nine companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the NUTS II region of Limburg , amounting to a sum of EUR 549 946 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - I support this measure of European solidarity with the 129 workers in 9 enterprises ( printing and reproduction ) who are facing redundancy .
The EUR 549 946 will offer some assistance to them in being reintegrated into the labour market .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and the victims of the relocations that occur in a globalised world .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of businesses , and it is crucial in facilitating their access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is now appropriate to provide aid to the Netherlands , which has submitted a request for assistance in respect of 129 redundancies in nine companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the NUTS II region of Limburg .
The far-reaching effects of globalisation are resulting in more and more people losing their jobs .
Redundancies are becoming increasingly common .
Between 1 April 2009 and 29 December 2009 , 129 workers were made redundant by a machinery and equipment manufacturer in Limburg in the Netherlands .
Now an application has been made to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for a contribution of EUR 549 946 to help those affected .
I have voted in favour of the report which will prevent those people who have been made redundant from suffering further financial problems .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund can save 129 jobs in nine different enterprises .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
This application is based on Article 2 ( c ) of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) Regulation , and is part of a larger package of six interrelated applications , all of which concern redundancies in eight different NUTS II regions in the Netherlands from companies operating in the graphics sector , which has been hard hit by the global economic and financial crisis .
More specifically , this concerns 129 redundancies from nine companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the NUTS II region of Limburg , a province which is facing a very difficult situation , both because it has the second highest unemployment rate in the Netherlands ( 8 % ) and because it has a per capita income that is significantly below the national average .
I therefore believe that in this case , all the conditions are met for the mobilisation of the EGF , and I hope that the assistance will be made available to the redundant workers swiftly and efficiently .
Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of 650 redundancies in 45 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Overijssel , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree with Parliament 's position regretting the severe shortcomings of the Commission in implementing programmes on competitiveness and innovation , particularly during this economic crisis , which is significantly increasing the need for such support .
650 workers have lost their jobs at 45 companies within the field of printing and reproduction of recorded media in the graphics sector , in the Dutch regions of Gelderland and Overijssel , adding their difficult situation to that of other workers and companies all over the country .
Faced with all the applications made for mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , it is important to ascertain how the workers will be guided and the extent to which new jobs and incentives for starting self-employment are sustainable , or whether they will run the same risks as those who have failed at doing so .
Inventiveness and entrepreneurship have long been characteristic qualities of Dutch society , and they deserve to be remembered and revived in the hard times that we are experiencing .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , the proper use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , developing a new , qualified workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
This plan for intervention in the Netherlands to help 650 people made redundant from 45 companies operating in the regions of Gelderland and Overijssel falls within the same framework .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects in implementing measures that speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of the Netherlands because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 650 workers made redundant by 45 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Overijssel , amounting to a sum of EUR 2 013 619 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - I welcome the report , which backs plans to release EUR 2 013 619 to help workers in Overijssel made redundant due to the downturn in the printing industry .
This support from the European Globalisation Fund should help reintegrate the workers into the labour market and I am pleased to see European solidarity in operation .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and the victims of the relocations that occur in a globalised world .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of businesses , and it is crucial in facilitating their access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is now appropriate to provide aid to the Netherlands , which has submitted a request for assistance in respect of cases concerning 650 redundancies in 45 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Overijssel .
In the nine-month reference period from 1 April 2009 to 29 December 2009 , 650 workers were made redundant by 45 companies in the two Dutch regions of Gelderland and Overijssel .
The redundancies were the consequence of the economic crisis and of structural changes in world trade patterns .
In order to improve the future prospects of people who have lost their jobs , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created , with annual funding of EUR 500 million , to intervene in cases such as these .
I have voted in favour of the report , because the redundant workers deserve the support of the EGF .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund can save 650 jobs in 45 different enterprises .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
The request submitted by the Netherlands for assistance under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in relation to 650 redundancies from 45 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Overijssel fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily widened to include its intervention in situations like this , in which , as a direct result of the global economic and financial crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , and I hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will contribute to the successful integration of these workers into the labour market .
Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of 720 redundancies in 79 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Noord Holland and Utrecht , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree with the Commission 's proposal of an alternative to unused European Social Fund resources as a source of payment appropriations for mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created separately as a specific instrument , with its own objectives and deadlines , and that it is therefore necessary to identify appropriate budget headings for transfers .
The crisis in the graphics sector in the Netherlands has affected a number of the country 's regions , including Noord Holland and Utrecht .
In this case , there were 720 redundancies in 79 enterprises .
This is one of six applications that have been submitted by the Netherlands and have merited the support of the European Commission and the Committee on Budgets .
I , too , support it , and hope that the sector is able to reorganise itself and that the redundant workers can find new jobs , whether in the same area of printing and reproduction of recorded media , or in others to which they are or could become suited .
The awarded support could be a step towards this .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , the proper use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , developing a new , qualified workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
This plan for intervention in the Netherlands to help 720 people made redundant from 79 companies operating in the regions of Noord Holland and Utrecht falls within the same framework .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects in implementing measures that speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
This is one of the reports on the six applications by the Netherlands for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in order to support the reintegration in the labour market of workers made redundant as a result of the economic and financial crisis .
There are some specific aspects of these six applications that is important to point out , in addition to the delay in the process of approval by the European Commission , which , however , is now the norm unfortunately .
These specific aspects refer to the content of these six applications , all of which concern redundancies in eight different regions of the Netherlands , in small companies of the graphics sector , specifically , printing and reproduction of recorded media and publishing activities .
This time , a total of EUR 2 266 625 of the EGF has been mobilised for the benefit of the Netherlands .
We have here a case of coincidental timing : Parliament has been asked to give its opinion today on six requests for European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) assistance that have been submitted by the Netherlands while , at the same time , the 2011 budget negotiations are stalling because of the refusal by the Netherlands and by two other Member States to engage in a responsible and constructive dialogue on the future of the European budget .
Today 's votes are therefore , in my view , an opportunity to point out that the European budget is not just an accounting tool that everyone finds daunting : it is , first and foremost , the ' power ' behind the European Union that enables it to work day in day out to protect its citizens , and particularly through the EGF , to protect unemployed workers .
The vote on the allocation of EGF aid to the Dutch workers could have been used as a ' protest vote ' against the Dutch Government , which is criticising on the one hand what it is benefiting from on the other .
Instead , it has been an opportunity for Parliament to recall that the principle of solidarity must be the foundation on which all EU decisions are made .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of the Netherlands because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 720 workers made redundant by 79 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two NUTS II regions of Noord Holland and Utrecht , amounting to a sum of EUR 2 266 625 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - I am pleased that EUR 2 266 625 has been made available through the European Globalisation Fund in order to support the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant in the printing industry due to the global economic crisis .
This application concerns 720 redundancies in 79 enterprises in the Noord Holland and Utrecht Division of the Netherlands .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and the victims of the relocations that occur in a globalised world .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of businesses , and it is crucial in facilitating their access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is now appropriate to provide aid to the Netherlands , which has submitted a request for assistance in respect of 720 redundancies in 79 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Noord Holland and Utrecht .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund would benefit 79 different enterprises and save 720 jobs .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
The request submitted by the Netherlands for assistance under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in relation to 720 redundancies from 79 companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Noord Holland and Utrecht fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily widened to include its intervention in situations like this , in which , as a direct result of the global economic and financial crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , and I hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will contribute to the successful integration of these workers into the labour market .
Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of 598 redundancies in eight companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 58 ( publishing activities ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Noord Holland and Zuid Holland , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree with the request to the institutions involved in the process to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( ESF ) .
Anyone who monitors the numbers and geographical distribution of redundancies in the graphics sector in the Netherlands , which are the reason for the various applications to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , will surely be alarmed to see how numerous and widespread they are .
In the contiguous regions of Noord Holland and Zuid Holland alone , 598 workers lost their jobs in publishing over a period of just nine months .
Competition with third countries , along with the financial and economic crisis ravaging the whole of Europe , is a crucial factor in what has been happening , making it clear that solutions need to be sought to people 's immediate problems : their reintegration into the labour market , and their medium- and long-term subsistence .
The EGF has a palliative role and can serve as a stimulus , but it is manifestly insufficient to solve the serious problems affecting so many families on its own .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , the proper application of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , developing a new , qualified workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
This plan for intervention in the Netherlands to help 598 people made redundant from 8 companies operating in the regions of Noord Holland and Zuid Holland falls within the same framework .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects in implementing measures that speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of the Netherlands because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 598 workers made redundant by eight companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 58 ( publishing activities ) in the two NUTS II regions of Noord Holland and Zuid Holland , amounting to a sum of EUR 2 326 459 financed by the EGF .
Lastly , I must emphasise that today 's adoption of the six reports shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - I welcome this report and the support the European Globalisation Fund is giving to workers made redundant .
This proposal is for EUR 2 326 459 to assist 598 workers , from 8 enterprises in the printing and reproduction media , who are losing their jobs because of the economic crisis .
This is an important example of European solidarity .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and the victims of the relocations that occur in a globalised world .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of businesses , and it is crucial in facilitating their access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is now appropriate to provide aid to the Netherlands , which has submitted a request for assistance in respect of 598 redundancies in eight companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 58 ( publishing activities ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Noord Holland and Zuid Holland .
During the nine-month reference period from 1 April 2009 to 29 December 2009 , there were 598 redundancies in a total of eight companies in Noord Holland and Zuid Holland .
Each one of these workers was a victim of globalisation .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was established to cushion the impact of social injustices of this kind .
I have voted in favour of the report , because all the requirements for the mobilisation of the EGF have been met .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund would benefit eight different enterprises and save 598 jobs .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
The request submitted by the Netherlands for assistance under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in relation to 598 redundancies from eight companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 58 ( publishing activities ) in the two contiguous NUTS II regions of Noord Holland and Zuid Holland fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily widened to include its intervention in situations like this , in which , as a direct result of the global economic and financial crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , and I hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will contribute to the successful integration of these workers into the labour market .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) receives annual funding of EUR 500 million with the aim of providing financial support to workers affected by major structural changes in world trade patterns .
Estimates indicate that between 35 000 and 50 000 employees could benefit from this support each year .
The money can be used to pay for help in finding new jobs , tailor-made training , assistance in becoming self-employed or starting up a company , mobility and support for disadvantaged or older workers .
I have voted in favour of the report , because the mobilisation of the funding is fully justified .
Regarding the request submitted by the Netherlands for assistance in relation to 140 redundancies from two companies in NACE Revision 2 Division 18 ( printing and reproduction of recorded media ) in the region of Drenthe , I refer to all the arguments set out in my declaration of vote regarding report to justify my vote in favour of this report .
I abstained on all of Mrs Matera 's reports on mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to help various Dutch regions , not because I oppose these plans , but to issue a warning to the Dutch Government , which has a populist and anti-European policy .
The Netherlands is opposed to increasing the European budget but has no qualms about accepting European aid .
What is more , the Netherlands is the main beneficiary , after Germany , of the internal market .
It is time Dutch politics returned to their roots .
The Netherlands is , after all , one of the founder members of the EU .
in writing . - As on several occasions in the past , we have supported this text which : 1 .
Requests the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF ; 2 .
Recalls the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have suffered redundancies as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis ; emphasises the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market ; 3 . Stresses that , in accordance with Article 6 of the EGF Regulation , it should be ensured that the EGF supports the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment ; reiterates that assistance from the EGF must not replace actions which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor measures restructuring companies or sectors .
The package of six applications from the Netherlands to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) received the support of Parliament .
Of course , I also voted in favour of the Dutch applications , because it is important for us to provide rapid support for citizens of a Member State who have lost their jobs and this is why the EGF was created .
However , I gave my support to the six applications rather grudgingly , in the light of the highly obstructive attitude of the Dutch Government during the budget negotiations on Monday of last week in Brussels .
In my opinion , flatly refusing to allow Parliament to hold a serious discussion on its involvement in the future financial framework and , at the same time , calling for Parliament to vote in favour of financial support for the Netherlands , are two completely incompatible things .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission reports have not established a single breach of competition by the German Alcohol Monopoly on the internal market .
That is why I am in favour of this proposal .
The report also stresses the importance of these provisions for the rural economy in Germany , particularly with regard to small distilleries .
Given the importance for all small-scale distilleries of their participation in the German Alcohol Monopoly and the need for further transition towards the market , as well as the fact that the reports presented do not demonstrate an infringement of the competition rules in the single market , I think that the monopoly extension period should have ended by 2013 at the latest , the date when the new CAP comes into force .
I voted for this report because I believe more time needs to be allocated for the adaptation of Germany 's small-scale distilleries so that they can survive on the free market .
I agree with the European Commission 's proposal for an extension of a few more years to complete the process of abolishing the monopoly as well as the aid , and allow for its definitive phasing out in 2017 .
Like the rapporteur , I find it regrettable that the common agricultural policy after 2013 will have to inherit old situations , such as this special arrangement within the Single Common Market Organisation Regulation as regards the aid granted in the framework of the German alcohol monopoly .
Nevertheless , I understand the need to extend the period for phasing the monopoly out , given the economic needs of the German rural economy , particularly in some of the country 's federal states .
In fact , while European rules should be predictable and impartial , they should also introduce the flexibility necessary to meet the specific needs of the markets and the European public , in this case , distillery owners in Germany .
We voted for this report , despite disagreeing with the arguments tabled by the Commission and the rapporteur to justify extending the aid .
Both of them think that the few intervention measures that still remain should be completely phased out , subjecting agriculture to the ' free market ' .
Therefore , they limit themselves to stating that ' more time is needed to facilitate the adaptation process , and to allow distillers to survive on the free market ' .
In contrast to the rapporteur 's position , we believe that intervention in the markets and regulation instruments should , in fact , be the rule rather than the exception .
That is the only way to guarantee a living income for farmers , especially small and medium-sized producers .
Therefore , it is the only way to guarantee the future of small and medium-sized agriculture , as well as the right to produce , and each country 's right to food security and food sovereignty .
Instead of an exception being made for Germany for a specific product , other countries and other products should be considered for intervention as well .
Firstly , I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the chair of the committee , Mr De Castro , and to the shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Mrs Jeggle , for their hard work .
The final extension of the German alcohol monopoly which was adopted today represents an important step forward .
It gives our fruit distilleries , in particular , the security to plan for the future beyond 2010 .
This is important because it enables them to prepare for the transition to the free market and to maintain one of Germany 's unique cultural landscapes .
However , it is now essential to make intensive use of this period of time to put in place the necessary adaptation measures , because there will be no further extensions of the monopoly .
That is the message of today 's report .
I would like to express my support for this report , principally because the German government aid to the alcohol monopoly goes mainly to farmers and small distilleries .
This aid does not evidence any breaches of the principles of competition , and it is a form of support for the smallest businesses .
Despite the fact that the aid is being given in an appropriate way , I support the proposal for information to be made available about all events related to this support .
There must not be breaches of any kind , because this would be unfair to other often much weaker and poorer producers .
I do , however , have certain doubts as to whether one Member State supporting its economy in this way will not reduce stability in the European market .
This type of instrument should be extended to other Member States , so that they , too , will be able to support their economies .
The German Alcohol Monopoly as a concept is to be phased out .
The farmers affected have prepared for the opening up of the market .
Thus , the aid is no longer fully utilised and measures have been taken , such as the establishment of cooperatives and changes in direct marketing methods , in preparation for this opening up of the market .
However , a sufficient amount of time is required for these measures to be taken .
At the end of the day , it is not large enterprises that are affected by this arrangement , but many small farmers in rural areas .
For this reason , I support an extension of the arrangement .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Currently , as an exception to State aid rules , the German authorities may grant State aid under the German Alcohol Monopoly for products marketed as alcohol of agricultural origin .
The current derogation ends on 31 December 2010 and the draft regulation extends the application of the derogation and proposes that the production / sales monopoly shall gradually decrease so that the monopoly will finally cease to exist as from 1 January 2018 .
I welcome this phasing out .
The constant pursuit of a functioning single market is incompatible with the presence of monopolies in any sector .
In the particular case of the German Alcohol Monopoly , there are certain attenuating circumstances that allow it still to exist .
However , in line with the recommendations of this report , we have to move towards the total abolition of agricultural bonded distilleries from 2013 and small-scale flat-rate distilleries from 2017 .
Whether and in what form the German Alcohol Monopoly will be retained and what changes will be made to it are all factors that will have an impact primarily on small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
The EU constantly claims that it wants to provide more support for SMEs , which are the motor of the economy and the main providers of jobs .
In this context , we need legal certainty and , therefore , an extension of the monopoly over a longer period .
This is the only way in which small and medium-sized businesses can afford to make the necessary purchases to prepare for the forthcoming deregulation , for example , by establishing cooperatives , modernising their equipment or extending their direct marketing activities .
Of course , the issue of the monopoly could have been combined with the phasing out of the common agricultural policy and the new regulations which will apply from 2013 .
However , there were no pressing grounds for doing so .
The important thing is to ensure that the adaptation process is designed to allow the distilleries to survive after the monopoly has come to an end .
I agree with the rapporteur on this issue .
However , I am not in favour of the internal procedure , which does not adequately meet the requirements for transparency and democracy .
For this reason , I have abstained from voting .
I am in favour of the proposal , but I believe that a whole range of factors need to be taken in account .
Firstly , I believe that an impact assessment should have been carried out on a regular basis and that the period of extension of the monopoly should not have surpassed 2013 , the date of the entry into force of the new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
However , given the importance for the small-scale distilleries of their participation in the monopoly and the need for further transition towards the market , and given the fact that reports presented do not demonstrate an infringement of competition in the single market , I support the extension .
I hope , however , that such details will be taken into account as part of the reform of the new CAP and that a balanced solution will be found to open up the market while , at the same time , protecting traditional local activities .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe the needs of the German rural economy justify extending the initial period of validity of the exception provided for in Article 182 ( 4 ) of the Single Common Market Organisation ( CMO ) Regulation , so as to provide the best possible conditions for small distilleries to prepare appropriately for their entry into the free market .
in writing . - Our group has supported this text and the line taken by the rapporteur in the sense that it is in favour of the proposal presented , while considering that several points need to be taken into account for the implementation of the regulation .
The rapporteur thinks a regular impact assessment should have been carried out and that the period of extension of the monopoly should not have surpassed 2013 , the date of the entry into force of the new CAP .
However , given the importance for the small-scale distilleries of their participation in the monopoly and the need for further transition towards the market , and given the fact that reports presented do not demonstrate an infringement of competition in the single market , the rapporteur is ready to support the proposal .
I voted in favour of this report which authorises the addition of a further 718 pharmaceutical and chemical products to the existing list of 8 619 products benefiting from duty-free treatment upon importation into the EU , which is due to be implemented on 1 January 2011 , as I believe that it is vital that duty-free treatment begins straight away next year , given that the US will make the implementation of the update conditional upon its entry into force on 1 January .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report , which shows how crucial the fourth review ( Pharma IV ) , launched in 2009 , is for keeping pace with the rapidly changing product environment in the pharmaceutical industry .
Given that the lists are produced by the industry and decided on by consensus by the participants , I welcome the agreement that has been reached by all the Member States who have supported previous reviews and also supported the product coverage of this fourth review .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Moreira , for having highlighted the need to carry out periodic reviews of the list of pharmaceutical and chemical products that enter the European Union duty-free .
I support this measure - in fact , I voted in favour of it - because the manufacturing scenario in which the pharmaceutical industry operates unfolds at a frantic pace and it is therefore essential to update the list , which currently includes more than 8 000 products , on a constant basis .
All the Member States , which were already in favour of the previous adjustments , have given their consent to the proposal to extend this list by including 718 new products .
Lastly , I support the mechanism implemented , which protects the interests and health of European consumers .
I am in favour , on condition that the appropriate scientific tests are carried out and the list of drugs , intermediates and active ingredients covered by the agreement on duty-free treatment is extended .
The proposal sends out a strong signal to the markets .
In fact , it serves primarily to confirm the commitment of certain important members of the World Trade Organisation to the free market .
It also has the effect of extending the boundaries of the potential market for the results of certain scientific research sectors , thereby encouraging investment in those sectors and , with it , the fight against diseases for which there is still no effective cure .
Lastly , the proposal sets an example to those countries for which pharmaceuticals represent a necessary item of expenditure if they are to guarantee a future for the younger generations , and a call to take a stance in favour of the adoption of development and wealth creation policies .
I voted for this report because I advocate the addition of a further 718 pharmaceutical and chemical products to the list of products benefiting from bound duty-free treatment upon importation into the EU .
The review of this list of products is necessary to cater for the rapidly changing product environment in the pharmaceutical industry .
Given the importance of the pharmaceuticals trade , not just to public health but also to the economy , I welcome the decision to include 718 new substances on the list of products eligible for duty-free treatment .
The arrangement is unanimously supported by the pharmaceutical industry because it eliminates tariffs on inputs and intermediaries that have to be paid even in connection with intra-company trade , thereby facilitating international trade in these products and benefiting pharmaceutical companies .
This arrangement could , in the final analysis , be reflected in the retail price of medicines sold to the public .
This proposal invited the Council and Parliament to authorise the addition of a further 718 pharmaceutical and chemical products to the existing list of 8 619 products benefiting from bound duty-free treatment upon importation into the EU .
This issue is not controversial , as there is consensus among the stakeholders , and it has the support of the Member States .
Lists are put together by the industry and decided on by consensus by the participants .
This addition of products is necessary to respond to the rapidly changing product environment in the pharmaceutical industry .
The intended date of implementation is 1 January 2011 .
The US has made the implementation of the update conditional upon implementation on 1 January .
Other participants are expected to follow this example , except Japan , which has announced an expected delay of 6 months in implementation .
in writing . - The WTO duty-free rules for pharmaceutical ingredients are universally supported by the pharmaceutical industry .
This is an industry which is important to Scotland , employing some 5 000 people nationwide .
The EU as a whole is a key producer and user of pharmaceutical products and I was happy to support this report .
in writing . - This proposal invites Council and Parliament to authorise the addition of a further 718 pharmaceutical and chemical products to the already existing list of 8 619 products benefiting from bound duty-free treatment upon importation into the EU .
I voted for it .
The trade in pharmaceutical products is an important part of world trade .
The inclusion of a further 718 products on the list for bound duty-free treatment is a beneficial measure , at both an economic and a public health level .
The decision to add these products to the 8 619 already on the list may also have an impact on the final price of medicines , which is beneficial for everyone .
As part of a World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) agreement , the EU , the USA , Japan , Canada , Switzerland , Norway and Macao in China have decided to reduce the duties on certain pharmaceutical products and active ingredients to zero .
Of course , the list of products is constantly being amended and extended to keep pace with the results of research and the latest developments in the pharmaceutical world .
The list of products that benefit from duty-free treatment , which originally contained 6 000 items , and which was created by the industry and reviewed by the states in question , will now be expanded to include more than 8 600 pharmaceutical and chemical products .
It is important to justify the duty-free treatment of pharmaceutical and chemical substances and active ingredients .
However , the entire system seems to be highly complicated and will result in additional bureaucracy for the customs authorities .
The gradual expansion of the list , on this occasion by more than one third , will , at some point , mean that the customs systems reach their data capacity limits .
Therefore , I am calling for a simplification of the fundamental principle and , for that reason , I have abstained .
As well as congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Moreira , with whom I agree on the need for periodic reviews to update the lists of pharmaceutical products eligible for duty-free treatment , I must point out that , thanks to the new mechanism introduced , end consumers will be the ones who benefit .
Indeed , I voted in favour because I believe it is important to periodically review the list of pharmaceutical products that are exempt from customs duties , in view of the rapidly changing product environment in the pharmaceutical industry .
All Member States have supported previous reviews and support the product coverage of the fourth review .
I therefore commend the work done and confirm my vote in favour .
The addition of these further 718 substances to the existing list of 8 619 products benefiting from bound duty-free treatment upon importation into the EU has met a consensus in the pharmaceutical industry and other stakeholders in the revision process , and thus deserves my support .
in writing . - This text basically concerns the proposal inviting the Council and Parliament to authorise the addition of a further 718 pharmaceutical and chemical products to the already existing list of 8 619 products benefiting from bound duty-free treatment upon importation into the EU .
It is rather a technical text .
Our group has voted in favour .
We are in favour of the proposal for a regulation providing for duty-free treatment for specified active ingredients because they concern pharmaceutical and chemical products that are essential to the pharmaceutical industry .
The review became necessary both to include new products and remove others .
This decision was made by agreement with the interested parties and with the unanimous consent of all participants and all Member States .
I agree that the Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and Ukraine should be renewed for another five-year period .
This decision will offer both the Community and Ukraine the opportunity to continue , to improve and strengthen cooperation in areas of shared scientific and technological interests .
The objective of this cooperation is to help Ukraine become more actively involved in the European Research Area .
Such cooperation will help Ukraine to support its science management systems and the reform and restructuring of research institutions , thus creating the conditions for the establishment of a competitive economic and knowledge society .
Both Ukraine and the European Union should obtain mutual benefits from their scientific and technological progress , implementing special research programmes .
By applying this decision , it will be possible to exchange specific knowledge and pass on practical experience for the benefit of the research community , industry and citizens .
I therefore agree strongly that Ukraine and the European Union should continue to cooperate closely in this field .
Scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and other countries is vital for technological development , with all its advantages , including in relation to improving people 's quality of life .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the renewal of the agreement between the EC and Ukraine .
The Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and Ukraine was signed in Copenhagen on 4 July 2002 and came into force on 11 February 2003 .
Given the importance of the science and technology sectors to the EU , its capacity in these areas and the important role that it can play alongside Ukraine , I believe that the renewal of the agreement is in the Union 's interests , in the sense of continuing to promote cooperation with Ukraine in areas of science and technology that are shared priorities and which are beneficial to both parties .
I hope that the agreement that has just been renewed continues to prove advantageous to both parties .
The Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and Ukraine was concluded in Copenhagen on 4 July 2002 and came into force on 11 February 2003 with the aim of encouraging , developing and facilitating cooperative activities in areas of common interest , such as research and development in science and technology .
I voted in favour of this agreement as I believe that its renewal contributes to strengthening the creation of the common European Research Area , in that it serves as a catalyst for the strategic partnership between the EU and the Ukraine .
I therefore hope that this renewal will bear fruit for both parties .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which concerns the reconsultation of Parliament on previous Council decisions concerning the renewal of the agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Union and Ukraine .
At a summit in Ukraine in November 2008 , both parties confirmed their interest in renewal of the agreement for a further five years and I welcome this .
I welcome the approval in the European Parliament of the draft decision sanctioning the renewal of the Agreement for Scientific and Technological Cooperation with Ukraine .
The importance of these sectors to economic and social development in both the European Union and Ukraine is acknowledged through the cooperation in various areas of common interest : the environment and climate change , health , green energy , the information society , industry and agriculture , etc .
Not only access to the research infrastructure but also the exchange of bilateral and multilateral experience between researchers in the EU and Ukraine can help increase the financial efficiency of the projects implemented , thereby reducing the duplication of effort and resources used .
Ukraine 's academic community must seriously assess the competitive advantages it gains from collaborating with the EU and use the European funds as a means of developing its strengths and not only as an alternative source of funding .
Scientific cooperation is undoubtedly a key element of the European Research Area and will pave the way for access to the global networks in this sector .
The Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and Ukraine , in force since February 2003 , has been a success and has played an important role for both parties .
Its renewal therefore confirms this success and we hope that it will continue to do so in the future .
For many years , Ukraine existed in a situation of constitutional and political disorder .
At last , it has a president capable of taking decisions .
I support Mr Yanukovych 's inclination to bring order to Ukraine .
We must use all available opportunities to help Ukrainian industry integrate with the European Union as soon as possible .
In this context , the Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and Ukraine is advantageous to both parties .
Secondly , it represents an important political signal to all political forces in Ukraine that we support the policy of putting law and regulations in order .
In today 's modern world where technical developments are so short-lived , making cooperation in scientific and technical fields easier will be of benefit to both sides .
As the renewal of the agreement apparently brings economic and social advantages for both sides , it is also in the interests of the European Union .
The costs of implementing the agreement , in the form of workshops , seminars , meetings , etc. will be charged to the relevant budget lines of the specific programmes in the EU budget .
In order to promote technical progress in the face of competition in a globalised world and in the light of the benefits which technological developments bring not only to our everyday lives , but also , for example , in the field of medicine , I have supported the renewal of the agreement for scientific and technical cooperation with Ukraine .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that the renewal of the agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and Ukraine will enable the parties to achieve significant progress and mutual benefits .
The renewal of the scientific and technological cooperation agreement between the European Community and Ukraine is extremely important in order to continue facilitating cooperation in both the shared priority areas of science and technology , which bring socio-economic benefits to both parties .
This is why , in the plenary sitting , I have given my support to Parliament approving the renewal of the agreement , in line with what we decided in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
This agreement should enable Ukraine and the EU to benefit mutually from the scientific and technical progress made through their research programmes , at the same time enabling the transfer of knowledge to benefit the scientific community , industry and Europeans .
With regard to specific results , the renewal of the agreement will allow the continued exchange of information on science and technology policies between the EU and Ukraine .
It will also enable Ukraine to take part in certain areas of the European Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development and enable training to take place through mobility programmes for researchers and specialists from both sides , among other things .
in writing . - Very easy vote , this one .
We simply had to agree , and we did .
Scientific and technological cooperation between the European Union and other countries is vital for technological development , with all its advantages , including in relation to improving people 's quality of life .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the renewal of the agreement between the EU and the Faroe Islands .
The EU and the Faroes have concluded their negotiations on establishing a scientific and technological cooperation agreement , which was initialled on 13 July 2009 .
The agreement is based on the principles of mutual benefit , reciprocal opportunities to access the programmes and activities relevant to the purposes of the agreement , non-discrimination , effective protection of intellectual property , and equitable sharing of intellectual property rights .
This scientific and technological association agreement will help to structure and improve cooperation on these matters between the EU and the Faroes , through regular meetings of its Joint Committee , in which specific cooperation activities can be planned .
I hope that the agreement that has just been adopted proves advantageous to both parties .
The EU and the Faroe Islands have concluded their negotiations on the establishment of an agreement on scientific and technological cooperation , with the aim of facilitating free movement and residence for researchers involved in activities covered by this agreement and in order to facilitate the cross-border movement of goods for use in such activities .
I voted in favour of this agreement as I believe that its renewal contributes to strengthening the creation of the common European Research Area .
I therefore hope that the renewal of the agreement will bear fruit for both parties .
I voted against the Agreement between the European Union and the government of the Faroes on Scientific and Technological Cooperation , not because I am against scientific cooperation between the Union and the Faroe Islands , but because I believe that pressure should start to be put on the Faroe Islands so that the repeated slaughter of pilot whales - almost 1 000 of them are killed each year - stops once and for all .
As long as these massacres are perpetrated , I shall , in future , vote against any agreement or financial aid arrangement between the European Union and the Faroe Islands .
in writing . - The Commission negotiated on behalf of the Union an agreement with the government of the Faroes on scientific and technological cooperation in June 2010 .
I voted for this report which approves the proposal .
The Agreement between the European Union and the government of the Faroes on Scientific and Technological Cooperation , in force since July 2009 , has been a success and has played an important role for both parties .
Its renewal therefore confirms this success and we hope that it will continue to do so in the future .
The entry into force of the Agreement between the European Union and the government of the Faroes on Scientific and Technological Cooperation will enable the Faroe Islands to participate fully in the European Union 's Seventh Framework Programme for Research , Technological Development and Demonstration Activities .
Although the Faroes have a small research community , their researchers have already successfully participated in EU-funded projects .
They have expertise in research areas linked to the geographical location of the Faroe Islands , in particular , marine resources and the environment .
The agreement will enable these researchers to work in other areas , such as energy , food , agriculture , fisheries and biotechnologies .
Regular meetings will help to identify common priorities in terms of research , as well as the fields in which joint efforts may be of benefit to both parties .
Furthermore , the agreement will promote the mobility of students and researchers from higher education .
The European Union has set itself ambitious targets in the field of technology and not only in the context of the Lisbon Strategy .
These objectives have now been reinforced in the plan for the near future , the Europe 2020 strategy .
This makes cooperation in science and technology even more important .
Against this background , we should welcome the fact that a series of agreements have been reached with other countries to promote this cooperation by means of workshops , meetings and seminars , for example .
This issue is of such great importance to the EU that a subsidy option has been made available within the Seventh Framework Programme for Research , Technological Development and Demonstration Activities .
Now we are about to renew our agreement with a group of islands in the North Atlantic , the Faroe Islands .
Unlike Denmark , the Faroes are not a member of the European Union and do not form part of the customs union .
Instead , they have created a single economic area with Iceland .
In order to encourage technological progress , I have voted in favour of renewing the agreement on scientific and technical cooperation with the Faroe Islands .
I voted in favour of the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the government of the Faroes on Scientific and Technological Cooperation as I am convinced that aligning our efforts in these strategic areas can be beneficial to both parties .
in writing . - ( BG ) Innovation and globalisation are the two main sources of economic development across the globe .
They have a direct effect on productivity , employment and the welfare of citizens , and provide an opportunity to resolve some of the challenges facing the world , for example , healthcare and the environment .
As their role is becoming increasingly visible and their characteristics clearer , policies must be adapted to them .
Japan is a country with traditions in the area of science and technology .
I therefore voted in favour of collaboration with them .
Scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and other countries is vital for technological development , with all its advantages , including in relation to improving people 's quality of life .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the conclusion of the agreement on this matter between the EU and the government of Japan .
The importance of science and technology to the development of Europe and Japan and the fact that both are confronted by similar challenges regarding economic growth , industrial competitiveness , employment , sustainable development and climate change mean that both the EU and Japan have expressed their desire to improve and intensify their cooperation in areas of shared interest , such as science and technology .
In 2003 , negotiations were started on a future scientific and technological cooperation agreement , which resulted in the draft text on which we have just voted .
We cannot forget that this partnership could be of the utmost benefit to Europe , as Japan is one of the world 's leading countries in terms of research investment , which amounted to 3.61 % of gross domestic product in 2008 , with more than 81.6 % of that coming from the private sector .
I hope that the agreement that has just been adopted proves advantageous to both parties .
The European Union and Japan are facing common challenges in terms of economic growth , industrial competitiveness , employment , social and regional cohesion , sustainable development and , perhaps most importantly , the need to adapt their economies to their ageing societies and the current financial crisis .
They also have similar research priorities , such as life sciences and communication sciences , so this agreement will serve to enhance cooperation in areas of common interest , such as life sciences , information and communication technologies , and environmental technology linked to climate change and renewable energy .
I voted in favour of this agreement as I believe that its adoption contributes to strengthening the creation of the common European Research Area , in that it serves as a catalyst for the strategic partnership between the EU and Japan , which is already one of the leading countries in terms of investment in research ( reaching 3.61 % of the gross national product in 2008 , with more than 81.6 % of this coming from the private sector ) .
in writing . - The Commission has negotiated an agreement on cooperation in science and technology with Japan , signed on 30 November 2009 .
I welcome this report , which approves the agreement , but I believe that the EU must work to intensify its relationship with Japan .
The agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and Japan has been under negotiation since 2003 , and has only just been concluded .
Given Japan 's considerable importance in terms of scientific and technological research , the agreement that has just been concluded is hugely significant for both parties .
This agreement gives the green light to the European Union to make use of technology from Japan , which is one of the most progressive industrial nations .
This is a great step forward on the part of the European Union .
However , I should like to hope that this cooperation will be two-way , as the experience of working with Japanese companies indicates that the Japanese side does not always abide by this principle .
I am voting in favour , in the hope that not only Japan but also the European Union will benefit from this cooperation .
Japan is a role model in the field of technological development .
Japanese technology is always state-of-the-art , whether it involves hybrid drive systems or entertainment products .
The country is not only well-known for exporting its high-tech products ; they are also of great importance to its citizens .
For example , in Japan , it is already possible to pay for goods or services securely using a mobile phone .
The shortages of the so-called rare earths that are essential for the electronic components of the latest technological products is the result of the Chinese strategy to ensure that these substances are in short supply and to keep their prices artificially high .
All of this will accelerate the search for alternatives .
Cooperation in the field of science and technology and the renewal of the relevant agreement deserve our support not only for these reasons .
The requirements of the Lisbon Strategy and the Europe 2020 strategy , where the European Union has set itself ambitious targets in the field of technology , also play a role here .
Europe and Japan are facing common challenges in terms of economic growth and sustainable development , so the conclusion of this agreement is worth celebrating , as it allows for the enhancement of their cooperation in the area of science and technology , with considerable advantages for both parties .
The EU and Japan are facing very similar challenges in terms of economic growth and industrial competitiveness .
Moreover , the need for socio-economic adjustments due to the ageing of their populations and the current economic crisis means that they are both facing similar situations and have similar priorities in terms of research , development and innovation .
I am voting in favour of this recommendation , which gives Parliament 's approval for an agreement to be made between the EU and Japan on cooperation in science and technology , because of the need to maximise the potential for cooperation between these two parties in the fields of science and technology .
The agreement , which is scheduled to run for five years , is aimed at the mutual benefit of both parties , and provides for regular meetings between the EU and Japan with a view to planning specific cooperative activities , including coordinated calls for proposals .
All of this should enable the EU and Japan , which already cooperate on significant projects such as the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor , to consolidate their cooperation even further in areas of common interest such as life , information and communication sciences , manufacturing technologies and the environment , including climate change and renewable energy sources .
I voted in favour of the report because I consider it to be right and necessary to mobilise the Solidarity Fund for victims of the floods that occurred in previous years .
In this case , the EU funds will directly benefit those affected .
Scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and other countries is vital for technological development , with all its advantages , including in relation to improving people 's quality of life .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the conclusion of the agreement in this area between the EC and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan .
Scientific and technological cooperation between the European Union and Jordan is one of the priorities in the collaboration between the EU and Mediterranean countries through the European Neighbourhood Policy and the EU 's strategy of strengthening ties with neighbouring countries .
It is also closely in line with the Jordanian government 's executive programme for promoting a process of lasting socio-economic reform in the country .
I think it is beneficial for both sides to cooperate on joint research , technical development and demonstration activities in different areas of common interest , with the fruits of this cooperation to be used according to their common economic and social interests .
The EU has been fostering a close partnership with Jordan , a country that is endeavouring to act as a force for moderation and reform in a politically turbulent region .
The EU has aimed to support Jordan in its efforts through a relationship that emphasises close cooperation on democratic reform and economic modernisation .
As the President of the Delegation for relations with the Mashreq countries , I am pleased to vote in favour of this report , the aim of which is to strengthen cooperation in science and technology between the European Union and Jordan .
Since 2008 , the EU and Jordan have been negotiating a scientific and technological cooperation agreement , which must now be adopted .
Partnership with Jordan is of great interest in the context of Euro-Mediterranean relations , because , in addition to its great potential , the country can act as a platform for scientific cooperation with the other countries of the region .
Furthermore , Jordan has a well developed network of universities and higher education institutions , and well equipped research and technological applications centres in fields that are very relevant to Europe , such as agriculture and agronomy .
The country is also well integrated into international and regional scientific networks .
I hope that the agreement that has just been adopted proves advantageous to both parties .
Scientific and technological cooperation between the European Union and Jordan has been one of the priorities of the Euro-Mediterranean association agreement , which has been in force since 2002 .
I voted in favour of this agreement as I believe that its renewal contributes to strengthening the creation of the common European Research Area , in that it serves as a catalyst for the strategic partnership between the EU and Jordan , which , by virtue of its strategic location in the Middle East , may have an impact on promoting scientific cooperation with countries in that region .
in writing . - The Commission negotiated an agreement between the EU and Jordan on scientific and technological cooperation .
This was signed on 30 November 2009 .
I voted for this report , which approves the agreement .
The agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has been under negotiation since 2008 , and has only just been concluded .
This agreement is important in view of the possibilities that it provides for exchange between Europe and this Middle Eastern kingdom .
It is also worth pointing out that there is a great deal of development under way in Jordan in terms of higher education , which may contribute greatly to the success of this cooperation .
Despite the fact that the environmental issues are overshadowed by the conflict in the Middle East , there is likely to be a need for more advanced technological solutions in these regions .
The drinking water strategies of both Jordan and Israel are gradually leading to a reduction in the flow of the Jordan River and an increase in the pollution of the water .
Against this background , there will be a high level of demand for technological developments , for example , in the field of water and sewage treatment plants .
Scientific and technical cooperation is important , in order to enable knowledge to be shared and to lay the foundations for new technological developments .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of renewing the agreement with the Kingdom of Jordan .
Cooperation on scientific and technological research between the European Union and Jordan is identified as a priority in the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an Association between the European Communities and their Member States and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , which has been in force since 2002 .
I therefore believe that the conclusion of this agreement on scientific and technological cooperation between the EU and Jordan is to be welcomed , as it is a further step towards strengthening this partnership .
I hope that aligning our efforts in these strategic areas will be beneficial for both parties .
Scientific and technological cooperation between the EU and Jordan is given as a priority in the Euro-Mediterranean association agreement between the two parties , which came into force in 2002 .
Negotiations to establish an agreement between the EU and Jordan on scientific cooperation therefore began in 2007 .
Parliament 's approval for the conclusion of the agreement is a step in the right direction .
My support for the conclusion of the agreement is based on my conviction that it will bring the EU closer to Jordan , which has significant capabilities in the field of science and technology .
Jordan has a large network of universities and research centres .
Moreover , it is hoped that Jordan will act as a catalyst for scientific cooperation in its region .
It has strategic planning for research , and is in a position to cooperate internationally in sectors such as energy , sustainable development , health and agriculture , among others .
These areas are in line with the European priorities set out in the seventh framework programme .
This is why it is important for this agreement to be approved , as it will enable the EU to move closer to its Mediterranean partner in the field of science and technology , thereby creating mutual benefits .
in writing . - With this vote , the European Parliament , having regard to the draft Council Decision ( 11362 / 2010 ) , having regard to the draft agreement between the European Community and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on Scientific and Technological Cooperation ( 11790 / 2009 ) , having regard to the request for consent submitted by the Council in accordance with Article 186 and Article 218 ( 6 ) , second subparagraph , point ( a ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( C7-0182 / 2010 ) , having regard to Rules 81 , 90 ( 8 ) and 46 ( 1 ) of its Rules of Procedure , having regard to the recommendation of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , 1 .
Consents to the conclusion of the agreement ; 2 .
Instructs its President to forward its position to the Council , the Commission and the governments and parliaments of the Member States and of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan .
I voted in favour of this resolution , as it addresses the resolution adopted by Parliament on 25 February and the Green Paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy , with regard to the need for regional cooperation and sustainability beyond EU waters .
This resolution repeals the fisheries partnership agreement which entered into force on 9 October 2006 for a three-year period and makes for continuity in the fishing activities of Community vessels , which is of particular interest to the EU as it contributes to the viability of its tuna fishing sector in the Pacific Ocean .
It also allows for a sharp reduction in tuna fishing opportunities in the East Atlantic on account of the conservation and management measures adopted by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission ( IATTC ) .
Furthermore , it should be noted that this agreement will allow for guaranteed revenue for the Solomon Islands , which will be used to support the implementation of its national fisheries policy , thus contributing to the principle of sustainability and sound management of fisheries resources .
I congratulate Mrs Patrão Neves for having brought the attention of this Chamber to the renewal of the partnership agreement with the Solomon Islands .
With the new Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament has acquired greater powers over partnership agreements in the fisheries sector , and with the reform of the common fisheries policy , the new agreements involve a commitment to promote responsible and sustainable fisheries in all areas of the world .
I voted in favour because this agreement involves promoting cooperation at sub-regional level , thus respecting the European goal of strengthening the framework of regional fishery management organisations as a means of promoting fishery governance .
I am also convinced that European Union relations with the Solomon Islands , where the sea is full of tuna , also represent a considerable economic interest .
In this way , it is possible to support the economic efficiency of the European Union tuna fishery supply chain in the Pacific , guaranteeing access to 4 000 tonnes of fish , a considerable quantity for the industry and the European market and partly offsetting the foreseeable reduction of tuna fishing opportunities in the eastern Atlantic .
We four Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have chosen to vote against the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Solomon Islands .
Our decision is based on a genuine fear that tuna will be exploited and overfished .
Two species in particular - the yellowfin and bigeye tuna - are endangered , and therefore fishing of these species should , as far as possible , be discontinued .
This fisheries agreement threatens tuna stocks , as it gives the green light to all catching of fish as long as European fishermen provide financial compensation for each tonne of tuna caught .
This will very likely result in uncontrollable overfishing and , in the worst case scenario , it may threaten the survival of tuna in the region .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthens the European Parliament 's powers regarding Fisheries Partnership Agreements ( FPAs ) by requiring Parliament 's prior approval .
In this context , I voted for the report on the FPA between the EU and the Solomon Islands because I believe that it furthers the aim of promoting responsible , sustainable fishing , thus serving the legitimate interests of both parties .
We Social Democrats chose to vote against the Fisheries Partnership Agreement with the Solomon Islands .
We believe that the monitoring of the agreement is inadequate and that the agreement does not take due account of the environment in relation to the overfished stocks .
The EU currently has 16 Fisheries Partnership Agreements ( FPAs ) in force .
Through these , the EU fleet has access to fish stocks which , for one reason or another , the partners cannot or do not intend to catch .
We are currently aiming to renew the FPA with the Solomon Islands for another three years .
As the rapporteur says , ' the EU is proposing to provide the same financial support to the Solomon Islands under the new agreement as it did under the previous agreement , even though fewer fishing authorisations are to be granted and the allowable catch volume is lower ' .
This is especially relevant when we consider that , under the previous version of the FPA , four Portuguese longliners were fishing in the exclusive economic zone of the Solomon Islands , which is now no longer possible because no fishing opportunities were negotiated for longliners .
It is true , however , that a clause has been included allowing the introduction of new fishing opportunities where necessary .
The 2002 reform of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) introduced the concept of partnership , with the objective of supporting the development of the national fisheries sector in partner countries .
Since 2004 , the agreements have been termed ' fisheries partnership agreements ' ( FPAs ) .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given Parliament increased powers regarding FPAs .
Under Article 218 ( 6 ) ( a ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , Parliament now has to give its prior consent to the conclusion of an agreement .
In February 2004 , the Solomon Islands and the European Community signed a three-year FPA , which entered into force on 9 October 2006 .
I agree that this agreement should be repealed and replaced by a new version , which belongs to a set of three agreements with the central and western Pacific region that also comprises partnership agreements with Kiribati and the Federated States of Micronesia .
Under the agreements with African and Pacific countries , part of the EU 's financial contribution is aimed at supporting national fisheries policies based on the principle of sustainability .
The signing of bilateral fisheries agreements between the EU and third countries guarantees access for EU fleets to sources of fish that are significant in quantitative and qualitative terms whilst , at the same time , channelling financial resources to these countries that often come to make up a large proportion of their budget available for pursuing policies in numerous areas , not just fisheries policy .
That is also true of this agreement .
We voted for this report , but we still have serious reservations about how the agreement has been implemented up to now , some of which are quite rightly shared by the rapporteur .
I am referring , amongst other things , to the fact that the Joint Committee never met while the agreement was in force ; the fact that the terms under which responsible fishing practices would be implemented in the exclusive economic zone of the Solomon Islands have not been set out ; and the failure to establish how catch volumes will be monitored .
These are failures that put the achievement of the agreement 's goals at serious risk , and they must not be repeated when it is renewed .
The Commission has committed to doing everything to prevent this from happening again : it must now meet that commitment .
in writing . - I voted for this proposal on a Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EU and the Solomon Islands , but with serious reservations .
EU development cooperation policy and the common fisheries policy have to be brought into a coherent , complementary and coordinated relationship , so that together they can help to reduce poverty in countries which have untapped fishery resources that they are seeking to exploit sustainably , while endeavouring to develop their local communities
The EU has several fisheries partnership agreements , which give it access to different fishing zones in exchange for funding , which is channelled into the economy of the countries with which they conclude these partnerships .
This is a way for the EU to help developing countries , while also making good quality fishing zones accessible to EU fishermen , so as to enhance their economic activity , which is vital for the EU economy .
On this particular occasion , there are two problems that must be solved methodically and purposefully .
The first is fishing quotas and the second is the exchange of knowledge and experience of the processing and conservation technologies for the catch and Pacific Ocean production .
I hope that all the aspects listed in the agreement will focus on encouraging cooperation and the mutual exchange of experience .
Bilateral fisheries agreements between the European Union and third countries are of significant economic benefit to the EU .
A new agreement is currently being negotiated between the EU and the Solomon Islands .
The disadvantages of the new agreement are an increase in the contribution to be paid by shipowners , a lower level of profitability for the EU than other tuna fisheries agreements and the same financial support from the EU in return for lower catch quotas .
According to the rapporteur , the benefits of the agreement include the fact that the Solomon Islands need foreign exchange reserves to maintain their macro-economic stability , that the agreed reference tonnage of 4 000 tonnes of fish is a relatively large amount for the EU , and that there is a need to pursue cooperation on a regional basis with a view to achieving sustainability beyond EU waters .
I have abstained , because the advantages for the EU are not clear enough in relation to the costs .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a partnership agreement between the European Union and the Solomon Islands because I believe that that agreement essentially serves the interests of both parties .
I believe that cooperation on a regional basis is an excellent way of achieving sustainability beyond EU waters and fostering fisheries governance .
Indeed , as well as providing a stable legal framework for both parties , the agreement will provide the Islands with guaranteed revenue for at least three years , and this will be used in part to finance the implementation of their national fisheries policy .
Maintaining fisheries relations with the Solomon Islands is very much in the EU 's interest , since this will help to enhance the viability of the EU tuna fishing sector in the Pacific by giving access to a large quantity of fish .
I congratulate Mrs Patrão Neves on having brought the renewal of the Partnership Agreement with the Solomon Islands to the attention of this House .
I voted in favour because , under the agreement , cooperation is to be promoted at subregional level , thus meeting the European objective of strengthening regional fisheries management organisations and , in that way , fostering fisheries governance .
Lastly , I support the rapporteur 's recommendations to the Commission , in particular , to ensure that the European Parliament and the Council receive equal treatment as regards the right to be duly informed , so that they may properly monitor and assess the implementation of international fisheries agreements .
I voted in favour of the conclusion of this fisheries partnership agreement as I believe that it essentially serves the interests of both parties , on the one hand , by allowing the EU access to 4 000 tonnes of tuna per year , a fairly substantial quantity for the EU industry and market and , on the other , by providing the Solomon Islands with substantial financial resources to be partly channelled into the implementation of its own sectoral fisheries policy .
However , I believe that everything must be done to remedy the problems rightly highlighted in the report .
in writing . - The Fisheries Agreement between the European Community and the Solomon Islands expired last October .
The new Protocol is valid from 9 October 2009 to 8 October 2012 and is already provisionally applied pending the European Parliament consent procedure .
According to Article 43 paragraph 2 and Article 218 paragraph 6 ( a ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the European Parliament can either consent or decline to consent .
Although the majority of the EP has voted in favour , our group , the Greens / EFA , has voted against .
I share the rapporteur 's concern that the Commission should examine not just the specific issue of the standard rate and other rates of value added tax ( VAT ) , but also the broader issue of a new VAT strategy , including its scope and derogations .
Given the increasing complexity in terms of rates , the VAT system is not keeping pace with the development of the internal market , putting businesses at a disadvantage , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises .
It should be recalled that Parliament has warned the Commission that the VAT system , as currently devised and implemented by the Member States , has weak points that are exploited by fraudsters , resulting in tax losses of billions of euro .
I welcome the Commission 's intention to launch a Green Paper on revising the VAT system with the goal of creating an environment that is more favourable to business , and a system that is simpler and more robust for the Member States .
I voted for this report .
With its proposal , the Commission proposes to extend by 5 years the current requirement for EU countries to have a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 % .
Therefore , the proposal will have no consequences in terms of tax rates .
The Commission proposes that the extension should take effect on 1 January 2011 for a period ending on 31 December 2015 .
To maintain the degree of harmonisation of rates already achieved , the Commission has twice submitted proposals providing for a standard rate band with a minimum rate of 15 % and a maximum rate of 25 % .
The band was derived from the rates applied in practice in the Member States , where the standard rates had always varied between 15 % and 25 % .
In both cases , the proposals to approximate rates were amended by the Council which kept only the principle of the minimum rate .
I agree with the Commission that the purpose of the extension is not only to give businesses the necessary legal certainty , but also to allow further evaluation of the appropriate level of the standard VAT rate at EU level .
I believe that in the future Green Paper on the review of the VAT system , the Commission should not only examine the specific issue of the standard VAT rate and other rates , but also the broader issue of a new VAT strategy , including the scope of VAT and the derogations .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Casa , for having drawn up this report , which allows us to take a fresh look at a topic as fundamental as VAT and tax harmonisation .
I support the rapporteur in his assertion that the current VAT system , partly due to an increase in its complexity , has not kept pace with growth in the internal market and actually places companies and small and medium-sized enterprises at a disadvantage by considerably affecting their competitiveness .
The current tax laws also display numerous loopholes that may be used to illegal advantage by tax dodgers .
I therefore support the Commission 's proposal to put off the creation of a common VAT system with the aim of giving enterprises the necessary legal certainty but , at the same time , I call on the Commission to conclude its analysis as quickly as possible and draw up a Green Paper on the review of the VAT system with the involvement of this Chamber .
I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I agree with the Commission 's proposal for a five-year extension of the current requirement for EU Member States to have a minimum standard value added tax ( VAT ) rate of 15 % , based on Article 113 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
As for the amendments made by Parliament , I think it is particularly pertinent that the new VAT strategy should aim to reduce the administrative burden , remove tax obstacles and improve the business environment , particularly for small and medium-sized and labour-intensive enterprises , whilst ensuring the robustness of the system against fraud .
I think that strict control is needed over the minimum VAT rate , at a time when the transitional arrangement for the 15 % level is due to be extended again .
Furthermore , I think that we should be more concerned by the fact that an ever-increasing number of governments in EU countries are raising their VAT rate to the maximum limit in order to tackle the challenges presented by the economic crisis .
This measure proves that there is a lack of viable solutions and is stifling the economy and people 's lives .
In this respect , I urge for excessive taxation to be avoided , with a view to adopting a definitive tax harmonisation system .
I voted for this report as I think that the European Union needs a new VAT strategy .
The EU must use this with the aim of cutting red tape and removing the financial obstacles blocking the development of small and medium-sized enterprises .
I also think that extending the transitional arrangement for the minimum VAT rate until 31 December 2015 can prevent structural imbalances in the European Union .
The renewal of the minimum standard rate of value added tax ( VAT ) of 15 % in Member States proposed by the Commission is founded on legal certainty .
I am in no way opposed to this principle , so I voted for the proposal .
However , I must stress how urgently deeper measures are needed in relation to this tax .
These measures must target the European Union 's fiscal competitiveness and the necessary protection of small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is increasingly evident that tax policies are not neutral .
The success story of VAT cannot and must not prevent it from adapting to new times .
In this proposal , which is based on Article 113 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , the Commission proposes a five-year extension of the current requirement for EU Member States to have a minimum standard value added tax ( VAT ) rate of 15 % ; it will therefore have no effect on tax rates .
The Commission proposes that the extension takes effect on 1 January 2011 for a period ending on 31 December 2015 .
The purpose of the extension is not only to provide businesses with the necessary legal certainty , but also to allow for a better evaluation of the appropriate level of the standard VAT rate at EU level .
The current VAT system , with its increased complexity not only in terms of rates , is not keeping pace with the development of the internal market , and is putting European businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , at a disadvantage .
Furthermore , as Parliament has pointed out , the VAT system , as currently designed and implemented by the Member States , has weaknesses that fraudsters use to their advantage , costing billions of euro in tax revenue .
This report concerns the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2006 / 112 / EC on the minimum standard value added tax ( VAT ) rate of 15 % , extending for another five years the current period - which was to expire at the end of this year - because they could not reach agreement on definitively standardising VAT rates .
However , the rapporteur has taken the opportunity to give the Council some suggestions , specifically about the new VAT strategy , which he believes should aim at ' removing tax obstacles and improving the business environment , particularly for small and medium-sized and labour-intensive enterprises , whilst ensuring the robustness of the system against fraud ' .
He also takes the opportunity to insist that the Council should move towards a definitive system before 31 December 2015 , while the Commission should submit legislative proposals to replace the current transitional rate by 2013 .
We will monitor this issue extremely closely , given the potential negative implications which the proposal that emerges in 2013 could have .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which examines a Commission proposal to extend by 5 years to 31 December 2015 the requirement for EU countries to have a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 % .
This is desirable in normal times , but in the present economic crisis , it is even more necessary .
Tax competition that drove down VAT rates would be ruinous for countries trying to maintain an acceptable level of public services .
We should remember that the current VAT system , with its increasing complexity , and not only in terms of rates , is not keeping pace with the development of the internal market .
This puts European businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , at a disadvantage .
Furthermore , as Parliament has pointed out in the past , the VAT system , as currently designed and implemented by the Member States , has weaknesses that fraudsters use to their advantage , costing billions of euro in tax revenue .
The focus of the new VAT strategy should therefore be to reform the VAT rules in a manner that actively promotes the objectives of the internal market .
The new VAT strategy should aim to reduce administrative burdens , removing tax obstacles and improving the business environment , particularly for SMEs and labour-intensive enterprises , whilst ensuring the robustness of the system against fraud .
This is an extremely important issue for the development of European entrepreneurship as a whole .
There must be a harmonised system of VAT rates , applicable to all European Union countries .
There must be a comprehensible long-term tax system as regards all types of entrepreneurship and industry .
Only then can we reckon on success in fiscal policy .
Currently in Latvia , individual politicians fail to appreciate the danger of an unstable tax system when plugging the budget deficit by continually amending tax legislation .
This significantly endangers a future reduction of the tax burden and leads to the liquidation en masse of small and medium-sized enterprises .
I consider that the European Commission 's initiative is timely .
Minimum value added tax rates are one aspect of the efforts to harmonise European tax rates .
However , we must oppose these moves towards harmonisation .
On the one hand , they could lead to attempts to introduce tax sovereignty for the EU through the back door and , on the other , regulations of this kind represent an intrusion into the sovereignty of the Member States .
The Member States must retain the power to set their own tax rates , because each country must decide for itself on its own priorities , as this depends on the extent to which the state spends money in different areas .
All of this is also an expression of Europe 's historical development .
We must reject calls for minimum tax rates so that the pressure to conform , the amount of EU red tape and the centralism of Brussels can all be reduced .
I strongly oppose the extension of the mandatory levy of a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 % for a further five years .
The EU should be focusing on cooperation on tax fraud , because billions of euro are being lost in the value added tax systems in particular .
There are some approaches in this area which are worthy of further discussion .
The report extends the transitional system introduced by Council Directive 92 / 77 / EEC , which introduced a minimum rate of VAT , establishing that the standard rate could not be lower than 15 % .
It is now common practice to set minimum rates because we have not yet achieved a permanent tax harmonisation system in the Union for indirect taxation .
As far as VAT is concerned , this allows us to prevent the increasingly sharp differences between the standard rates applied in Member States from causing structural imbalances and distortions of competition .
The deviation between standard rates applied currently ranges between 15 % and 25 % and is sufficient to guarantee the correct operation of the internal market .
The postponement will make it possible to give companies the necessary legal certainty but also to carry out further evaluations with regard to a satisfactory level of standard VAT rates throughout the EU .
The Commission is also called on to publish a Green Paper on a new VAT strategy as quickly as possible and to start consultation on future tax harmonisation .
I voted in favour , in the expectation of a tax harmonisation system that will lead to a single VAT rate throughout the Union .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Casa , whom I congratulate on the work and collaboration within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The aim of the report is to extend by a further five years the current requirement for EU countries to have a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 % .
As well as emphasising the importance of a minimum standard rate , the report goes further and stresses the need to devise a new VAT strategy , insofar as the current system , with its increased complexity not only in terms of rates , is not keeping pace with the development of the internal market .
As Mr Monti , too , pointed out in his report on the relaunch of the single market , the lack of uniform rates and a different cost of living in the various Member States could create conditions that undermine the spirit of the single market .
This puts European businesses , and especially SMEs , at a disadvantage .
Furthermore , the European VAT system , as currently designed and implemented by Member States , is often the subject of cross-border fraud , something which costs billions of euro in tax revenue .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Casa , on having drafted this report , which enables us to address once again the fundamental issue of VAT and tax harmonisation .
I agree with the points made by the rapporteur , namely , that the current VAT system is not keeping pace with the development of the internal market but , on the contrary , is placing businesses and SMEs at a disadvantage by significantly affecting their competitiveness .
I therefore support the Commission 's proposal for an extension so as to create a common VAT system to give businesses necessary legal certainty but , at the same time , I urge the Commission to conclude its analyses as soon as possible and to draft , with the help of this House , a Green Paper on the review of the VAT system .
I am voting in favour of this report .
Nevertheless , I must point out that the successive postponement of definitive regulation of value added tax ( VAT ) is symptomatic of the deadlock into which European integration has fallen .
Even if the Commission tabled a proposal for revising the VAT system soon , we are all aware that the various Member States ' different interests , as expressed in the Council , will end up blocking a proposal to make rates more uniform .
We would do well to remember that , despite being a regressive tax , VAT has been , and continues to be , the emergency tax measure put at the service of the austerity policies imposed by the Council and the Commission .
Pressure for the so-called ' budgetary consolidation ' of the Member States is now a major obstacle to the convergence of VAT rates .
If we recall that the suggestion of a ' European VAT ' , put forward by the Commission as a source of income for the Union , was immediately rejected by several Member States , we will have to acknowledge that asking the Commission for ' a new VAT strategy ' seems to make little sense .
I voted in favour of this report , which focuses on the Commission 's proposal for a five-year extension of the current requirement for EU Member States to have a minimum standard value added tax ( VAT ) rate of 15 % .
In line with what the rapporteur says , it is important to acknowledge that the VAT system itself needs to be thoroughly overhauled so as to actively promote the objectives of the internal market , thus helping to create a more favourable business environment , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I therefore wholeheartedly welcome the Commission 's stated intention to launch a Green Paper on the review of the VAT system .
in writing . - We are in the majority in Parliament voting in favour of this text , which states that the European Parliament , having regard to the Commission proposal to the Council , having regard to Article 113 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union pursuant to which the Council consulted Parliament ( C7-0173 / 2010 ) , having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee , having regard to Rule 55 of its Rules of Procedure , and having regard to the report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , approves the Commission proposal as amended ; calls on the Commission to alter its proposal accordingly , in accordance with Article 293 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ; calls on the Council to notify Parliament if it intends to depart from the text approved by Parliament ; asks the Council to consult Parliament again if it intends to amend the Commission proposal substantially ; instructs its President to forward its position to the Council , the Commission and the national parliaments .

This report on the common system of value added tax and the duration of the obligation to respect the minimum standard rate is only to be welcomed .
It will fix the minimum standard rate at 15 % up to the end of 2015 .
While the European Commission repeatedly proposed introducing a maximum rate of 25 % , the European Council did not support this .
At the same time , the standard rate does not currently exceed 25 % in any Member State .
Estonia , where the standard rate of VAT is 20 % , is among the 19 Member States where the rate is 20 % or more .
Regarding this aspect , I wish to point out that I strongly supported the extension of the 15 % minimum rate , which will give every Member State the option to decide how high its rate should be .
In addition , this report ensures legal certainty for our entrepreneurs , who will know that for the next five years , European legislation will prevent the standard rate of VAT from rising .
The European Commission 's proposal provides for a five-year extension of the current requirement for EU Member States to have a minimum standard value added tax ( VAT ) rate of 15 % until 15 December 2015 .
The idea is to maintain the harmonised fiscal structure , with two obligatory rates of VAT and harmonisation within a 10 % band : in other words , between 15 % and 25 % .
The Member States undertake to avoid extending the current span above the current lowest standard rate applied by them .
I agree with the rapporteur that , with its increasing complexity , the current VAT system is not keeping pace with the development of the internal market .
I also hope that in the future , the European Commission will analyse not just this issue of the standard rate of VAT but also the general subject of revising the current system , including its scope and derogations , and that it will commit to drawing up a new strategy for this tax .
I voted for the report for the reasons given above .
Obviously , I have voted in favour of Mr Casa 's report .
Moreover , I agree , not only with the rapporteur 's stance on the directive , but also with the tenor of the notes to his report . Since as early as 1993 , the European Union has been operating a transitional system for VAT .
Attempts to move to what is known as a definitive system have so far failed .
However , this is no reason why we should not keep on trying .
The VAT system is not just a question of rates and ranges , but also one of a simple , legally certain scheme which works well in the internal market , which is tailored to SMEs and is resistant to fraud .
The fact that the Commission plans to pick up this thread is good news . I would like to encourage the competent Commissioner to tackle this difficult dossier .
I believe that in the new VAT strategy , particular attention should be paid to the reform of VAT rules , in keeping with principles that actively promote attainment of the objectives of the internal market .
As the rapporteur points out , the current VAT system , with its increased complexity , not just in terms of rates , is not keeping pace with the development of the internal market .
In January 2009 , the VAT rate in Lithuania increased from 18-19 % , and to 21 % in September .
It is important that future changes do not dent foreign investor interest in Lithuania .
We must propose favourable tax planning opportunities .
According to the new VAT strategy , we should aim to reduce the administrative burden , remove tax obstacles and improve the business environment , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Prior to adopting a final decision , the Commission should fully consult public and private sectors .
VAT rates should be discussed during these consultations , as well as broader issues , such as the goal of setting a maximum rate and VAT structure and operational framework alternatives .
Therefore , I look forward to the Commission 's Green Paper on the review of the VAT system .
I voted in favour of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) annual report because I think that measures to maintain a low inflation rate , close to 2 % , while increasing liquidity in the markets , prevented the collapse of many financial institutions .
However , I recognise that the full recovery potential of the ECB 's measures did not unfold because their liquidity was not always passed on to the real economy .
It should be recalled that the crisis started out as a financial one , becoming an economic one , too , later on .
The governments of the Member States and the ECB have had to respond to the most serious crisis since the 1930s .
We have witnessed a contraction of gross domestic product , a drop in economic activity and an increase in budget deficits , resulting in reduced tax receipts and creating unsustainable public debt : it has been difficult to achieve figures comparable with those existing before the crisis .
This situation is a result of the lack of structural reforms within the EU , which is so obvious in the events in Greece and other countries of the euro area .
I therefore think that it is important to deal with the weaknesses in the financial system at global level and learn all the lessons from the crisis by improving the quality of risk management and the transparency of the financial markets .
The report on the European Central Bank annual report shows the European Parliament to be the most consistent champion and supporter of the attack by capital on the workers throughout the European Union .
It basically repeats the anti-grassroots decisions of the EU summit in October to create a controlled bankruptcy mechanism , to introduce stricter terms in the Stability Pact and apply it to the letter and to impose penalties on Member States which fail to comply with those terms .
It welcomes the money package made available at EU and Member State level for the stock exchange and other sectors of capital , in order to ensure that it remains profitable during the capitalist crisis .
It supports all the barbaric measures against the working and grassroots classes applied by the bourgeois governments in all the Member States of the EU .
In order to get the EU out of the capitalist economic crisis , the political representatives of capital propose that the rate of capitalist restructurings in all the Member States be stepped up , so as to maintain the profitability of the monopoly groups , at the expense of the workers , who are being called upon to pay for the crisis .
Ireland is the most recent and will not , of course , be the last example of the tragic consequences in store for the workers as a result of encouraging the sovereignty of the monopolies and their profitability .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the European Central Bank report on the basis of the excellent report by my German colleague , Mr Balz .
Having become a European institution with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the ECB , whilst being independent , cannot be indifferent to the wishes of the European people , represented by their parliaments , or of the Member States ' governments .
I therefore support the request for the ECB 's work and decision making to be transparent .
During the crisis , the ECB adjusted interest rates down to 1 % and continued unprecedented non-standard measures to support credit throughout 2009 .
Those measures have borne fruit .
I support the idea that lifting these measures needs to be well timed and coordinated with national governments .
In particular , it would be helpful if the ECB were to carry out a global , rather than regional , assessment of inflation in its monetary policy for setting intervention rates to exit the crisis .
In the European Parliament 's resolution on the ECB annual report 2009 , it is noted that the principles of the Stability and Growth Pact were not always fully respected in the past and therefore , it is necessary to ensure that in future , this pact is applied more coherently and effectively in the Member States .
I supported this resolution and believe that a monetary union needs strong coordination of economic policies and for the current gap in macro-prudential supervision to be closed by establishing a European Systemic Risk Board ( ESRB ) .
I feel that under the concept whereby the ESRB only gives warnings and recommendations with no actual enforcement , it is impossible to satisfy the principles of effective implementation and responsibility , and the ESRB cannot declare an emergency by itself .
Therefore , the ESRB must be given greater powers .
It is particularly important to call on the European Commission not to simply limit itself to amending the regulation on credit rating agencies , which would increase the liability of these agencies , but to present a proposal on the establishment of a European Credit Rating Agency which would facilitate an objective assessment of the economic and financial position of the Member States .
I voted in favour of the resolution by Parliament as I agree that the financial crisis in some countries within the euro area is a serious matter and reflects a certain dysfunction of the euro area , and because I believe that this shows the need for reform and for stronger coordination between the various economic policies .
I also agree with the call for the unrestricted and more coherent application of the Stability and Growth Pact , as I believe that the pact should be complemented by the development of an early warning system to detect possible inconsistencies , such as in the form of a ' European semester ' , in order not only to enhance surveillance and economic policy coordination so as to ensure fiscal consolidation , but - beyond the budgetary dimension - to address other macro-economic imbalances and strengthen enforcement procedures .
The monetary union needs strong and enhanced coordination of economic policies to be robust .
I would like to call upon the Commission to put forward proposals to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact by including specific targets for closing the competitiveness gap between European economies in order to stimulate job-creating growth .
I greatly appreciate the efforts of the European Central Bank .
I believe , in fact , that the ECB has shown that it is capable of meeting the objectives it is set and that its level of technical expertise has always proved equal to the situations faced , including in times of severe crisis such as now .
However , the very existence of unexpected variations in the key macro-economic indicators should make us stop and think about the intermediate mechanisms at work between monetary policy and the real economy .
I therefore think it necessary not only to set up other supervisory and control authorities to support the ECB , but also and , above all , to cover those spheres of responsibility which , hitherto , have not been seen as important .
In particular , Estonia 's forthcoming accession to the euro area is a source of concern .
An enlarged monetary union requires , in fact , greater internal cohesion .
The macro-economic performance of that Baltic state aside , in accordance with the standards required by the EU , greater convergence must be achieved among the euro area countries , not least to increase the capacity for action on the part of the institutions , which safeguard its stability and value .
I voted for the annual ECB report for 2009 .
The ECB continued its policy from 2008 , setting an inflation rate target of close to 2 % , while increasing liquidity in the markets .
The ECB therefore adjusted interest rates down to 1 % and continued the non-standard measures introduced in 2008 throughout 2009 .
The five key elements of the enhanced credit support were fixed rate full allotment , an expansion of the list of collateral , longer maturities for refinancing operations , liquidity provisions in foreign currencies and financial market support through a measured but significant covered bond purchase programme .
Close coordination is required with national governments in EU countries in connection with their own programmes , especially in the light of the crises which have hit Greece and , now Ireland , and of the gloomy prospect of them spreading .
I voted for the ' ECB annual report 2009 ' as I consider that it proposes a number of measures which could benefit the European Union 's economy .
These include creating a permanent mechanism for protecting the euro area against speculative attacks , monitoring the activities of current credit rating agencies and devising a possible European credit rating agency .
As rapporteur for my political group , I also highlighted the limitations of the Stability and Growth Pact in its current form .
The pact should be supplemented by an early warning system which will enhance the coordination of economic policies within the European Union .
I voted for this report because I advocate reform and stronger coordination of the economic policies within the euro area , given the dysfunction that the financial crisis has caused in the current system .
The proposals aiming to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact must take into account the competitiveness gap between European economies in order to stimulate growth that pays particular attention to job creation .
The crisis that we are experiencing is an opportunity to revise and improve things that have gone wrong in the past .
Strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact and supervising compliance with it are essential to preventing future imbalances in the euro area .
The creation of a European Systemic Risk Board and the replacing of the supervisory committees with three new supervisory authorities are measures that will be beneficial in terms of better economic supervision .
I agree with the rapporteur when he talks about the need for prudence regarding initiatives to regulate the financial markets .
It is as we have been arguing : better regulation does not necessarily mean more regulation .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given the European Central Bank ( ECB ) the status of an EU institution , which increases the responsibility of Parliament as an EU institution through which the ECB is accountable to the European public .
The ECB annual report 2009 deals primarily with the ECB 's reaction to the crisis , the exit strategy and governance topics .
The financial crisis which started about two years ago with the US sub-prime mortgage crisis rapidly spread to the EU and turned into an economic crisis as well , hitting the real economy .
Real GDP in the euro area shrank by 4.1 % in 2009 , the average general government deficit ratio increased to about 6.3 % and the public debt-to-GDP ratio rose from 69.4 % in 2008 to 78.7 % in 2009 .
The ECB acted correctly by adjusting interest rates down to 1 % and continuing with substantial and unprecedented non-standard measures to support credit .
That prevented the collapse of many financial institutions .
However , liquidity has not always been passed on to the real economy .
This crisis has clearly shown the need for greater transparency and better risk management in financial markets , sound public finances , and the urgent need to regain credibility .
The international financial system really is amoral and immoral .
The latest developments in the Irish crisis have reassured the banks that they will be able to carry on handsomely rewarding their shareholders and taking risks in the long term , since the Member States and the European taxpayers will always be there to save them .
Privatisation of profits and public ownership of large-scale losses ...
Heads I win , tails you lose ...
It is paradoxical , and indeed scandalous , that the turmoil in the stock market caused by Ireland 's sovereign debt is the direct consequence of the aid that the country granted to its banks - aid that has made its deficit worse than ever before and sent its debt soaring .
Moreover , the banks that it saved , or their sister banks , are the ones that are today speculating against it .
However , the main lesson to be learnt from all this is that the euro is a millstone round its Member States ' neck and that the European Central Bank 's policy , like the euro exchange rate , is geared solely towards Germany .
The Member States that have fared best are those that have retained some flexibility with regard to their currency and their exchange rates . Their national currency , that is !
It is high time everyone learnt from this .
in writing . - This initiative by the Parliament is of special importance this year as it gives MEPs a chance to give their opinion on how the European Central Bank has reacted to the banking crisis .
How we voted on this also gave us a chance to have our say on some of the other aspects of the current economic climate , such as causes of the crisis , governance and financial market reform .
It is important that the voice of the people 's branch of the European Union is heard on such an important topic .
I have voted to support the European Central Bank ( ECB ) annual report for 2009 as it clearly highlights the consistent action taken by the ECB and its primary objective of maintaining price stability .
In the crisis of 2009 , the ECB acted and reacted effectively . With independence and determination , it laid the foundations for a lasting climate of confidence .
Our most important proposal for improvement should be put into practice consistently .
In other words , the ECB should make its activities more transparent in order to further increase its legitimacy .
The new Treaty of Lisbon , which came into force on 1 December 2009 , made the ECB into a European Union body .
I very much welcome this , because the ECB is primarily accountable to Parliament , a fact of which many people are not aware .
It must continue to be able to make its financial policy decisions independently of political influence and to justify them to the citizens whom we represent .
The ECB was , and is , a reliable ally in finding a balance between sound public finances and the necessary reduction of debt in the Member States .
It has constantly underlined the fact that the euro area needs a stability pact with authority .
This must be applied to the letter and must not be circumvented or undermined .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which examined the ECB 's annual report for 2009 .
My group ( the S & D Group ) used the report to push for our core macro-economic policies , including : coordination of macro-economic policies by the Member States ; a permanent crisis-management framework ; a strengthened Growth and Stability Pact ; the possibility of creating a European credit rating agency ; credit for SMEs ; and flexible exit from government support following the crisis .
The serious economic crisis that has spread across the entire world has made itself very keenly felt in the EU .
The response of the European Central Bank to the crisis has been effective , although it has been guilty at times of acting late or with a lack of assertiveness , particularly in relation to the policy of reducing interest rates , which was more radical and effective in the United Kingdom and the US Federal Reserve .
We must learn from the mistakes made so that they may be avoided in the future .
The financial crisis in some countries within the euro area is therefore a serious matter for the euro area as a whole and reflects a dysfunction of the euro area .
This shows the need for reform and for stronger coordination of the economic policies within the euro area .
This task must be carried out by all the states that belong to the euro area so that it can finally be consolidated and can quickly escape from the pressure that it is experiencing at present .
The report by Mr Balz failed to bring clarity to the question of the manner in which the European Central Bank ( ECB ) supervised and regulated transactions and monetary policy during the crisis .
It is merely an attempt to clothe the bank 's operations in vague and cautious phrases .
In reality , it is essential not only to define the state of affairs but also to prevent any symptoms that threaten the development of the economy .
Only then can preparations be made in time and financial debts such as Greece 's EUR 110 billion budget deficit , Hungary 's EUR 28 billion budget deficit and Latvia 's EUR 7.8 million budget deficit be avoided altogether .


Nevertheless , I consider that , taken as a whole , the ECB report is a positive step .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Balz , with whom I have had the opportunity of working on this matter within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The European Central Bank has played an important and fundamental role during the economic crisis of recent years , and its representatives have often been instrumental in pointing out problems in the euro area .
The Member States have not always listened , but the coordination provided by the Frankfurt-based institution can only be regarded in a positive light .
The aid package put together and provided to Greece , just like the rapid responses , would not have been possible without an authority and a body such as the ECB .
Furthermore , with the recent approval of the package on Europe 's supervisory authorities , the ECB will acquire greater powers and authority to monitor and highlight anomalies in the system .
This is essential , just as it is essential for the ECB to maintain its independence and not be under the influence of any Member State .
The ECB annual report covers the reaction to and exit strategy from the crisis applied by the Bank during 2009 .
On the other hand , in its report , which I voted in favour of , the European Parliament sets particular store by the gradual withdrawal of the ECB emergency measures applied in 2008 as a result of the financial crisis ( 1 % interest rate , quantitative easing and inflation below 2 % ) .
This is especially important to Greece and the other states in the euro area as , in these cases , not only did the recession not end in 2009 ; on the contrary , it developed into a serious budgetary crisis .
Consequently , any change of stance by the ECB will need to take account of the new situation and be applied in close cooperation with the Member States currently hit by the debt crisis .
I am voting against this report .
It ignores , or at least underestimates , the recessionary effect of a policy to reduce public spending being carried out simultaneously by most of the EU Member States , just as the EU was leaving behind the major recession that began in 2008 .
Accepting this report means voting in favour of abandoning the policy of concerted stimulus that was implemented in 2009 .
The neoliberal ideology that is dominant in the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , which means that there is an ever-lurking threat of inflation , even when there is considerable untapped productive capacity , is making the euro area a hostage to the financial markets .
This ideology has returned to remind us that austerity is not enough , and that there needs to be a nominal reduction in wages and further deregulation of the labour market .
Since the drop in aggregate demand will affect the implementation of the budget by Greece and Ireland in 2011 , the ECB will then come and tell us that the austerity policy was right , but that it did not go far enough or deep enough .
This report embraces a real intellectual scam .
The current economic and financial crisis has made apparent the need to implement EU reforms that can strengthen supervision and the coordination of economic policies in the euro area and restore confidence in European public finances .
Important steps are being taken in this direction , particularly through the creation of a European Systemic Risk Board ( ESRB ) , which will close the current gap in macro-prudential supervision of the EU financial system , but it is vital to move forward with proposals for strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact in order to ensure budgetary consolidation and also to address other macro-economic imbalances and strengthen enforcement procedures .
This report , which I voted for , also draws attention to the fact that the austerity packages adopted by the governments of the Member States should not compromise their ability to promote economic recovery , with an emphasis on ensuring a balance between the process of consolidating public finances and meeting the need for investment in jobs and sustainable development , and using measures and instruments which can give a direction to the sacrifices imposed on the public , along with an end in sight .
in writing . - This report evaluates the 2009 annual report of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and the work done by the ECB during that year .
As the statement of the European Parliament on the ECB annual report 2008 had been delayed due to the elections in 2009 , not much time has passed since the European Parliament 's last statement on ECB activity .
The report on 2008 dealt mainly with the performance of the ECB in the financial and economic crisis .
Unfortunately , the situation has not changed since then .
Still , economic , financial and , to an increasing extent , political actions are widely dominated by the crisis .
The ECB annual report 2009 therefore still deals primarily with the ECB 's reaction to the crisis , the exit strategy and governance topics .
Recently , the work of the European Central Bank has focused on fighting the financial crisis and on attempts at rebuilding the stability of economic and monetary union .
Coping with the effects of such a serious crisis requires individual countries to adopt a new model of economic governance .
The European Central Bank should support measures leading to the recovery of budgetary balance by encouraging the repayment of existing loans instead of extending new loans to economies which are heavily in debt .
The financial crisis in individual Member States of the European Union represents a significant threat to the stability of the euro .
It also shows the deficiencies in the operation of the euro area and draws attention to the need for reform and more effective economic consolidation in the countries of the Union .
Care should also be taken to develop preventative mechanisms in the event of a worsening of the present crisis or if it should move into a new phase .
The European Union and the euro area can even emerge from the crisis stronger than they were , but we must draw the proper conclusions from the experiences of recent months .
I am convinced that the role of the European Central Bank and of the governments of individual EU Member States will be crucial in this process .
The European Central Bank ( ECB ) annual report is primarily an investigation into the way in which the ECB responded to the financial and economic crisis .
The ECB reacted quickly and intervened successfully .
By taking a series of extraordinary measures , it was able to ease the liquidity shortages on the markets .
However , now these measures must be dismantled cautiously and gradually , because by definition , ' extraordinary measures ' must not become the rule .
The banks and , in the meantime , the Member States which , because of the loss of confidence among the players on the financial markets , came to rely on the intervention of the ECB as an intermediary in order to access funding , must regain their independence .
The central bank constantly emphasises the fact that it is independent , but during the recent crisis , this no longer seems to have been important enough to enable us to refer to it as independence .
As a result of the massive capital injection in Ireland , in the form of emergency loans for the Irish banking system and the purchase of government bonds , the ECB itself is now relying on Ireland to accept the EU rescue package , so that it can once again service its loans from the ECB .
The ECB must oppose any efforts to make it into a political body .
The European Parliament report on the development of the civilian-military capabilities of the EU highlights the repulsive imperialist face of the EU and of the political representatives of capital .
It is a macabre manual for implementing the imperialist interventions of the EU and committing crimes against humanity .
It openly supports the ' new doctrine ' of NATO to ' intertwine internal and external security ' , calling on the EU to organise and plan its civil and military forces so that it can intervene directly , using combined civilian and military means , in every corner of the planet , in the name of so-called ' crisis management ' and ' to maintain peace ' .
Without mincing their words , the political representatives of the monopolies propose a series of measures to increase the efficacy of EU military missions , in order to strengthen its position in the battle between the imperialists , which is raging with unprecedented intensity both at global level and within the EU .
Proposals include a permanent EU operations centre in the form of a ' joint crisis management headquarters ' , new ' integrated police units ' , better use of the European Gendarmerie Force , new ' Civilian Response Teams ' , closer collaboration with NATO , ensuring NATO can rely on the ' EU 's civil capabilities ' and harmonising the EU 's ' development capabilities ' with NATO standards .
The ever-increasing interdependence between internal and external security is becoming clear .
Under these circumstances , the development of policies and capabilities for crisis management and conflict prevention is actually an investment in the security of European Union citizens .
The European External Action Service should be a major player in devising a truly comprehensive European approach to civil and military crisis management at European level and to conflict prevention , providing the EU with sufficient structures , human and financial resources to fulfil its global responsibilities .
When setting up the EEAS , the transfer must take place of the CSDP structures , including the Crisis Management Planning Directorate , the Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability , the EU Military Staff and the Situation Centre , to the EEAS , under the direct authority and responsibility of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
It is the High Representative 's direct duty to ensure that these structures will be integrated and operate coherently .
Close collaboration is required between the EEAS and all the other relevant units within the Commission in order to encourage the development of a comprehensive EU approach , especially with those dealing with issues relating to development , humanitarian aid , civil protection and public health .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Ehler , for having called the attention of this Chamber to a topic fundamental to the European Union , namely , civilian and military cooperation .
I voted in favour of this report because I support the need for closer cooperation between civilian and military capabilities in order to provide effective responses to present-day crises and security threats , including natural disasters .
I also approve of the idea of drafting a European Union White Paper on security and defence , based on systematic and rigorous security and defence reviews conducted by the States according to common criteria and a common timetable , which would define the Union 's security and defence objectives , interests and needs more clearly in relation to the means and resources available .
The recent emergency in Haiti also highlighted the need for the European Union to offer improved coordination and faster deployment of military assets in the context of disaster relief , in particular , air transport capabilities .
Given the importance of these missions , I feel it necessary that funding should be considered more quickly and , for the sake of transparency , for one budget line to be created for each mission .
The rapporteur successfully argues the need for a better coordination and division of tasks between civilian and military forces in crisis management .
The distinction between the strategic and operational dimensions is still vague at present .
I therefore support the rapporteur 's proposal for the creation of a permanent headquarters responsible for operational planning and conducting military operations .
With regard to the development of civilian-military capabilities , the Member States should set objectives that match their resources in terms of personnel deployment .
It would also be a good idea to establish real financial solidarity between the Member States .
Lastly , greater synergy between civilian and military research would be a big advantage , since it would help prevent repetition , duplication and , hence , unnecessary costs .
' Si vis pacem , para bellum ' ( ' If you wish for peace , prepare for war ' ) said the ancients .
Fortunately , the days of arms races are now over .
Nonetheless , the principle that inspired the Latin phrase is still relevant today .
There can be no serious and credible commitment to peace if the conditions are not in place to enforce it , in accordance with serious , objective rules .
In particular , without seeking to interfere in every dispute that may arise , the EU , as a major economic and political power , should make its presence felt in cases involving interests of any kind or nature , if necessary , also by using military means to restore order and re-establish peaceful conditions , as a precondition for resolving conflicts .
It follows that greater autonomy , together with a closer link with NATO and with the other existing bodies , can only increase Europe 's authority , credibility and cohesion .
We want the establishment of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) to contribute to devising a truly comprehensive European approach to civil and military crisis management at European level , as well as to conflict prevention and peacebuilding , providing the EU with sufficient structures , human and financial resources to fulfil its global responsibilities in line with the UN Charter .
Given that the UN Security Council has primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security , close cooperation must be established between the EU and the UN in the area of civilian and military crisis management and , in particular , in humanitarian relief operations where the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ( UNOCHA ) is in the lead role .
At the same time , it is desirable for this cooperation to be strengthened , particularly in those areas where one organisation is to take over from the other , especially in light of the mixed experience in Kosovo .
I voted for this report because I argue that effective responses to present-day crises and security threats , including natural disasters , often need to be able to draw on both civilian and military capabilities and require closer cooperation between them .
We live in a world in which , firstly , there is ever less expectation of a conventional attack on the EU or any of its Member States and , secondly , threats are increasingly scattered across the globe , whether they are from international terrorism , cyber attacks on crucial IT systems , long range missile attacks on European targets , or piracy in international waters .
As an organisation committed to peace preservation , conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction , and reinforcement of international security , it is therefore essential for the EU to be capable of acting as a global player in this area , capable of guaranteeing the security of its citizens within its territory .
I therefore believe that it is essential for the EU to be committed to cooperating within the United Nations and , in the Euro-Atlantic area , with NATO , which this weekend approved its new Strategic Concept , aiming to reinforce the Alliance 's ability to deal with non-conventional threats and strengthen its ties with the European Union ; this includes enhancing ' practical cooperation in operations throughout the crisis spectrum , from coordinated planning to mutual support in the field ' .
The EU has committed itself to defining and pursuing common policies and actions to preserve peace , prevent conflicts , consolidate post-conflict rehabilitation and strengthen international security , in line with the principles of the United Nations Charter .
Through its civilian crisis management , the EU already makes a clear contribution to global security , reflecting its core values and principles .
The establishment of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) should contribute further to the development of a truly comprehensive European approach to civilian and military crisis management , conflict prevention and peacebuilding , and provide the EU with adequate structures , staffing levels and financial resources to meet its global responsibilities .
On this point , I would like to highlight the need to speed up the provision of financing for civilian missions and to simplify decision-making procedures and implementation arrangements .
This means that the Council needs to quickly take the appropriate decisions to establish the start-up fund as outlined in Article 41 of the Treaty on the European Union ( TEU ) , after consulting Parliament .
This report is a good reflection of the crisis of capitalism and the gunboat diplomacy with which the EU wants to respond to it , in partnership with NATO and the US .
From the outset , the mouthpieces of the interests of big capital - the majority of Members of this House - have been seeking to cover up the historical and current responsibilities of the EU for the world 's existing security problems .
This resolution , therefore , maintains the thesis of preventative wars with the misleading argument that the ' security ' of the citizens of EU countries is guaranteed by a policy of intervention , violating the sovereignty of countries and peoples and making war wherever and whenever the interests of the EU 's economic groups are at stake ; this will only increase with the creation of the European External Action Service .
In reality , it is increasingly clear that the EU is now part of the threat that is hanging over people .
At a time when workers are having important rights taken away and draconian measures are being imposed on people under the pretext of a lack of resources , the channelling of funds into arms purchases and the strengthening of the war industry should be condemned .
in writing . - Concerning the vote on the resolution on the Ehler Report , Labour MEPs were happy to be able to give their support .
I and my Labour colleagues are happy to support positive civilian and military cooperation and greater capacity building in order to help preserve peace , prevent conflicts and consolidate post-conflict rehabilitation .
At this time of financial struggle across Europe , we question , however , the need for the establishment of a permanent EU operational headquarters and what added value it would bring to the positive work already being done .
in writing . - I welcome some aspects of this report dealing with civilian-military cooperation and the development of civilian-military capabilities .
I particularly welcome cooperation on humanitarian crises and natural disasters .
It is necessary to provide effective responses to current crises and threats to security , including natural disasters , so we often need to be able to draw on both civilian and military capabilities and require closer cooperation between them .
The development of the EU 's comprehensive approach and its combined military and civilian crisis management capabilities have been distinctive features of the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) , and represent its core added value .
The establishment of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) is further contributing to the development of a truly comprehensive European approach to civilian and military crisis management , conflict prevention and peacebuilding , and providing the EU with adequate structures , staffing levels and financial resources to meet its global responsibilities , in line with the UN Charter .
I have voted against the report on civilian-military cooperation and the development of civilian-military capabilities .
The report describes in great detail the current developments in security policy .
However , in my opinion , it does not provide clear , decisive and positive answers to the important questions , such as whether the EU will be able to stand on its own feet in the long term or whether it will maintain its very close links to NATO and , therefore , will hand over its foreign policy responsibilities to the USA .
in writing . - With civil and ethnic wars gradually replacing interstate wars to dominate the scene of 21st century conflicts , the line drawn between peacekeeping and peacebuilding is increasingly blurred .
The changing nature of conflict calls for more extensive cooperation between civilian and military capabilities .
The highly successful EU-led Aceh Monitoring Mission ( AMM ) from 2005 to 2006 serves as an important example and reminder of how civilian-military synergies can anchor peace and build confidence in an unstable environment in a timely and effective way .
While the decommissioning team , dominated by military experts , monitored the rapid and successful disarmament process , the civilian team of AMM worked to turn the process into a platform for further political dialogue and for both parties to credibly commit themselves to permanent peace .
The application of civilian and military expertise should not be restricted by the technical labelling of the nature of operations , but should instead be decided on the basis of appropriateness and cost-efficiency .
I voted in favour of this report because I think it plays a critical role in facilitating the further development of a non-aggressive but nevertheless coherent and competent face of EU foreign policies .
I voted in favour of Mr Ehler 's report because I believe that this is an important issue and that the report deals with it in a serious way and takes a number of aspects into account .
Cooperation as envisaged in the report is a typical activity of peacekeeping operations , within the scope of which the military component cooperates with the civilian component ( local authorities , national , international and non-governmental organisations and agencies ) in order to restore acceptable living conditions and begin reconstruction .
Such activities help to ensure and maintain full cooperation between military forces , civilian populations and local institutions , with the aim of creating the conditions necessary to help achieve the objectives set .
It is therefore important for the European Union to support and promote this type of cooperation .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree that , in order for the EU to meet its responsibilities to preserve peace , prevent conflicts , strengthen international security and assist populations facing disasters , it is vital to foster better coordination between civilian and military resources and to ensure that the necessary resources are available to strengthen their global crisis management abilities .
in writing . - We abstained on this report because we keep seeing too much effort being focused on military capacities , and too little on the civilian and prevention activities .
Once again , Parliament has voiced its strong support for the development of the EU 's common security and defence policy , despite the fact that it is consistently refused an active role in shaping this policy .
We are all aware of the added value of the policy which , above all , represents an opportunity to combine military and civilian capabilities , although in practice , as highlighted by the report , much remains to be done .
I support the integration of this policy 's institutional structures into the European External Action Service , although I would echo the rapporteur in stressing the need for the EEAS to cooperate closely with structures remaining within the Commission .
in writing . - While we would clearly support the principle of enhanced civilian-military cooperation in certain activities , this report has an entirely different thrust .
It is essentially about taking forward the EU 's ambitions in the defence field in order to promote EU integration .
We do not support these objectives .
In particular : the idea of an EU Defence White Paper that would ' explicitly identify opportunities for the pooling of defence resources at EU level ' ; the demand for increases in staff to man duplicative EU military structures ; the establishment of a permanent EU ' operational HQ , responsible for the operational planning and conduct of EU military operations ' ; and the idea of a vanguard group of nations to take forward defence integration using the Treaty of Lisbon 's mechanism of ' Permanent Structured Cooperation ' .
There are many more examples .
For all these reasons , we voted against the resolution .
The Treaty of Lisbon has made the establishment of a common defence policy into one of the EU 's concrete objectives .
The aim is to improve the ability of the European Union to act in a crisis management role by allowing financial , civilian and military resources to be provided and used more efficiently .
Military capabilities will be developed at an EU level among those Member States which want this by means of a Permanent Structured Cooperation ( PSC ) .
Mr Ehler 's report calls for the conditions for military cooperation to be laid down and for a clear definition of the PSC .
For me as an Austrian , clear definitions are of great interest , in particular , with regard to the implementation of the solidarity clause as outlined in Article 222 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the mutual assistance clause as outlined in Article 42 ( 7 ) of the Treaty on the European Union , which are also called for in the report .
The mutual assistance clause specifically states that it will not prejudice the specific character of the security and defence policy of certain Member States , which guarantees that neutrality will be maintained .
As before , the solidarity clause leaves to the national authorities the decision on whether , and in what form , EU assistance should be requested .
However , the citizens of Austria have become very concerned following a series of different reports in the media and , therefore , we need definitive information about these new military components of the EU .
I voted for the report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a long-term plan for the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay and the fisheries exploiting that stock , because it should contribute to maintaining biomass stocks at levels that will enable their sustainable exploitation , on the basis of scientific advice .
Given the importance of anchovy fishing in the Bay of Biscay , the damage caused by the closure of the fishery to groups dependent on it ( fishers , net menders , the canning industry , etc . ) and the fact that the loss of income has not been covered by the compensatory aid granted by the Member States , it is essential to establish a long-term plan for the recovery of the anchovy stock so that fishers can start making use of these resources , without threatening this vital species for the European fishing and canning industries .
With regard to the 10 % reduction in fishing quotas and how exploitation is calculated , I believe that such measures are excessive , as they forget the economic and social impact that they could have on the industries and populations involved .
The objective of this proposal for a regulation is to establish a long-term plan for the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay and the fisheries exploiting that stock .
The anchovy fishery in the Bay of Biscay has been closed since 2005 due to the poor condition of the anchovy stock .
In order to raise the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay to a level which allows it to be exploited sustainably , it is necessary to put in place long-term management measures to ensure that the exploitation of this stock is compatible with sustainable exploitation , thus ensuring , as far as possible , the stability of the fishery while maintaining a low risk of stock collapse .
I welcome the approval of a long-term plan in this report rather than annual ad hoc measures for allocating fishing opportunities , so as to ensure the stability of the fisheries sector and strengthen monitoring and enforcement .
I agree with support for the competent regional administrations in their monitoring , inspection and surveillance work , as they are closer to what is happening , and with the need to draw up and publish a report before the fishing season begins .
The worrying conservation status of the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay led to the closure of the fisheries in 2005 .
The result of this closure - which has had the inevitable tragic economic and social consequences , which it is always necessary in this and other cases to guard against and alleviate as much as possible - is that anchovy stocks have been recovering , making it possible to start exploiting them again .
We believe that decisions about closing fisheries , reopening them and setting the conditions for the exploitation of their resources must always be based , first and foremost , on scientific knowledge and advice about the state of the resources .
It is , therefore , essential for this knowledge to be as rigorous and up-to-date as possible , meaning that there must be sufficient financing for this purpose , specifically through the financial instruments of the common fisheries policy .
Long-term plans constitute an important instrument in fisheries management , enabling the essential conservation of fisheries resources at sustainable levels to be combined with guaranteed medium-term prospects for exploiting these resources , which is indispensable for giving economic and social stability to fishing and the local communities that depend on it .
in writing . - The anchovy fishery in the Bay of Biscay has been closed since 2005 due to the poor state of that stock .
This report details the objectives of a plan to maintain the biomass of the stock of anchovy in the Bay of Biscay at a level that allows its sustainable exploitation in accordance with maximum sustainable yield , on the basis of scientific advice , and while ensuring as much stability and profitability for the fishing sector as is practicable .
The plan is similar to other long-term plans for pelagic fisheries ( such as that recently agreed for the West of Scotland stock of herring ) in that it provides a harvest control rule for exploitation at high long-term yields whilst protecting against the risk of stock collapse .
The suspension of anchovy fishing in the Bay of Biscay since 2005 has brought great difficulties for economic operators whose livelihoods depended on this economic activity .
Now , five years after fishing was suspended , the stock of this species in the Bay of Biscay has recovered to acceptable levels , so it is now possible to resume fishing for it , but based on a long-term plan to keep the anchovy stock above the level where it is in danger of becoming extinct , so that this activity can once again add to this economic sector in this area .
Although catch quotas have been introduced for the anchovy fishery in the Bay of Biscay , this does not apply to pelagic species and tuna .
The number of fishing vessels in this area has declined from 391 vessels in 2005 to 239 vessels in 2009 , which has had a significant influence on the economy of the area .
However , according to the rapporteur , the anchovy stock has not yet recovered .
A new management plan is needed to resolve this problem which is linked to the anchovy stock and which does not need to be renegotiated every year .
The rapporteur believes that the new plan should also define the control mechanisms used to inspect catch levels .
I have abstained , because the rapporteur has explained that the articles in the plan relating to the controls are likely to be amended by a new control regulation from the Council and she does not know exactly what this involves .
The anchovy fishery in the Bay of Biscay is of considerable social and economic importance .
This fishery has been closed since 2005 , and the fleet has declined from 391 vessels in 2005 to 239 vessels in 2009 , directly affecting more than 2 500 families .
This closure has caused serious damage to the groups concerned ( fishermen , net menders , the canning industry , etc . ) .
The loss of income has not been covered by the compensatory aid granted by the Member States .
The introduction of this plan will make it possible to remove the management of anchovy from the political negotiation in December of each year , placing it on course to achieve the objectives for the management of European resources in the long term , thereby guaranteeing sustainability and maximum yield .
The exploitation rule defines the TAC ( or total allowable catch ) in the fishery for each year ( from July to June of the following year ) , immediately after the assessment of the stock in line with the fishing seasons in May of each year , thus immediately making maximum use of this information .
All the productive and local businesses involved await the reopening of this fishery and have made a significant contribution to drafting the paper .
For these reasons , I am minded to vote in favour of the provision as a whole .
The anchovy fishery in the Bay of Biscay is of great socio-economic importance .
The fishery has , however , been closed for five years , and this has directly affected fishermen and their families , as well as the income that revolved around that employment sector , which includes net menders and the canning industry .
Unfortunately , the aid granted by the Member States has not made up for the serious loss of income .
This closure should therefore be reviewed and a long-term plan established to find a solution that takes the various demands into account .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Mrs Bilbao Barandica 's report .
I did so primarily because it introduces an exploitation rule that will maximise catches , on the basis of the precautionary principle , and will provide expected maximum economic levels for that fishery .
The anchovy fishery in the Bay of Biscay is of great socio-economic importance , and its closure in 2005 has caused great damage to groups that depend on it ( fishermen , net menders , the canning industry , etc . ) .
I voted in favour of this report , as I believe that establishing a long-term plan will address the need to rationalise the exploitation of this resource , ensuring the long-term sustainability of the fishery while mitigating the risk that the anchovy stock will collapse .
This debate on the situation of anchovy stocks and the recovery plan is , as has been said , a turning point , both for the species and for relations between the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
On this issue , our group has supported the precautionary proposals made by the Commission from the start , especially as regards : 1 ) the exploitation rule , ( which we advocate should not be greater than 0.3 ) ; 2 ) the fact that the total allowable catch ( TAC ) should take into account live bait ; and 3 ) the fact that any reduction of the TAC , if it is deemed necessary , should be a minimum of 25 % .
These three issues were finally accepted by the majority of members of the Committee on Fisheries , and I trust that this will be the case when we vote in plenary .
This is clearly a paradigmatic case , and I trust that we will have learned our lesson , and that for once , we will act like holistic doctors who cure , instead of acting like forensic doctors .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that the measures presented by the Commission for the monitoring and surveillance of fishing zones are necessary .
This resolution is an attempt to tackle the lack of information about horse mackerel stocks by establishing a formula for vessels involved in the horse mackerel fishery , regarding an annual ceiling of maximum allowable landings and catches from defined areas .
The principal parts of the sector affected by this plan are the owners , operators and crew of pelagic fishing vessels operating in the distribution area of the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel , namely the North Sea , areas west of the British Isles , the western English Channel , waters west of Brittany , the Bay of Biscay and off north and northwest Spain , with the main objective of ensuring an exploitation of living aquatic resources that provides sustainable economic , environmental and social conditions .
It is also important to note that Portugal has managed to preserve its fishing interests and enjoy its historic right to fish in those areas .
I would like to emphasise the positive solution for the benefit of small-scale coastal fisheries which is completely compatible with safeguarding resources .
The western stocks are , economically speaking , the most significant stocks of horse mackerel living in EU waters .
Because of this , we must think both in terms of a long-term exploitation of live aquatic resources which will provide the conditions necessary for sustainability and development , and from a social viewpoint - for the owners , operators and crews of fishing vessels .
This is why I agree with the Commission 's proposal to establish a long-term plan for the western stocks of Atlantic horse mackerel and how these stocks are to be fished .
I voted for the report on the proposal establishing a long-term plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the fisheries exploiting that stock , because it contributes to ensuring the economically , environmentally and socially sustainable exploitation of the stocks .
This proposal , which is of interest to Portugal , also takes into account the specific characteristics and purposes of the fleets involved , not least the artisanal fleet , with a view to supplying high quality fresh fish to the general public .
Defending fishing along with the economic and social interests involved - over and above food interests - is not the same as defending the right to fish without rules or limits .
We know that fishery resources are finite and that intensive fishing means there is no time for the exploited populations to reproduce in sufficient numbers .
It is therefore important to create plans to maintain and conserve fish stocks , seeking to reconcile the economic and social interests at stake with the preservation of the species , which is essential to the long-term maintenance of fishing opportunities .
With the amendments that have been tabled and adopted , this report defends traditional horse mackerel fishing and , in particular , enables 30 Portuguese vessels to continue fishing in the Bay of Biscay , which is crucial to the national interest , as is clearly pointed out by Mrs Patrão Neves , the shadow rapporteur of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for this report .
This proposal is an attempt to tackle the lack of information about horse mackerel stocks by establishing a formula for vessels involved in the horse mackerel fishery , taking into account an annual ceiling of maximum allowable landings and catches of horse mackerel from defined areas .
This formula is based on the most reliable scientific and biological indicators available at present for the development of the stock .
I welcome the inclusion of respect for the activity of artisanal fleets which traditionally specialise in this type of fishery for the purposes of local consumption of fresh fish , so zones should not be established too far from the coast .
I would like to highlight the important role that Parliament has played in repealing and amending the Commission 's delegated acts on this matter .
Multiannual plans constitute important instruments in fisheries management , enabling the essential conservation of fisheries resources at sustainable levels to be combined with guaranteed medium-term prospects for exploiting these resources , which is indispensable for giving economic and social stability to fishing and the local communities that depend on it .
We therefore welcome the adoption of this report , as well as the adoption of the amendment tabled by our group regarding the zonal distribution of total allowable catches ( TAC ) , which we consider crucial to an economically and socially fair approach to managing stocks .
When limits to fishing activity are set , coastal and artisanal fishing , whose purpose is to supply the public with fresh fish for consumption , should not be treated in the same way as industrial fishing , which is geared to industrial processing and export .
In order for fishery resources management to definitely take biological and environmental issues into account as well as economic and social ones , the specificities of the fleets and the destination of the fish must be acknowledged as aspects to be taken into consideration when setting TACs .
This report I have provides a long-term management plan for one of the most important fish stocks in Europe .
The long-term horse mackerel plan will ensure that stocks will be able to reach the maximum sustainable level in future .
The proposal was originally put forward by the Pelagic Regional Advisory Council , a proposal outlining the importance of the European pelagic sector as regards the sustainable management of fish stocks .
Members from Spain and Portugal wanted to create two areas for the total allowable catch ; that recommendation does not make sense and would be to the detriment of the Irish pelagic fleet .
I succeeded in modifying those amendments in the final vote .
This report is one of the first fisheries legislative initiatives adopted under the Treaty of Lisbon , and therefore some procedural delay was involved .
in writing . - Atlantic horse mackerel has grown in importance in my own constituency and last year , some GBP 2 million worth of the fish was landed into Scottish ports by foreign boats alone .
This figure shows that it is of importance to a number of nations and it is important that the stock is properly managed .
I fully agree with Mr Gallagher that the western stock should be dealt with as a single stock , and I believe that the fishing nations involved should have the right to cooperate in managing this important resource .
in writing . - This proposal aims at ensuring an exploitation of living aquatic resources that provides sustainable economic , environmental and social conditions .
While it is still on the first reading , there is a possibility of introducing amendments at the further stages .
The general direction of this proposal is positive and thus it should be given time for others to have their say .
in writing . - The proposal establishes a long-term plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the fisheries exploiting that stock .
The Commission laid down a legal management instrument for the stock of horse mackerel according to available conservation reference points and long-term sustainability considerations .
The proposal aims at ensuring an exploitation of living aquatic resources that provides sustainable economic , environmental and social conditions .
The establishment of a long-term plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the fisheries exploiting that stock is crucial for the efficient and proper use of fisheries resources .
In this way , and provided that the rules are followed , the fish stocks will not collapse and it will be possible to exploit these resources sustainably .
In this report , it is also important that Portugal has the opportunity to maintain its previous catch levels , as this is vital to maintain a healthy fishing industry , an industry which has suffered many setbacks in recent times .
During a time when overfishing of stocks is becoming more widespread , we need more discussions about introducing catch quotas and , consequently , also about how these can be adhered to and monitored .
However , scientists have not yet succeeded in accurately determining the level of fish stocks , in this case , of the Atlantic horse mackerel .
As a result , all the measures that are taken are based on estimates .
Nevertheless , these estimates must be used to establish the total allowable catches .
I have abstained because the report does not focus in sufficient detail on the economic aspects of mackerel fishing .
I voted in favour of Mr Gallagher 's report because I support its content and message .
I believe in fact that , as science develops , the values used for the fixing of biological references could be subject to new and different scientific advice .
In these circumstances , it is obvious that the plan should provide for the possibility of adapting the reference factors .
I agree with the rapporteur as regards area access for vessels fishing horse mackerel .
It is advisable , in fact , to create a more flexible rule than that suggested by the Commission .
It must be possible for vessels fishing in one area to land the catch in a port in another area .
I believe , therefore , that a system whereby the master of a fishing vessel has to keep a record of catch and location is feasible and fair .
Multiannual plans are a fundamental instrument for ensuring that the exploitation of fishing resources takes place under sustainable economic , environmental and social conditions .
I have therefore supported this report on the proposal establishing a multiannual management plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel , and I welcome the fact that the amendment put forward by Mrs Patrão Neves has been adopted , as it is essential for ensuring that the artisanal fishery is protected , along with Portugal 's interests in this matter .
in writing . - The dispute among the institutions centres around what part of the fisheries management plan is related to setting the TAC , and therefore is the sole responsibility of the Council .
A few Member States think that Council alone should decide the whole plan , but that view is not widely supported , not even by the Council 's legal service .
Most feel that the mathematical rule that sets the TAC should be decided by the Council , rather than by codecision .
On 1 December 2009 , the day on which the Lisbon Treaty entered into force , the Committee on Fisheries had an ' indicative vote ' on the amendment that had been tabled by Mr Gallagher and others , but we did not proceed to the final vote on the draft report as amended .
The aim was to give the rapporteurs ( Mr Gallagher on horse mackerel and Ms Bilbao Barandica on anchovy ) a political mandate to negotiate with the Council .
Finally , after almost a year of dithering on the part of the Council , the Committee on Fisheries decided to proceed to a full vote in committee to put pressure on the Council to move .
In economic terms , the western stock of horse mackerel is the most important in EU waters .
The European Commission proposal establishes a long-term plan for this stock as well as the fisheries exploiting it .
It is desirable to ensure an exploitation of living aquatic resources that provides sustainable economic , environmental and social conditions .
This proposal could even serve as a model for future multiannual plans dealing with the regulation of fishing opportunities within European Union waters .
I support the amendments tabled in Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries to create greater flexibility when determining the biological reference factors and how the total removal amounts are calculated by setting upper and lower limits , as well as greater coordination with the legislation establishing a Community control system for ensuring compliance with the rules of the common fisheries policy .
I am therefore voting in favour of this report .
The Baltic Sea has been classified as a ' particularly sensitive sea area ' ( PSSA ) by the International Maritime Organisation 's Marine Environment Protection Committee .
This places the Baltic Sea among the most precious and most sensitive marine ecosystems in the world .
I voted for the provisions contained in the document according to which we must pave the way for the sustainable exploitation of fish stocks , without any need for marketing standards to be lowered .
In order to limit effectively the discard of an excessive number of juvenile and under-sized specimens belonging to target or non-target species , it is important that the fishing industry should be encouraged to use the most selective fishing gear and not to fish in areas in which there are large numbers of under-sized fish and non-target species .
We must begin a review of the discard system and I feel that this will be one of the most important issues in 2011 as we debate the reform of the EU 's common fisheries policy .
We are all following the effects on the environment of human activity and mass fishing with great concern , which we share regarding dwindling stocks and uncontrolled industrial fishing .
On account of this , I am voting for the introduction of the sustainable exploitation of live aquatic resources and a review of the protected areas in the Baltic Sea .
I voted for this report because it calls for restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea .
There is a pressing need for industrial fishing in the Baltic Sea to be stopped .
As there is a lack of reliable scientific data on the basis of which fish catches in industrial fisheries can be assessed , it is essential that full documentation of catches should be introduced immediately , together with full monitoring on the vessels engaged in these fishing activities .
I agree with the European Parliament 's position that it is necessary to take immediate action under the common fisheries policy to settle the issue of industrial fishing in the Baltic Sea , bearing in mind that , from an environmental point of view , such fishing is harmful to the Baltic Sea 's ecosystem .
We must take into account the fact that the Baltic Sea is among the most precious marine ecosystems in the world , and that the Baltic Sea region has been classified as a ' particularly sensitive sea area ' ( PSSA ) .
Furthermore , the climate in the Baltic Sea is changing , and different species of fish are adapting to this , meaning that their migration and spawning patterns are also changing .
For this reason , I agree with Parliament 's call for the Commission to carry out a review of the marine protection areas in the Baltic Sea .
For the European Union , and especially for a country like Portugal that has a calling to the sea and to fishing , as well as large-scale fishing and canning industries , it is essential to maintain fishing as a viable and sustainable economic activity .
Portugal needs fishing and , therefore , needs the sea to remain able to provide us with fish and species to remain able to reproduce .
For this very reason , I agree with the rapporteur when he says that ' in order to prevent by-catches effectively and limit the discard of an excessive number of juvenile and under-sized specimens belonging to target or non-target species , it is absolutely vital that the fishing industry should be encouraged to use the most selective fishing gear and not to fish in areas in which there are large numbers of under-sized fish and non-target species ' .
In order to prevent highgrading and limit the discard of an excessive number of juvenile and under-sized specimens , it is absolutely vital that the fishing industry should be encouraged to use the most selective fishing gear and not to fish in areas in which there are large numbers of under-sized fish and non-target species .
I believe that bringing in a complete ban on discards in the case of flounder or other fish belonging to the flounder family is inappropriate , as this will have a negative impact on flounder stocks .
This ban on discards might also have the perverse effect of being used as an argument to legalise the large-scale fishing of under-sized cod in the Baltic Sea .
It is worth pointing out that the Baltic Sea has been classified as a ' particularly sensitive sea area ' ( PSSA ) by the International Maritime Organisation 's Marine Environment Protection Committee .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which backs a proposal designed to simplify administration but does not make substantive changes to the restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea .
Fishing has to be a sustainable economic activity over the long term , and this is only possible with the careful management of fishery resources .
The concerns raised by the rapporteur are therefore legitimate and take into account the need for species protection and biodiversity conservation .
I therefore agree with the prohibitions and restrictions adopted here .
Given the limited fish stocks in the Baltic Sea , we must strictly regulate the catch of valuable fish species .
It is important for this purpose clearly to define the task of the competent European Union organisations , so that monitoring can be implemented and restrictions imposed on the illogical exploitation of marine resources .
It is essential to impose quotas in order to allow fish resources in the Baltic Sea to recover .
A clear signal should be sent to all parties engaged in fishing that the irrational exploitation of fish resources could have dire consequences .
Increasing numbers of fish species in the Baltic Sea are under immediate threat .
For example , fewer cod are being caught in the Baltic than was the case 15 years ago and the fish are smaller and of poorer quality .
One of the major contributory factors to this decline is industrial fishing and the way in which by-catches are handled .
Traditional , small-scale , inshore fisheries are , in some circumstances , able to guarantee that fish stocks are managed sustainably .
I have abstained , because the report clearly states that no reliable scientific data is available on this subject .
I voted in favour of the resolution .
Experience gained via the use of a discard system in the Baltic Sea shows that the system works well and is practicable for certain species of fish .
Species making up by-catches may have a low market value , they may be completely unsuitable for human consumption , or it might be illegal to land them .
The foundations are therefore being laid for the sustainable exploitation of fish stocks , without any need for marketing standards to be lowered .
In order to prevent by-catches effectively and limit the discard of a number of juvenile and under-sized specimens , it is absolutely vital that the fishing industry should be encouraged to use the most selective fishing gear and not to fish in areas in which there are large numbers of under-sized fish and non-target species .
Variable closed periods should also be introduced that fit in with fish spawning cycles .
The climate in the Baltic Sea is changing , and different species of fish are adapting to this , meaning that their migration and spawning patterns are also changing .
In the light of these considerations , a review of the protection areas would appear necessary .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that it is vital to promote the sustainable management of marine resources , so as to be consistent with the objective of preserving fish stocks in the Baltic , which is one of the most valuable and sensitive ecosystems in the world .
in writing . - The detailed technical rules for fishing in the Baltic Sea ( mesh size , closed areas , etc . ) are included in Council Regulation 2187 / 2005 .
However , prior to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the Council often took short-cut measures to adopt such rules quickly by including them in the regulation on quotas .
For instance , Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1226 / 2009 fixing quotas for 2010 has provisions related to technical measures , namely Article 7 on the prohibition of highgrading , and in Annex III on the restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot .
After Lisbon , this is no longer legal , so Council Regulation 2187 / 2005 must be amended .
That is the sole purpose of this proposal , and it was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Fisheries .
Next year , the European Parliament will debate the reform of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
I agree that this process must include measures to improve the sustainable exploitation of fishery resources and the effective management of marine resources .
As the International Maritime Organisation has indicated , the Baltic Sea is a ' particularly sensitive sea area ' .
This places the Baltic Sea among the most sensitive marine ecosystems in the world , but we also must not forget the human side of this issue which is not mentioned in the report .
The fishing industry has deep-rooted traditions in Lithuania .
Although the fisheries sector accounts for a relatively small proportion of Lithuania 's GDP , it is particularly important for the Lithuanian economy .
Regions of Lithuania that are dependent on fishing have suffered significant economic and social difficulties in recent years due to declining fishing levels and stock conservation policy .
In Lithuania , it is now becoming increasingly difficult to make a living from fishing related activities .
Due to low pay , such work is unattractive to young people .
Consequently , Lithuania and other EU Member States must continue to implement most of the policies defined under the European Fisheries Fund .
This assistance will help to create new jobs , will increase the value of fishery products and will promote eco-tourism , etc .
in writing . - We abstained on the Bilbao Barandica , Gallagher and Ferreira reports on the grounds that they contained beneficial and harmful proposals in the same instrument .
However , we voted in favour of the Gróbarczyk report , despite having misgivings about some of its content ( e.g. its suggestion that the discard system might have worked well for certain species of fish - we are opposed to the discard system completely ) .
We voted in favour of it because it promised a review of the discard system .
This is about as much as we can hope for within the confines of the common fisheries policy .
On the whole , I agree with the proposed amendments , given that the introduction of alien species is one of the main reasons why ecosystems are being thrown out of kilter and , along with the destruction of natural habitats , one of the biggest contributory factors implicated in global biodiversity loss , as is acknowledged by the Commission .
I therefore support the proposals laying down conditions for the introduction of alien and locally absent species , by strictly defining the requirements with which closed aquaculture facilities will have to comply , as well as the need to supervise facilities , the aim being to ensure the technical requirements proposed by specialists .
Particularly at a time when a new European strategy in this area is being launched , aquaculture requires substantial support for scientific research and technological development in the area of farming native species so as to enable greater diversification .
I agree with the amendments to ensure Parliament 's involvement in this area by adapting the old comitology provisions to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
First of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Ferreira , for drafting this report , for which I voted in favour .
Recent surveys have revealed a need to develop the European aquaculture sector and intensify scientific research in the field of native species breeding .
In this way , it will be possible to guarantee improved safety , quality and diversification of products offered to consumers and therefore ensure greater environmental protection .
With regard to the introduction of exotic species in closed aquaculture systems which , according to the Commission , primarily concerns ' aquaculture and restocking practices ' , I believe that this practice must be accompanied by strict monitoring of these facilities , of the systems and the activities for transport of these animals in order to prevent any escapes that could create disturbances in native ecosystems and natural habitats , representing one of the major factors in terms of making a significant contribution to biodiversity loss on a global scale .
I voted for the report concerning the use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture , since it will make it possible to strengthen the requirements to which closed aquaculture facilities and the transport of species should be subject , so as to minimise the impact on ecosystems and biodiversity .
The European aquaculture sector has more than 16 500 companies , a global annual turnover in excess of EUR 3.5 billion and employs approximately 64 000 people , both directly and indirectly .
Moreover , with fishery stocks becoming scarce , aquaculture is creating innumerable opportunities for European industries .
Relaxing the introduction procedure for alien and locally absent species in aquaculture , as is being proposed , must be balanced by strictly defining the requirements with which closed aquaculture facilities will have to comply , as well as by the necessary supervision of the facilities , the aim being to ensure that the technical requirements proposed by specialists will all be properly taken into account and observed .
The Commission 's proposed amendment to the present regulation is based on the outcome of the IMPASSE project , a concerted action focusing on the environmental impact of alien species in aquaculture .
This project proposes an operational definition of a closed aquaculture facility , tightening up and expanding on the definition currently in use , according to which ' the degree of risk associated with alien species could be reduced considerably , possibly to an acceptable level , if the potential for escape of target and non-target organisms is addressed during transportation and by well-defined protocols at the receiving facility ' .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree with the need to dispense with the permit requirement for introductions and translocations for closed aquaculture facilities , thus freeing operators of that administrative formality .
Regarding the report 's fundamental issue , as we stated during the debate - the relaxation in the introduction procedure for alien species in aquaculture , in ' closed facilities ' - must go hand in hand with the most precise possible definition of the requirements with which such facilities will have to comply , in keeping with up-to-date technical and scientific information .
The supervision of facilities must also be ensured before they open and while they are operational .
The sustainable development of aquaculture demands substantial support for scientific research and technological development in the area of farming native species .
These species must be given preference over alien ones , so as to enable the diversification of production and supply of foodstuffs , along with an improvement in quality , while also making for greater environmental security .
As regards the process of drawing up the report , I welcome the fact that the Commission has incorporated the proposals adopted by the Committee on Fisheries in its proposal for a regulation .
The only thing I find regrettable is that it has been considered indispensable to formally table a new proposal , leading to a delay in formalising the agreement at first reading .
in writing . - Whilst aquaculture is an important source of both jobs and food , it is important that the wider environment is protected from potential threats .
The existing legislation strives to do this and today 's proposal will not undermine those efforts .
Accordingly , I supported this report .
While fish stocks in the world 's oceans are slowly being depleted and catch yields are reaching their limits , the farming of fish and shellfish in aquaculture has been growing in importance in recent years .
Aquaculture production is consequently a growth sector , which is being afforded the necessary attention with this report .
The proportion of aquaculture facilities established inland , such as pond fish culture or flow-through systems , show higher growth rates than other food production sectors , and production in these facilities already exceeds that of maritime facilities .
Pond fish culture in particular has a long tradition : fish and crustaceans have been farmed for hundreds of years , mostly in artificial ponds .
Closed aquaculture systems clearly provide enormous ecological advantages as well as advantages with regard to the antibiotics problem .
I support the report , which calls for important framework conditions for closed aquaculture facilities and strictly defines the prerequisites for the introduction of exotic fish species .
In order to prevent disruption to native ecosystems through the optimum introduction of exotic species , it is important to support closed system farming .
in writing . - The Ferreira report deals with the amendment of Council Regulation No 708 / 2007 , which established a framework governing aquaculture practices in relation to alien and locally absent species .
This framework is now under revision after the completion of the so-called IMPASSE project , whose aim was to develop guidelines for environmentally sound practices for introductions and translocations in aquaculture .
I voted for the report .
The introduction of alien species is one of the main reasons for global biodiversity loss and the disturbance of ecosystems on Earth .
The introduction of alien species in aquaculture must therefore give rise to an exact definition of the requirements with which closed aquaculture facilities will have to comply , and the supervision of the facilities .
The transportation of target and non-target species should also be subject to strict rules and supervision .
For these reasons , I voted for this report .
I believe , however , that research and development for the purpose of farming native species should be strengthened so as to reduce the risks associated with introducing exotic species and promote more sustainable production .
The introduction of alien species is one of the main factors in the disturbance of ecosystems , along with the destruction of natural habitats , and one of the main reasons for global biodiversity loss .
Relaxing the introduction procedure for alien species in aquaculture must be balanced by a strict definition of the rules with which closed aquaculture facilities will have to comply , in accordance with the outcome of the IMPASSE project , as well as being subject to supervision , the aim being to ensure that the technical requirements proposed by specialists will all be properly taken into account and observed .
The sustainable development of European aquaculture demands substantial support for scientific research and technological development in the area of farming native species , so as to enable the production and supply of foodstuffs to be diversified and quality to be improved , while also guaranteeing greater environmental security .
Alongside the destruction of natural habitats , the introduction of alien species into our ecosystems is one reason for the global loss of biodiversity .
More and more species are dying out in aquacultures , which is leading to long-term damage to the entire ecosystem .
I have abstained , because the report does not go into sufficient detail about the actual problems involved .
The introduction of alien species is one of the main reasons why ecosystems are being thrown out of kilter and , along with the destruction of natural habitats , one of the biggest contributory factors implicated in global biodiversity loss .
The introduction of alien species into Europe 's coastal seas and inland waters is due , in a great many cases , to ' aquaculture and stocking practices ' .
The relaxation in the introduction procedure for alien species in aquaculture must go hand in hand with an exact definition of the requirements with which closed aquaculture facilities will have to comply and with the necessary supervision of the facilities , the aim being to ensure that the technical requirements proposed by specialists will all be properly taken into account and observed .
The sustainable development of European aquaculture demands substantial support for scientific research and technological development for the purpose of farming native species , so as to enable production and the supply of foodstuffs to be diversified and their quality improved , while also making for greater environmental security .
I therefore hope that there will be strong encouragement to bring this about .
I voted in favour of this report in view of the fact that the results of the IMPASSE project have revealed that ' the degree of risk associated with alien species could be reduced considerably , possibly to an acceptable level , if the potential for escape of target and non-target organisms is addressed during transportation and by well-defined protocols at the receiving facility ' .
It therefore makes complete sense to dispense with the permit requirement for introducing alien species into closed aquaculture facilities .
Reducing this administrative burden and the cost of permit applications is an important incentive for the aquaculture sector .
Provided it is accompanied by a strict definition of the requirements with which closed aquaculture facilities will have to comply , as well as by adequate monitoring of compliance , it will not compromise the necessary protection of biodiversity and the environment .
in writing . - The Commission 's proposal deals with amendments to a regulation on the use of alien species in aquaculture based on the IMPASSE project , which focused on the environmental impact of alien species .
This project has produced an operational definition of a closed aquaculture facility , which tightens up and enlarges upon the definition currently in use and embodies an approach whereby the degree of risk associated with alien species could be reduced considerably .
In the light of the above results , the Commission is proposing that introductions and translocations involving the use of closed aquaculture facilities be exempted from the permit requirement , thus dispensing operators from that administrative formality .
As the rapporteur notes , the introduction of alien species is one of the main reasons why ecosystems are being thrown out of kilter and , along with the destruction of natural habitats , one of the biggest contributory factors implicated in global biodiversity loss .
Many of these introductions into Europe 's coastal seas and inland waters are due to ' aquaculture and stocking practices ' .
With this in mind , the rapporteur tabled an amendment to specify that ' closed aquaculture facilities ' were limited to those on land , in order to reduce the possible survival of escapees .
Other amendments concerned the comitology provisions .
The use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture damages natural ecosystems that deserve protection from the EU , causing global biodiversity loss in particular .
The IMPASSE project is concerted action on the environmental impact of alien species in aquaculture , which has demonstrated the need to prevent the escape of these species and of biological material during transportation .
I welcome this European Parliament report because it is committed to biosecurity and , at the same time , to speeding up the administrative formalities relating to the permit requirement for introductions and translocations for closed aquaculture facilities .
Clearly and rigorously defining ' closed aquaculture facility ' , as well as the regularly updated listing of all such facilities by Member States , will lead to the sustainable development of this sector .
The Member States must supervise the facilities themselves and the means by which species are transported .
I also support the commitment to scientific research and technological development as a means of reducing this sector 's harmful effects on natural ecosystems .
Finally , I would highlight the fact that this regulation was amended using the ordinary legislative procedure of codecision , as provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - UKIP opposes any EU management of our industries , as it should be up to national elected governments to decide on the future and any potential subsidy of coal mines .
However , in this case , the EU is making special arrangements for governments , outside of normal State aid rules , for greater flexibility to manage subsidies to coal mines .
Amendments 25 and 36 are asking for a greater period of such flexibility before normal State aid laws would apply - which UKIP can go some way to support .
UKIP has abstained on these two amendments and the final vote because although we do not support any EU State aid laws ( as it should be up to national governments to decide subsidy levels ) , giving greater flexibility to Member States and lengthening this period is beneficial and much more democratically accountable , putting power back into the hands of governments to make these decisions .
I supported this report .
Although it still only represents a small part of the EU energy market , the coal mining industry ensures jobs for those EU citizens working in it and economic development in the sparsely populated and remote regions where most coal mining companies are located .
I agreed with the amendments according to which the deadline for the closure of uncompetitive coal mines will be extended until 2018 , with the possibility of keeping mines open if they fail to become competitive in the set period .
When uncompetitive mines are closed , it is important to guarantee that the necessary long-term funding is allocated to ensure environmental protection and rehabilitate former mining sites .
In some regions , mines are the only form of industry and their closure will mean that many people will be made redundant .
It is therefore essential to ensure that they are provided with assistance on a multiannual basis and various labour market measures , such as retraining , implemented to create the conditions for them to return to the labour market .
I therefore supported the European Commission 's proposal to allocate such assistance until 2026 .
I voted for Mr Rapkay 's report as I support , amongst other measures , the extension of the deadline for closing uncompetitive coal mines .
In this regard , I think that this will be an attempt to avoid a massive wave of job losses , with Romania , Spain and Germany being the EU Member States hit hardest by the new regulation .
I believe that the operation of uncompetitive mines should be discontinued in line with the closure plan , only if they fail to become profitable by the specified deadline .
I want to encourage aid to be granted degressively to cover production losses as part of a well-defined mine closure plan .
From 1 January 2011 , half of the mines operating in Romania will be included in a closure plan .
Against this background , I think that aid will need to be channelled more towards covering the social and environmental impact .
in writing . - UKIP opposes any EU management of our industries , as it should be up to national elected governments to decide on the future and any potential subsidy of coal mines .
However , in this case , the EU is making special arrangements for governments , outside of normal State aid rules , for greater flexibility to manage subsidies to coal mines .
Amendment 25 and 36 are calling for a greater period of such flexibility before normal State aid laws would apply , which UKIP can go some way to support .
UKIP has abstained on these two amendments and the final vote because , although we do not support any EU State aid laws because it should be up to national governments to decide on subsidy levels , giving greater flexibility to Member States and lengthening this period is beneficial and much more democratically accountable , putting power back in to the hands of governments to make these decisions .
Having been consulted by the Commission , the European Parliament was called on to give its verdict , this Tuesday 23 November , on the issue of State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines .
The main stumbling block was the cut-off date for that State aid .
The Commission proposed 1 October 2014 .
For environmental reasons , I believe it is important to diversify our sources of energy production and to promote sustainable production methods .
2014 would therefore seem to be a reasonable cut-off date .
However , given the social impact of mine closures and the difficulties involved in redeploying miners , support must be provided during the closure process .
The majority of the European Parliament has therefore decided to extend the provision of State aid until 31 December 2018 .
I decided to abstain from this final vote because I believe that the most important thing is to give priority to sustainable energy sources but , at the same time , it is also important to bear in mind the economic and social consequences of mine closures .
I decided to vote for Bernhard Rapkay 's report on ' State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines ' .
This report proposes putting back the deadline for closing uncompetitive coal mines by four years : from 2014 , as originally provided for in the European Commission 's proposal , until 2018 .
This report also encourages the European Commission to devise a strategy for retraining the workers who will be affected by these closures .
We must bear in mind that certain regions in the European Union are totally dependent on the mining sector economically and socially , which also includes Valea Jiului in Romania .
The mining sector provides 100 000 jobs in the European Union .
The ongoing economic and financial crisis , in severely affecting the economies of the ' developed ' countries of the West , has shown that the economic paradigm of the efficiency and capacity for self-regulation of the markets is no longer based on reality , because reality has called for all economic and market players , especially financial market players , to act responsibly and ethically , something which they have completely failed to do in recent times .
The disruption caused in financial terms to the entire economy shows that the industrial sector requires a huge amount of support , since it is still a sector of fundamental importance for the economy , especially the real economy .
When taking into account the competitive and comparative advantages and disadvantages between regions , especially at international level , we must not forget that the mining industry is present in areas in which the development of sound economic and occupational alternatives should be encouraged as a preliminary step and in which welfare support provisions should be enhanced to prevent painful increases in unemployed workers whom it is difficult to redeploy .
The report on State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines , on which we have voted , seems to me to be at least partly along these lines .
I voted for this report as I believe that uncompetitive coal mines must be able to benefit from the State aid contribution , given that without this , the mines would close , resulting therefore in a huge wave of redundancies and very serious social problems .
The transition period granted for making these mines profitable or closing them is important .
Its role is , on the one hand , to ensure the provision of professional retraining for the population involved in the coal industry and , on the other , to ensure a gradual transition to cleaner energy sources .
We Swedish Social Democrats believe it to be unreasonable , for reasons relating to both the environment and competition , to retain subsidies for uncompetitive coal mines .
At the same time , we consider it necessary to implement comprehensive employment and environmental initiatives in those regions affected by the closures that will probably result from the discontinuation of the subsidies .
Overall , we think that the Commission 's proposal on this matter is balanced and takes good account of both of these aspects .
The subsidies will be phased out , but this will be carefully managed , taking into consideration both jobs and the environment .
We have therefore chosen to vote consistently in favour of the Commission 's line .
As regards the question of allowing the possibility of the continued operation of mines which become profitable during the closure period , we believe , like the Commission , that it would be wrong to include this option .
In order for the aid that is granted to be used in the right way , it must be based on a definitive closure plan .
With regard to the exact year in which the closure aid is to end , we have no strong preferences , but we nevertheless believe that the Commission 's proposal of 2014 is more appropriate than the rapporteur 's proposal of 2018 .
In the absence of a specific regulation on granting State aid to the coal industry , as the applicable regulation expires on 31 December 2010 , rules need to be set out enabling some Member States that have been forced to close their coal mines to minimise the social and economic impact of that closure .
As coal mines are concentrated in certain regions ( in Germany , Spain and Romania ) , the social impact of simultaneous mine closures could be significant .
In employment terms , the jobs of around 100 000 miners could be at stake ; they may be unable to find jobs in other sectors as quickly as is necessary and they run the risk of becoming long-term unemployed .
For this very reason , this proposal aims to provide the Member States with a legal framework enabling them to more effectively resolve the potential negative effects of mine closures that could occur as a result of the gradual withdrawal of subsidies , in particular , the social and environmental effects .
It also aims to minimise distortions of competition on the internal market .
Aid to the European coal industry is regulated by Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1407 / 2002 of 23 July 2002 , which expires on 31 December 2010 .
In the absence of a new legal framework allowing for specific types of State aid to the coal industry , Member States will be able to grant aid only within the limits provided for in the general State aid rules applicable to all sectors .
Compared with the regulation of coal , the general rules on State aid significantly reduce the chances of State aid being granted to the coal industry .
It is therefore likely that some Member States will be forced to close their coal mines and cope with the social and regional consequences of that decision .
I understand that due to the regional concentration of coal mines , the social impact of simultaneous closure could be significant .
Taking into account jobs in mining-related industries , this could jeopardise up to 100 000 jobs .
I agree , therefore , that the closure plan should be extended to 31 December 2018 , along with the final closure of production units , if they do not become competitive by this date , and provided that the EU 's energy needs do not require them to exist .
This report assesses and makes positive changes to the European Commission 's proposal for amending this regulation , which itself changed the period for awarding State aid to the coal industry . Without this amendment , the period would have expired on 31 December 2010 .
Now , the European Commission 's new proposal is suggesting extending aid until 2014 .
However , the European Parliament has adopted a proposal , for which we voted , extending aid until 2018 . The purpose of this is to take the social problem - preventing redundancies of workers and difficulties integrating them into the labour market - and the environmental problem into account , together with the aid that it advocates to resolve these problems .
The commitment to safeguarding the maintenance of coal industries that have become competitive during the course of this process , while also ensuring that environmental and public health issues are safeguarded , is also positive .
The need to rehabilitate former coal mining sites is also stressed , specifically : the removal of old mining equipment from the mine , making it safe , cleaning the site and disposing of waste water .
I voted in favour of the Rapkay report and of State subsidies for the coal industry .
Coal remains an essential part of the global energy mix .
If coal could no longer be mined in Europe , we would have to import it from the United States or Australia .
It takes time and a great deal of confidence to adapt to changes in social structures .
Therefore , the European Union and Germany intend to end subsidies for non-competitive coal mines .
The period from now until 2018 will be used to put in place the necessary restructuring measures .
This is a successful compromise which is evidence of the far-sighted approach of everyone involved .
Given the large number of people employed in the industry , it is important for the European Union and the Member States to make every effort to cushion the negative social and regional impact of this change and to keep the impact to a minimum .
Therefore , I am very pleased that the European Parliament has shown its support for this view today .
This will enable the difficult but necessary adaptation processes to be implemented in Europe and in Germany , in particular , in a balanced way and on a sound political footing .
On the question of continuing the subsidies for unprofitable coal mines , I have gone against the line taken by my group and abstained .
In my opinion , the vote in Parliament is based on a nationalist reflex and short-term thinking .
I oppose the subsidies because I believe that the use of coal and the accompanying CO2 emissions in principle run counter to all our efforts to combat climate change .
The money which we could be investing in renewable energy sources is literally being thrown into a bottomless pit .
In my view , we should be looking for sustainable alternatives in the field of energy production .
However , we also need alternative solutions on the labour market .
It is obvious that mistakes have been made in the past and that there has been a short-sighted approach to employment policy .
Given that many jobs are at stake , I would prefer to see funding being made available for retraining the workers who are affected , rather than a continuation of the coal subsidies .
For this reason , I have decided to abstain rather than voting against the report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as I agree with the fundamental point that there should be ' transition ' regulation in this sector .
While coal and the mining of it contribute hugely to pollution , in some countries , they also provide huge employment .
Therefore , the ending of some of these aids so suddenly could potentially have a serious effect on some of the Member States in the EU , but it is important for the sector to realise that they should not rely solely on these aids in the future .
Since indigenous energy sources in the Union are rare , I believe that support for the coal mining industry is justified under the Union 's policy to encourage renewable and lower carbon fossil fuels for power generation .
However , I do not believe that this justifies indefinite support for coal mines that prove uncompetitive .
In the light of the serious socio-economic impact of pit closures , particularly in thinly populated regions , consideration should be given to the possibility of providing help and support .
However , in order to minimise the distortion of competition in the internal market resulting from aid , the Commission will have to ensure that precise and effective conditions of competition are established , maintained and observed .
As for environmental protection , the Member States will have to provide a programme of measures aimed at mitigating the environmental impact of the use of coal , in the field of energy efficiency , renewable energy or carbon capture and storage .
The pro-Europeans want to facilitate the closure of the last remaining coal mines in Europe by means of short-term State aid .
Given that Germany and Romania generate more than 40 % of their electricity from coal combustion , this means that more than 100 000 people will be sacrificed on the altar of ultraliberalism on the pretext of fair competition and ' green ' political correctness , which would have us generate electricity by wind power .
In their quest for ' renewable ' energies , these countries will no doubt have to replace coal by buying nuclear-generated electricity from their neighbours .
As a former miner myself , it makes me rather emotional to think back to all the French and European coal mines that have been closed , causing great suffering and leaving entire regions to go to ruin - regions which have thus become economic and social wastelands and have often not recovered .
Therefore , I can unfortunately only conclude that , in this area as in so many others , the Europe of Brussels has not sought to protect our industries and hence our jobs , preferring instead to waste huge amounts of money on globalist projects that bear no relation to the problems of our fellow citizens .
I have voted in favour of Mr Rapkay 's report because the plan to phase out coal mining subsidies by 2018 is , fortunately , supported by a broad majority across all the groups .
The example of Germany shows how a coal pact between central government , the federal states , unions and management can result in efficient coal production without the need for redundancies .
There is now more security for 100 000 jobs throughout Europe .
To avoid any misunderstandings , it is important to realise that these are not permanent subsidies and that the aim is not to prop up uncompetitive businesses .
This is all about taking a responsible approach to a traditional European industry .
The use of coal can easily be justified , either as a fuel for generating electricity or as a raw material in the chemical industry , particularly in times when resources such as oil and gas are in increasingly short supply .
The production of a minimum amount of coal contributes to our energy security and prevents us from being dependent on imports .
It is wrong to say that ending subsidies for coal mining will help to protect the environment .
From a climate perspective , it makes no difference whether we use domestic or foreign raw materials .
We must continue to support environmentally friendly coal technology and a secure energy supply using domestic products .
An active industry policy is not a thing of the past but a task for the future , on the basis of a consistent competition strategy and a sensible social policy involving job security .
With the expiry of the Coal Regulation on 31 December 2010 , some countries would be obliged to close their hard coal mines .
I voted to extend this regulation until 31 December 2030 , as opposed to 31 December 2026 proposed by the European Commission .
Unfortunately , this amendment did not receive the required majority .
However , support was given to the point where the steep downward trend is being reduced for the overall amount of closure aid granted by a Member State .
Furthermore , the operation of the production units concerned will form part of a permanent closure plan with a deadline which ought to have been set for 31 December 2020 , as 2020 is the year which features in the context of the carbon capture , transport and storage projects currently being developed in several Member States .
The deadline which resulted from the majority vote was 31 December 2018 .
I wish to point out that this deadline obtained for subsidy operations is nevertheless an achievement by the European Parliament , extending the initial deadline of 2014 as proposed by the European Commission by four years .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report on State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines .
Coal has been exempted from State aid rules for a total of 35 years .
The Commission has proposed an end to this exemption , which would allow State aid only to coal mines that are slated for closure by 2014 .
Any coal mine that does not close by that date must pay back State aid and all countries giving State aid must provide a climate change mitigation plan .
Germany plans to close uncompetitive mines by 2018 and the rapporteur has proposed an amendment to extend the proposal to 2018 .
It seemed to me reasonable to support his proposal .
I voted in favour of this report because , although it concerns important environmental issues such as energy sources and climate change and economic issues such as the durability of uncompetitive production units in the economy , at a time of economic and social crisis , it is important to stand up for the social issues .
Measures should not be taken if they exacerbate the crisis .
The response to the crisis is through investment and protecting the public , which in this case means ensuring conditions that allow for the closure of these mines over a period of time after the expected resolution of the crisis , thereby protecting jobs and combating unemployment .
The aid provided for in this report is vital for helping to support those who will potentially lose their jobs in this industry .
Retraining needs to be arranged straight away for workers affected by the mine closures , and all possible avenues of funding from regional , national and EU funds should be explored .
In the long term , the funding of measures aimed at protecting the environment and the costs arising from the mine closures should be continued after 2014 .
Early termination of subsidies to the coal industry by the Member States could cause huge environmental and financial problems in the affected regions , and could become even more costly than a gradual phasing out of these subsidies .
It is essential that we continue to support the coal industry in Europe to allow uncompetitive mines to be closed down gradually .
However , the Commission 's proposal does not go far enough .
Mining is concentrated in only a few regions which will have to completely restructure their economies over the next few years .
We have seen often enough in the past that mining regions which have become uncompetitive have suffered a severe social and economic decline within a short period of time .
Previously , many of these regions were the ' black pearls ' of economic performance in Europe .
If we give them the time to adjust to the change in circumstances , they can continue to be economic powerhouses .
However , if we leave them in the lurch , we will incur considerable costs as a result of unemployment and bankruptcies .
The argument put forward by the Greens that this process is harmful to the environment is pure invention .
Domestic coal is much more environmentally friendly than imported coal .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of this report , which is very clearly worded .
I voted for this report because the measures it contains will help , if they are approved by the Council , to avoid serious social repercussions in many of the European Union 's Member States .
The deadline proposed by the European Commission is too close and unrealistic .
This is why the subsidies for hard coal production had to be extended until 2018 .
Romania , the Member State which I come from , has experience of such a huge social challenge and I believe that the extension of the deadline is a necessary and welcome step .
I am delighted with the position adopted today by the European Parliament on State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive mines .
It should be noted that the State aid granted in such cases must be of an exceptional nature , and there should be compliance with the regulations , which , in reality , make it possible for mines not to be closed as a result of the aid , and do not explicitly require that public aid be returned if the mines are not closed .
We cannot end up with a situation in which funds from the state budget are used by mines to achieve profitability .
Today , we have proposed a mechanism to force Member States to implement consistent limits on public aid , as well as a gradual transition to the general provisions that apply to all sectors of the economy .
I voted in favour of Mr Rapkay 's report because I agree with extending the deadline to 2018 .
The 2014 deadline proposed by the Commission is not justified , even by the Commission impact assessment .
On the basis of the Commission impact assessment , and as a logical follow-on to Regulation ( EC ) No 1407 / 2002 , the 2018 deadline is an appropriate one , ensuring a socially acceptable solution without entailing mass redundancies in a number of Member States .
In these times of crisis , I do not believe that pits should be closed and thousands of workers made redundant across Europe .
What is more , the pollution problem should not be tackled as part of this issue .
Indeed , closing these coal mines would not solve the problem , because instead of coal coming from them , it would be imported from abroad .
If we want to find a solution to prevent climate change , we must find it in plants that use coal .
Only by converting those types of plants will emissions be reduced .
I am grateful to Mr Rapkay for his excellent work , and I support the amendments tabled .
I voted in favour , as I approve of the measures required to prevent the extremely serious socio-economic impact of pit closures , particularly in thinly populated regions .
Given that indigenous energy sources in the Union are rare , support for the coal mining industry is justified under the Union 's policy to encourage renewable and lower carbon fossil fuels for power generation .
I therefore support the efforts made , which are in line with the broader 20-20-20 strategy .
Based on the opinion of the European Parliament on the proposal for a regulation , the deadline for subsidising coal production is being extended to 31 December 2018 ( four years longer than in the Commission 's proposal ) and is intended only for hard coal .
The coal sector provides approximately 100 000 jobs .
Mines whose operation is dependent on aid are located particularly in the Ruhr region of Germany , north-west Spain and in Valea Jiului in Romania .
Roughly 40 % of Romania 's electricity production is based on coal , most of which is hard coal .
The deadline of 2014 ( proposed by the Commission ) for the mine closure plan is arbitrary and is not justified based on the impact assessment carried out by the EU executive itself .
Consequently , 2018 guarantees an acceptable solution , taking into account this impact assessment .
The rapporteur favours a gradual reduction in aid .
The annual reduction must not be less than 10 % of the aid granted in the first year and based only on a very closely monitored closure plan .
I voted for this report as the application of the regulation in the form proposed by the European Parliament will mitigate the adverse social repercussions of such mine closures , with the mines in Valea Jiului also among those affected by this measure .
I voted in favour of this report because , although it concerns important environmental issues such as energy sources and climate change and economic issues such as the durability of uncompetitive production units in the economy , at a time of economic and social crisis , it is important to stand up for the social issues .
Measures should not be taken if they exacerbate the crisis .
The response to the crisis is through investment and protecting the public , which in this case means ensuring conditions that allow the closure of these mines over a period of time after the expected resolution of the crisis , thereby protecting jobs and combating unemployment .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1407 / 2002 of 23 July 2002 on State aid for the coal industry expires on 31 December 2010 .
This would force some Member States to close their coal mines on that date and face the considerable social and regional impact of these simultaneous closures .
The Commission 's proposal suggested providing the Member States with a legal framework to allow them to extend the support given until 31 December 2014 , Parliament having extended this deadline until 31 December 2018 , thus ensuring the conditions for resolving this problem in a sustainable manner at a social and environmental level .
Ending aid for the closure of uncompetitive coal mines in 2014 - the date proposed by the Commission - would have serious socio-economic consequences in certain regions of the EU where mining continues to be a significant source of employment .
This is why Parliament 's position asking for it to be delayed to 2018 is so important .
My vote reflects my conviction that the closure of these mines should be postponed in order to give the regions and Member States concerned - mainly Spain , Germany and Romania - the time they need to carry out the required restructuring in the current period of crisis .
That restructuring must involve , on the one hand , a transition towards sustainable economic activities that create high quality jobs , and on the other , wherever possible , establishing more competitive and sustainable coal mining and less polluting coal use .
In order to do this , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy must support research and innovation in areas such as CO2 capture and storage and achieving more environmentally friendly combustion methods .
Should the European Union continue to subsidise industrial sectors that are destined eventually to disappear from Europe ?
That is the difficult question we had to answer with the adoption of the Rapkay report on State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines .
The European Commission has proposed a scheduled end of subsidies in October 2014 .
This is a sensible proposal that takes into account the negative environmental impact of aid for the coal industry and of the need for the Member States to provide a plan of appropriate measures , for example , in the field of energy efficiency , renewable energy or carbon capture and storage .


The facts are damning : EUR 1 288 million of aid to production , making a total of EUR 2.9 billion of subsidies for the coal industry between 2003 and 2008 , has done nothing to limit the loss of market share , nor has it ensured that the industry 's 100 000 workers receive useful support to help them retrain .
I therefore regret that the European Union has not had the courage this lunchtime to say ' no ' to extending aid for coal mines until the end of 2018 or to turn resolutely towards new energy sources , which would provide jobs for the European population .
in writing . - Today 's vote is in conflict with the EU 's economic , energy and climate change interests .
Subsidising uncompetitive coal mines is a waste of billions of euro of public money , particularly in the context of current pressures on public finances .
Prolonging operational aid to coal mines fails to address the legitimate concerns of coal workers for their futures .
Instead , it risks delaying the transition towards a green economy - with a future energy sector based on energy efficiency and renewable energy - which will ensure the creation of thousands of new , sustainable jobs in former coal producing regions .
Although the coal mining industry does not have a great bearing on the Lithuanian economy , this report is important for my country .
With the expiry of Regulation ( EC ) No 1407 / 2002 , some Member States will be forced to close their coal mines immediately and face huge social and regional consequences related to the closures .
Lithuania knows only too well the kind of problems that have to be faced following such closures .
The closure of Lithuania 's Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant led to the loss of business and jobs .
It also dealt a blow to our independence in the field of energy , and so we must not forget that the European Union is founded on energy solidarity .
At present , Lithuania and the Baltic countries are energy islands , separated from Europe 's gas and the electricity networks .
I was delighted to hear reports this month that the European Commission supports the Baltic Energy Market Interconnection Plan .
I hope that projects such as those related to the Visaginas Nuclear Power Plant and the Lithuania-Poland gas network interconnection will receive financial assistance from the EU .
That would benefit the whole of Europe .
Finally , it is important for us to bear in mind the safety of coal miners and workers in other branches of the energy industry .
The recent accidents in Chile and New Zealand will not allow us to forget this .
Coal mining in Europe is not efficient , and has to be subsidised .
However , so-called alternative energy sources are equally - if not more - inefficient .
Power plants burning coal therefore have one thing in common with solar or wind-powered plants .
The power they produce is simply too expensive .
States therefore subsidise coal mining , or purchase the electricity produced at a higher price than the price paid by the end user .
Every method of producing electricity has its pluses and minuses .
However , experience has taught us that it is not good to rely on one source of energy .
If the energy security of Europe is a priority for us , then it would be a mistake to abandon one of the possible energy sources .
The state should not use taxpayers ' money to support non-functioning enterprises .
Not all mines that are currently unable to survive on the market without subsidies are inevitably doomed to fail .
Some of them may become competitive if they are given time to transform .
The report of Mr Rapkay wants to make this possible for them .
I come from the Prievidza region , which has a strong mining tradition .
I know how many families would fall into poverty if the fathers lost a job in the mines .
On their behalf , too , I have voted in favour of the report , which creates an opportunity to save thousands of jobs in a traditional Slovak mining region .
I voted in favour of the report on the work of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) Group of States-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) in 2009 as I believe that it is vital that it continues to play a monitoring role in negotiations on economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) and fosters interaction between parliamentarians , with the aim of bringing about greater transparency for all the processes .
In view of this , I believe that it is crucial to strengthen the parliamentary dimension of cooperation work , recognising that the establishment of the African Union and the growing power of the JPA are , without doubt , a challenge to ACP-EU cooperation and , consequently , to the ACP-EU JPA .
Given that in 2009 , the Commission and the ACP states put forward proposals for a second revision of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement , it is vital that the JPA oversees events so as to ensure that it can survive and make progress as an institution .
This cooperation between Parliament and the JPA began in 2007 , and last year resulted in the creation of a fully-fledged delegation for relations with the JPA .
I voted for this resolution which assesses the work of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly of the African , Caribbean and Pacific group of states ( ACP ) and the EU in 2009 .
The work of this assembly is particularly important , strengthening democratic processes in these countries , and therefore I agree with the observations made in the resolution that we need to closely involve parliaments in the democratic process and in the national development strategies .
I believe that the revision of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement will help address the new changes that have come about in the decade since this agreement was first signed and will increase participation on the part of national parliaments , civil society and the private sector in those countries ' political and economic life .
I also agree with the proposal that the European Development Fund should be incorporated into the EU budget in order to increase the consistency , transparency and effectiveness of development cooperation policy and guarantee appropriate scrutiny .
in writing . - I support this report on the work of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) -EU Parliamentary Assembly .
The Trade Commissioner 's positive response to the request by ACP countries for a review of contentious elements of the Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) negotiations is welcome .
Future EPA negotiations , as well as eventual implementation , should be the subject of closer parliamentary scrutiny .
The parliaments of ACP countries should press for their involvement in the adoption and execution of the country and regional strategy papers , as these are the main programming tools for development assistance .
In order to help address the Parliamentary Assembly 's concerns regarding the repercussions of the current crisis on the developing world , we need to work on additional sources of financing , especially an international financial transactions tax .
The ACP governments , on the other hand , need to show an increased commitment to fighting against tax havens , tax evasion and illicit capital flight .
The establishment , at the beginning of the current term , of a permanent European Parliament delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament is a very positive step which will contribute to consolidate the increasingly political engagement of the ACP-EU Parliamentary Assembly .
I welcome the adoption of this report because the Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) has succeeded , through the quality of its work , in establishing itself as a key player in North-South cooperation .
For example , the assembly has played , and continues to play , a key role in monitoring the negotiations on Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
Furthermore , some important amendments have been passed , such as the one encouraging the JPA to explore additional and innovative sources of financing for development , such as an international financial transaction tax , and further calling on it to address the question of the eradication of tax havens .
I voted for the report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2009 , because I believe that this assembly continues to provide an important framework for an open , democratic and in-depth dialogue between the European Union and the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) group of states .
In order for the cooperation process to be more efficient and democratic , there is a need for greater involvement by the parliaments of the ACP countries in drawing up and drafting strategic cooperation plans , and for them to participate more actively in negotiating economic partnership agreements alongside the European authorities .
Without calling into question the importance of the work done by the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) in 2009 or its undeniable contribution to development cooperation , I cannot fail to express my concern about the content of point 6 of the Joly report : ' encourages the JPA to continue to work on this area and to explore additional and innovative sources of financing for development , such as an international financial transaction tax ' .
I do not believe that an international financial transaction tax would be of much benefit to the African , Caribbean and Pacific group of states .
The Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) convened twice in 2009 , the year in which the Commission and the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) group of states made proposals for the second revision of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement to be negotiated during 2010 .
In view of the regionalisation of the ACP group being brought about by the economic partnership agreement ( EPA ) process , it is important for the JPA to monitor developments extremely closely in order to ensure that it can survive and move forwards as an institution .
I would like to highlight the JPA 's concern at the repercussions of the current financial crisis , the adoption in Luanda of a resolution on the impact of the financial crisis on the ACP states , and the resolutions on its impact and on addressing the crisis in the ACP states .
For the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly to properly carry out its role - mentioned by the rapporteur - in North-South cooperation and the strengthening of the parliamentary aspect of this cooperation , some of its fundamental characteristics need to be defended .
The breadth of its representation is both its greatest asset and an essential requirement if it is to properly carry out its role .
Therefore , any attempt to reduce this representativeness on the grounds of cost cutting must be rejected , while defending the assembly 's plural nature , without which some of its principles would be seriously distorted and some of its basic objectives seriously compromised .
All the means needed to achieve the effective extended participation of all parliamentarians must be guaranteed , whether they represent the EU or , in particular , the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) group of states .
It is therefore with concern that we have repeatedly witnessed the failure to ensure the conditions necessary to achieve this participation , specifically with regard to interpretation services .
Official languages of EU and ACP countries are frequently dropped , as has been the case with Portuguese on more than one occasion .
This is a serious error , the correction of which is important .
As a member of the ACP-EU ( African , Caribbean and Pacific-European Union ) Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I voted resolutely in favour of this report on the work carried out by the assembly in 2009 .
The ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly is a unique institution that has succeeded in establishing itself as a key player in European-African relations and in North-South relations .
It has succeeded in demonstrating the high quality of its work , which is based on the principles of cooperation , consultation , transparency and democratic dialogue , and on ever greater interaction between European and ACP parliamentarians .
As the 20th session of this assembly begins in Kinshasa , I would like to encourage the JPA to continue its work and this cooperation .
In particular , I did , of course , vote for the paragraph calling for efforts to establish an international financial transaction tax and to eradicate tax havens .
I endorsed the Joly report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2009 .
The question we should analyse in more detail concerns the JPA regional meetings .
There is no doubt that these meetings are necessary .
I think , however , that we should elaborate and clarify the formula for these meetings .
We should specify more clearly the working methods to be employed during regional meetings .
The value of these meetings stems from the fact that they allow greater concentration on regional problems .
Better specification of formal procedures will strengthen the opportunities for ACP-EU JPA regional meetings to be influential .
This is precisely why we should deal with this matter . Thank you very much .
in writing . - The group which I am part of in the European Parliament has amended the original report quite substantially .
It now calls on the ACP governments to include stronger clauses on non-discrimination and help fight against tax evasion and tax havens .
Greater involvement of the ACP national parliaments and civil society - through financial and technical support - is needed in order to enhance the ACP-EU cooperation .
I voted to approve the report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2009 , because I consider its contribution to North-South cooperation to be fundamental .
In fact , the JPA has played , and continues to play , a key role in involving local authorities and bodies in the negotiations on Economic Partnership Agreements .
For these reasons , I join in the calls made by my fellow Members for the Commission to make every effort to provide timely information on the negotiations , in order to ensure that Parliament can participate fully in monitoring the agreements and to assist it in doing so .
Lastly , I consider it vital for the European Parliament to play an informed role - and I say this not only with reference to the negotiations in this area - since it is an institution capable of ensuring the transparency of the process and of voicing the needs of local communities .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2009 .
The strengthening of parliamentary oversight is vital to ensure that EU development funds are put to best use and contribute effectively to achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
The assembly has played , and continues to play , a key role in monitoring the negotiations on Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) , allowing MEPs to hear first hand the concerns of the ACP parliamentarians and thus contributing to greater European Parliament oversight of the Commission 's negotiations and implementation of EPAs .
The African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) group of states-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) convened twice in 2009 , and came to important decisions on various matters at these meetings , particularly the food and financial crisis , the situation in Somalia , climate change and the situation in Madagascar .
Several working groups also met to debate a range of relevant topics , including : training for better governance , construction projects and urban re-housing , disabled people , rural tourism and minority rights in the Czech Republic .
These regular meetings have become important due to their diversity and the discussion of important issues for both parties , with the aim of trying to come up with solutions for the problems faced by the most disadvantaged regions .
I voted in favour of Mrs Joly 's excellent report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , which is - I repeat - a unique institution in the world by virtue of its composition and its willingness to work together to promote North-South interdependence , not only by legislative means , but also through democratic dialogue and cooperation .
I should like to take advantage of this report to make the case for a tax on international financial transactions in order to help certain donors to honour their commitments in terms of official development aid and to help developing countries to make the changes necessary to cope with climate change .
I would emphasise that the Monterrey Consensus in 2002 , the follow-up to the Doha conference in 2008 and the High-level Plenary Meeting on the Millennium Development Goals held in New York in September 2010 issued a favourable opinion on innovative and alternative sources of financing for development and stressed the need for a balanced approach between the economic , social and environmental aspects of development .
I have voted against the report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2009 , because it is very vague and its wording is imprecise .
In addition , it does not contain any plans for more efficient development cooperation with the African , Caribbean and Pacific group of states ( ACP ) in future .
Development aid , in its current form , is a failure in 80 % of cases .
It has simply increased the dependency of the states in question on external aid .
We need to help these states to help themselves .
It must be possible for them gradually to develop a functioning national economy .
The ability to feed themselves plays a major role in this context .
However , this report doggedly supports the status quo , which is why I have voted against it .
Cooperation with the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries is one of the most important aspects of the European Union 's foreign policy .
I am therefore sorry to learn of the financial problems affecting the ACP Group .
Regardless of these problems , the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly is one of the most important fora today for North-South dialogue .
I welcome the development of regional integration between African countries , on the one hand , and Caribbean countries , on the other , which facilitates effective dialogue between the European Parliament and the global South .
In view of these aspects , and fully supporting the development of dialogue between the EU and the countries of the South , I decided to vote in favour of the report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2009 .
I voted in favour of the report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , because I believe that the assembly has played a key role and has endeavoured to find solutions to what are , at times , complicated problems .
Although its role is that of an advisory body , it is an important forum and a meeting point for discussing and attempting to meet the various demands .
Of all the important reports and resolutions adopted , one need only mention those on the situation in Madagascar , on climate change , on the situation in Niger and on the second revision of the Cotonou Agreement .
Worthy of note , lastly , is the resolution on the consequences of the financial crisis on ACP countries , in which it is pointed out that those countries , although in no way responsible for the global turmoil , have unfortunately ended up paying the highest price , in terms of increased costs , reduced aid from rich countries , and more expensive commodities .
I voted for the report on the work of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) group of states-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) in 2009 .
It is important to highlight the role of the JPA , as it has succeeded in establishing itself as a key player in North-South cooperation , contributing to strengthening open and democratic dialogue between the EU and the ACP group of states .
We have voted today , in plenary , on a motion for a resolution on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2009 .
The Joint Parliamentary Assembly met twice in 2009 .
On these occasions , 10 resolutions and the Luanda Declaration on the second revision of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement were approved .
During the year , two regional meetings were also held , in Guyana ( Caribbean region ) and in Burkina Faso ( West African region ) respectively .
Despite this , 2009 was blighted by the decision , adopted by the ACP Council of Ministers in December 2008 , to make radical cuts to the ACP secretariat budget earmarked for staff missions .
This decision considerably affected the possibility of guaranteeing services relating to JPA meetings held at sites other than Brussels .
In December 2009 , the ACP Council adopted the necessary revisions to guarantee that the budget funding for 2010 was sufficient to cover two plenary sessions , one regional meeting and two additional missions at most .
Given the context , it is appropriate to continue to work within this sector and examine additional and innovative sources of development finance , namely , a tax on international financial transactions .
in writing . - I applaud this resolution , led by our colleague , Eva Joly , where it states that it welcomes the fact that in 2009 , the JPA continued to provide a framework for an open , democratic and in-depth dialogue between the European Union and the ACP countries and calls for an enhanced political dialogue , welcomes the new Commissioner for Trade 's positive response to the request by several ACP countries and regions for a review of the contentious issues raised during negotiations on the EPA , in line with the statements made by the President of the Commission , and underlines the need for close parliamentary monitoring of the negotiations and implementation of the EPA .
As a member of the Delegation to the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I endorsed the report on the work of the JPA in 2009 .
I have a good opinion of the work of the assembly this year , including , in particular , the resolutions adopted on the effect of the global crisis on social conditions and concerning climate change .
Next week , during the 20th session of the assembly , we will be dealing , amongst other matters , with achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
As a member of the JPA Committee on Social Affairs and the Environment , I think it is essential that a comprehensive analysis be made and a wide-ranging debate entered into next year on the environmental and social situation in the ACP states .
A review of existing measures will allow us to plan objectives for the coming years more effectively .
In keeping with the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee , I am also in favour of greater support and recognition for the African social economy .
Integration of the African social economy into the EU programme can result in a strengthening of cooperation with international organisations such as the International Labour Organisation and the World Bank , and can also lead to greater support from European public opinion for strengthening EU external aid by greater involvement of the major players of the European social economy .
I think the JPA could also examine more thoroughly the role of the African social economy in eliminating poverty .
I hope the JPA will be actively involved in implementation of the EU-Africa strategy .
I voted in favour of this report , which reviews the work done with the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) states .
With this text , the European Parliament is drawing attention to the fact that the success of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly is linked to an open , democratic and in-depth dialogue between the European Union and the ACP countries .
The report also reiterates the principle of the universality of human rights and reminds the Council that the European Parliament has made repeated calls to include a stronger clause on non-discrimination in the revision of the Cotonou Agreement .
I particularly welcome the vote on an amendment calling for a financial transaction tax as a possible response to the crisis , even though I am under no illusions about the European Parliament 's contradictory votes on this issue .
With this amendment , the European Parliament is calling for additional and innovative sources of financing for development , such as an international financial transaction tax , to be explored , and ' further calls on the JPA to address the question of the eradication of tax havens ' .
Let us hope that this report will not go completely unheeded and that all the European institutions will be able to refer to it in order to forge other relationships with the ACP countries .
I am approving this report , highlighting Article 67 , regarding the various legal systems and practices , and access to justice , issues on which mutual recognition should contribute to better knowledge of the various legal systems and practices .
I believe that enormous progress has already been made in terms of civil justice in the EU , and that this ambitious plan for the adoption of an approach to civil law that is more strategic and less fragmented should reflect the real needs of citizens and businesses .
It must also take into account the difficulties of legislating in an area of shared jurisdiction , with harmonisation an option where there are overlaps .
Therefore , dedication to the various legal approaches and constitutional traditions of the various Member States must be maintained while , at the same time , an EU-level approach must be thought up in order to resolve general problems .
Mention must be made of the need to ensure that measures that have already been put into practice work and progress already made needs to be consolidated , so that we can move forward coherently towards a correct and functional implementation of the Stockholm Programme .
The Stockholm Programme establishes ambitious European policies on justice and security in order to build a citizens ' Europe .
The objectives include a legislative proposal on reinforced cooperation with regard to the law applicable to divorce .
In Europe , 20 % of divorces concern international couples .
Such divorces are sometimes marred by endless red tape and a lack of clear responses from national systems .
In many cases , the children and the weakest spouse suffer most from the emotional stresses and strains arising from legal action .
Where possible , the best solution would be to set up a system of mediation , namely an amicable agreement between the parties .
It would be appropriate to refer for this purpose to the concepts defined in Directive 2008 / 52 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 on certain aspects of mediation in civil and commercial matters and the European code of conduct for mediators .
It will also be important for all citizens to gain access to up-to-date , high quality information now available in a Commission database on essential aspects of national and EU law and procedures concerned not only with separation and divorce but also mediation .
The Stockholm Programme seeks to create a European area of freedom , security and justice that will guarantee citizens ' fundamental rights , including freedom of enterprise , so as to develop entrepreneurship in all economic sectors .
Since the Union first obtained competence for justice and home affairs , and the subsequent creation of the area of freedom , security and justice , huge progress has been made in the area of civil justice and harmonisation of the rules of private international law has advanced apace .
This is very important as this area of law is the means par excellence of achieving mutual recognition of , and respect for , each others ' legal systems .
I feel that the action plan presented by the European Commission is ambitious but , at the same time , it is necessary to properly assess the effectiveness and compliance with set objectives of measures already imposed , in order to satisfy the needs of citizens , business and practitioners .
I support the proposal of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection to include the text on the European single market in the resolution on civil , commercial , family and international private law .
In my opinion , the single market helps the European area in terms of freedom , security and justice and contributes to strengthening the European model of a social market economy , but , at the same time , protects consumers .
Bulgaria , which is on the fringes of the EU , is often under threat from the import of dangerous or potentially dangerous counterfeit goods .
Just recently , 20 year old lamb meat was found on the Bulgarian market .
And that is only one of many cases .
The creation of a European area of freedom , security and justice will strengthen the single market , particularly consumer rights protection , and I urge you , ladies and gentlemen , to support the Commission in taking this into account and providing legislation which will ensure the proper functioning of the single market in the interests of consumers .
I voted for this report because the European Parliament calls on the Commission to ensure as effectively and swiftly as possible that the Stockholm Action Plan truly reflects the needs of Europe 's citizens , particularly as regards free movement throughout the European Union , along with employment rights , the needs of business and equal opportunities for all .
I would like to stress that Union law must be at the service of citizens , notably in the areas of family and civil law , and therefore I am pleased that since the Union first obtained competence for justice and home affairs and the subsequent creation of the area of freedom , security and justice ( AFSJ ) , huge progress has been made in the area of civil justice .
It should be pointed out that the Stockholm Programme seeks to create a European area of freedom , security and justice that will guarantee citizens ' fundamental rights , including freedom of enterprise , so as to develop entrepreneurship in all economic sectors .
The time then is ripe for reflection on the future development of the AFSJ , and the European Parliament therefore calls on the Commission to initiate a wide-ranging debate involving all interested parties , including , in particular , judges and practitioners .
The report contains a whole series of recommendations in the areas of civil , commercial and family law , as well as international private law .
It is mainly concerned with measures designed to increase the enforceability of law in cross-border disputes and , in the spirit of the Stockholm Programme , those targeting a greater degree of cooperation between Member States ' judicial authorities .
The action plan also proposes a legislative initiative to draw up a provision to increase the effectiveness of the implementation of judgments relating to the transparency of debtors ' activities , and similar provisions on the freezing of bank accounts .
I consider the question of standardising information on personal circumstances in the documents of EU Member State citizens as a natural step , as it will eliminate barriers when travelling .
The report also calls on the Commission , which has set up a working group for arbitration , to consult on any legislative proposals before submitting them , as arbitration issues have a significant impact on international trade .
The measures proposed in the report will help to increase the enforceability of law in the EU and I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
I abstained from the final vote on the Berlinguer resolution because Amendment 2 was thrown out .
This was extremely important for ruling out possible erroneous interpretations of item 40 , which states that Parliament ' strongly supports plans to enable the mutual recognition of the effects of civil status documents ' .
The expression could suggest , for example , a European Union-wide obligation to recognise a union between people of the same sex registered in a Member State where such a union is permitted .
In actual fact , we must distinguish between the effects of a completed legal action ( in the case of marriage ) and the effects of an official registration document .
The latter bears full witness to what is documented ( for example , that a homosexual marriage has been entered into in Holland ) and this public witness is the effect of the official marital status document .
However , the effects of the official registration document are something different and their recognition ( for example , a survivor 's pension ) is not permitted in a State that does not recognise them .
Matters of family law are , in any case , part of the identity of individual states and cannot be touched by EU law .
The possibility of a different interpretation led me to choose to abstain .
I welcome the huge progress that has been made in the area of civil justice since the Union first obtained competence for justice and home affairs and the area of freedom , security and justice was created .
Moreover , I would congratulate the Commission on its very ambitious plan , which responds to a substantial number of the demands that Parliament has been making .
It is essential to adopt a more strategic and less fragmented approach based on the real needs of citizens and businesses when exercising their rights and freedoms in the single market .
The Stockholm Action Plan must reflect these needs in respect of mobility , employment rights , the needs of business and equal opportunities , amongst other things , while promoting legal certainty and access to rapid and efficient justice .
We cannot ignore the difficulties of legislating in an area of shared competence where harmonisation is only infrequently an option and overlapping needs to be avoided .
Divergences between the legal approaches and constitutional traditions of the various legal systems can serve as a source of inspiration for a European legal culture , but should not constitute a barrier to the further development of European law .
To this day , there are certain differences in the civil law of the 27 Member States and of those set to join the EU in the near future .
The action plan presented is a step forward ; it notes the similarities and highlights the differences so as to draw attention to the need to reduce those differences .
In particular , as regards the subjects covered by the committees of which I am a member , I believe that the creation of common rules and the implementation of an integrated judicial system are essential for guaranteeing the survival of the single market .
While everyone 's legal traditions and specific characteristics should be respected , today 's challenges require , in fact , a common effort to harmonise European laws .
I therefore welcome the report , which calls on the European Commission to strive to remove the legal barriers to the exercise of rights in the Member States and to lessen the negative impact of those barriers on citizens involved in cross-border legal matters , both of which are essential conditions for the establishment of a ' European judicial culture ' , which alone can guarantee the creation of a common area of freedom , security and justice in Europe .
Explanation of vote : on 23 November 2010 , the Swedish Conservatives voted in favour of the report on civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law aspects of the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme .
However , we would like to emphasise that we believe a great deal of care should be taken with regard to the harmonisation of the different forms of training for the legal professions in the Member States and stress that such harmonisation does not fall within the framework of the Stockholm Programme .
We also do not believe that knowledge of two languages should be a requirement to be able to practice as a lawyer .
Finally , we would like to point out that party autonomy is of the utmost importance in commercial contract law and it should also remain so .
The Stockholm Programme is an essential next step in the development of the European area of freedom , security and justice towards a greater focus on individuals .
A greater focus that contributes not only to a more comprehensive perspective on citizenship , including respect for human beings and human dignity , but also to a perspective on the law and on justice that makes it accessible throughout the Union , so that individuals can exert their rights without any internal borders .
A focus on individuals that must be guaranteed across the board , including as regards the growing phenomenon of immigration and asylum , albeit in strict compliance with the rules on civil harmony , including security .
The Commission Action Plan is a consistent embodiment of the Stockholm Programme .
When developing European areas of freedom , security and justice , however , respect must always be shown for the principle of subsidiarity , which encourages respect for individuals and for the traditions that form an integral part of their history .
The report on civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law aspects of the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme , on which we have voted , seems to me to be along these lines .
I voted for this report as I think that it is of paramount importance to implement properly the measures envisaged by the Stockholm Programme with regard to improving the area of freedom security and justice .
This can be achieved by improving judicial cooperation between Member States , promoting a European judicial culture and by resolving the various incompatibility issues between the different procedural law models which exist at Member State level .
The Commission 's Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme must take into account all these aspects mentioned in the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for this report because it advocates specific measures promoting legal certainty and access to rapid and efficient justice .
Under the Stockholm Action Plan , it is necessary to ensure that the exchange of best practices between legal systems pays particular attention to the needs of individual citizens and businesses , facilitating mobility within the EU , employment rights and equal opportunities .
The areas of civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law constitute some of the most sensitive areas of the law applicable in each of the EU Member States .
I therefore think that any changes to them must be made with particular care , with the utmost consideration given to the principle of subsidiarity .
European legislators must always have respect for the various legal systems , for the consensus created around them in each of the respective political communities , and for their legitimate options ; they cannot and must not ignore the fact that they are dealing with peoples and nations with stable , established and deep-rooted legal systems .
I therefore recommend making changes suitable and proportional to people 's actual needs , and stringent checks on the proposed plans and initiatives .
While I carefully monitor the adoption of measures in this regard , I am aware that there are legal relationships that , because of their nature , are more likely to call on the laws of more than one country .
I acknowledge that much of what is advocated is positive and aims at the exchange of best practices and the realisation of a true area of freedom , security and justice .
The Stockholm Programme , adopted by the Council in December 2009 , establishes priorities for the development of a European area of freedom , security and justice over the next five years .
Union law facilitates mobility and enables the public to exercise their right to free movement , thus strengthening confidence in the European judicial area .
The Commission 's Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme involves making use of the tools available following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , in order to ease daily life and business for EU citizens , reconciling the needs of the public and the internal market with the diversity of legal traditions among the Member States .
I support this report , but would note that certain areas should take priority , such as civil matters and the mutual recognition of official documents .
This own-initiative report tackles various complex subjects based on aspects of civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law in the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme .
As a result of this , our opinions about the rapporteur 's suggestions are also diverse .
Some of them seem positive to us , specifically when he refers to the need to foster debate about the problems relating to maritime , commercial and family law .
It is just that in Portugal , there is also an unresolved issue , which is the specialisation of magistrates for those areas .
Naturally , because of the type of issues in question , magistrates need specific training to work in family courts .
There are several problems in the commercial areas , however , and it would probably be more important to ensure trademark protection by recourse to civil jurisdiction rather than criminal .
In this area in Portugal too , the delays are very long and it is acknowledged that many magistrates find it difficult to reach a decision on very specific subjects .
Explanation of vote : on 23 November 2010 , the Swedish Conservatives voted in favour of the report on civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law aspects of the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme .
However , we would like to emphasise that we believe a great deal of care should be taken with regard to the harmonisation of the different forms of training for the legal professions in the Member States and stress that such harmonisation does not fall within the framework of the Stockholm Programme .
We also do not believe that knowledge of two languages should be a requirement to be able to practice as a lawyer .
Finally , we would like to point out that party autonomy is of the utmost importance in commercial contract law and it should also remain so .
We voted against this report .
It is unacceptable to create a 28th regime , even if it is optional , in certain areas of civil law , in order to bypass national systems .
Moreover , it is the height of hypocrisy to state that the diversity of these systems is an asset when ' regulatory emulation ' is also recommended to allow for their convergence - or , in other words , their eventual standardisation .
It is unacceptable , above all , for the free movement of persons and non-discriminatory access to the social security benefits of countries of residence to be used as a pretext for demanding mutual recognition of civil status documents , because the real aim behind this proposal is not to make life easier for European families who have moved to another EU country .
The real aim is to impose same-sex marriage and adoption by homosexual couples on those Member States that do not recognise them in their own law .
Family law is strictly and exclusively the responsibility of the Member States , and it must remain so .
However , we must put a stop to the unilateral decisions of the German judiciary with regard to child custody when couples of mixed nationality divorce , and to the excessive , absolute power of the Jugendamt , which has been denounced in petitions submitted to us .
I am pleased at the adoption of this report , which welcomes the Stockholm Action Plan and , more specifically , the elements it contains in relation to civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law .
The European Union is working to create a ' European judicial area ' , and that area is based on the idea that judgments , like people , must be able to ' move ' within the Union , in order to help European citizens gain access to justice .
This ' common judicial area ' involves the principle of mutual recognition of judgments by Member States , and this issue of mutual recognition is crucial in areas such as family law , contracts , succession and wills , matrimonial property , and so on .
These are crucial areas in everyone 's lives .
Our report insists , among other things , on the importance of judicial training , legal education , the creation of networks between judges and the introduction of exchange programmes .
I fully support these objectives .
I have voted in favour of the amendments and against the Berlinguer report , because I am not sure that it provides adequate support for subsidiarity .
I do not believe that we should be able to delete important details just because this is a large package of directives .
This is a strategy which will backfire .
For me , the crux of the matter is paragraph 40 , which , in the form that it was adopted today , together with other components of the Stockholm Programme , will provoke conflicts of jurisdiction .
In specific terms , there are doubts as to whether we should use family law for the mutual recognition of civil status documents , in other words , marriage certificates , and , therefore , whether we should take into account the decision-making authority of the Member States with regard to the definition of marriage , following the procedure outlined in Article 81 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
While this remains unclear , there is a risk of a conflict between the simple procedures of civil law and the complex procedures of cross-border family law .
A sentence corresponding with Amendment 3 would have been sufficient to defuse this conflict .
This is a detail which , unfortunately , was not supported by the majority in Parliament today .
I remain of the opinion that marriage and family life are under the specific protection of the state . They are exclusively a matter for the Member States .
Therefore , I have voted against this own-initiative report .
in writing . - This resolution calls on the Commission and the Council to ensure that Parliament is fully consulted on the organisation and arrangement of judicial training .
This initiative will aid the concept of a European judicial culture so that the entire citizenry of the EU will be treated fairly and with dignity .
I voted in favour of the report on the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme because I consider the progress made in relation to the area of freedom , security and justice to be crucial .
Since its creation , in fact , huge progress has been made in the area of justice , including civil justice .
I believe that the different legal approaches and constitutional traditions of the Member States must be respected , but I also believe that the existence of such differences should be considered a strong point on which to focus in order to achieve the aim of developing European law further .
In this respect , the European judicial community must be involved , since its contribution should strengthen the idea of a real European judicial culture , through the sharing of knowledge and the study of comparative law .
I therefore fully support the proposal to create a forum in which judges who frequently deal with cross-border issues , such as admiralty , commercial , family and personal injury cases , could hold discussions and expand their knowledge .
Lastly , I believe that , on the basis of these preconditions , the Stockholm Action Plan should be focused on fully satisfying the demand for European justice voiced by individual citizens and individual businesses when exercising their rights and freedoms .
The Stockholm Programme ( 2010-2015 ) , when viewed from the perspective of cooperation within the area of freedom , security and justice ( AFSJ ) , in reality lays the future foundations of European supremacy in many areas with the aim of removing any remaining obstacles to ' free movement ' between the EU Member States .
Whether it be fundamental rights , privacy , minority rights , ' European Union citizenship ' or asylum and immigration policy , this confused assortment in fact serves as a pretext for encouraging the federalist ambition of a European bureaucratic superstate .
I maintain that the law and all habits and customs are a fundamental part of the spirit and identity of a people and a sovereign nation .
To support the idea of obscure European harmonisation , particularly in relation to civil and family law , would be tantamount to denying the sacrifices made and the ground won over the centuries .
Since , for the time being , it still enjoys some of the highest legal and social protection standards in the world , France will not benefit from any progress made by remaining the victim of pro-European , globalist and ultraliberal stubbornness .
in writing . - I welcome the adoption of this report on the Stockholm Programme , which stresses the need to ensure mutual recognition of official documents issued by national administrations .
This will include same-sex unions , meaning that partners in same-sex unions can act as next of kin in case of accidents abroad and , where appropriate , have equal rights to tax benefits while living or working in another Member State .
The aims of the Stockholm Programme and its implementation plan are positive .
In my opinion , one of the main reasons is the fact that the aim of the programme is to create a foundation and conditions under which EU citizens can make full use of , and enforce , their rights and freedoms .
The implementation of the Stockholm Programme has , and will continue to have , its difficulties .
On the one hand , there is the objective need to unify legislation ( for example , in the area of the right to freedom of movement ) , and , on the other , there is the danger of abuse through differing interpretations of the unified legal norms .
The initiative of the Stockholm Programme aimed at securing recognition of official documents by Member States can be welcomed .
However , this mechanism must not come into direct conflict with the basic regulations of Member States , particularly in the area of family law .
In view of the fact that family law reflects a tradition going back many years and a hard-won social consensus , it is not acceptable for Member State sovereignty in this area to be breached , albeit by well-intentioned unification schemes .
Further development should be aimed at ensuring that the unified law does not lead to reduced standards in terms of the rights ( civil , social , etc . ) that exist in Member States at various levels .
It is also necessary to ensure that the unification of regulations does not lead to the possibility of launching property claims and violating state integrity , and there must be a clear definition as to how and by whom the enforceability of unified European regulations will be ensured .
The areas of civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law constitute some of the most sensitive areas of the law applicable in the different EU Member States .
I abstained from voting on this report as I believe it is vital that the principle of subsidiarity is always present in these matters , especially those that relate to family law and when addressing issues such as mutual recognition of matrimonial and family law .
What do we intend to improve about the level of European judicial cooperation as we currently know it ?
The document adopted sheds light on the most important parts of the Commission 's plans .
It underlines the tasks that lie before us in the upcoming period from the perspective of the citizens .
As a politician and a teacher , I agree that communications between higher education institutions require further improvement , so that the new generation of jurists are already in a position to familiarise themselves with the diversity of European legal culture during their years at university .
It is in the interest of Member States to further perfect the judicial area .
The energy invested in education has a bearing on the effectiveness of the justice system .
We must make efforts to ensure that the resources required for training are available everywhere .
The main contributors to the removal of obstacles to cross-border cooperation can be those professionals who have experience gained abroad , coupled with the appropriate language skills .
Trust in Member States ' systems can be improved by learning about them .
Students must be sensitised to participate in foreign exchange programmes .
It is of vital importance to support fora which aim to develop professional dialogue .
Representatives of the legal professions must be given an opportunity to continuously express their opinion regarding an area based on freedom , security and justice .
It is they who face the relevant problems in practice .
It is they to whom we direct our questions concerning the fruits of the measures taken so far .
As representatives of the interests of citizens , we must strive to ensure that the EU does not conjure an image of a legislative maze in people 's minds .
Legislation on consumers and enterprises should indeed be for them and about them .
Paragraph 40 of the report on civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law aspects of the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme represents a serious intrusion into national law , by calling for same-sex marriages and partnerships which are entered into in a specific Member State to be recognised in all other Member States .
Clever wording is being used to smuggle this measure in through the back door .
In the German version of the motion and , I suspect , in many other language versions , the actual aim of this paragraph is not nearly as clear as it should be .
Since I am opposed to gay marriage out of principle and , in particular , to this deceitful style of politics , I have voted against this paragraph and against the report .
The report could become an incentive for partnership tourism , in the same way as has already happened with adoption and artificial insemination .
Entering into a partnership in a country where rights and claims equivalent to those of marriage have the force of law will allow the partners to make claims in their country of origin which only apply to marriage there .
The ultimate consequence of this resolution would be to make the existence of different regulations in different countries totally absurd .
The report deals with a topic of utmost importance , which is the way the EU meets the needs of its citizens and commercial companies in the area of the law , with particular reference to cross-border civil and commercial disputes .
However , I regret that I did not find in the report 's content any reference to the actions required to inform citizens or company administrators about the opportunities offered to them by European legislation with regard to pursuing their interests in judicial proceedings .
Not enough is known about these opportunities and , therefore , they are not utilised enough .
It is important to focus on magistrates and lawyers , but it does not ensure that citizens have total access to this information .
I voted in favour of adopting the report on civil law , commercial law , family law and private international law aspects of the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme .
Ever since the EU gained powers in the field of justice and internal affairs , and since the creation of the area of freedom , security and justice , for which the EU and the Member States are currently jointly competent , significant progress has been made in the field of civil law .
The European Commission communication entitled ' An area of freedom , security and justice serving the citizen ' proposed an ambitious plan for development of the aforesaid area in the period 2010-2014 .
There can be no doubt that further progress in this area will necessitate a more strategic approach , targeted primarily at the needs of citizens and businesses with regard to exercising rights and freedoms in the single market .
Progressive harmonisation , approximation and standardisation are required , for example , in the field of consumer protection .
It goes without saying that the radically different legal systems and traditions must be respected and reconciled when ensuring the functionality of measures that have already been introduced .
However , I believe that their coexistence should be regarded as a strength and inspiration when creating common solutions for European legislation , rather than a hindrance .
In order to meet the challenges , the Commission should conduct an open debate with various representatives of the judicial system , including , in particular , legal professionals .
I voted in favour of the Berlinguer report insofar as it concerns aspects of fundamental importance for enabling a shift towards a Europe of the citizens and for promoting the development of a European judicial culture .
In particular , the report addresses in a balanced and exhaustive way issues concerning the training of judges ; cooperation between judicial authorities ; European contract law ; fundamental rights , including freedom of enterprise , so as to develop entrepreneurship in all economic sectors ; and the mutual recognition of official documents issued by national administrations , including the effects of civil status documents .
The Stockholm Programme aims to safeguard the fundamental rights of citizens in an area of freedom , security and justice .
However , the differences in the various legal systems of the Member States are creating barriers to the development of European legislation .
That is why I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution , which proposes the convergence and harmonisation of civil , commercial , family and private international law and focuses on cooperation between the various legal systems of the Member States by :
• nurturing a common European judicial culture ;
• educating and training judges , prosecutors and other court officers , with the aim of building mutual understanding of the legal systems of the other Member States and resolving cross-border disputes ;
• creating a regular forum so that judges in areas of law where cross-border issues arise can examine areas of legal controversy or difficulty with the aim of building a climate of mutual confidence ;
• introducing a European contract law ;
• introducing cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil and commercial matters .
The Stockholm Programme adopted in December 2009 establishes the priorities for the development of a European area of freedom , security and justice over the next five years .
In this context , it is important to point out the significant results that have already been achieved , and to hope that the recommended measures can help to respond to the real needs of the public and businesses , facilitating their mobility and the exercise of their rights and freedoms in the single market , without jeopardising the requirements of the principle of subsidiarity and respect for diversity of the legal approaches and constitutional traditions of the different Member States .
Today , we voted in plenary on a proposal for a resolution on positive law aspects of the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme , in other words , European Union priorities for the development of an area of freedom , security and justice in the period 2010-2014 with particular regard to aspects of civil , commercial and private international law .
The dossier calls on the Commission to improve the proposal submitted in an attempt to overcome certain problems and critical areas that occur specifically in international judicial practice .
Assisting national judges on technical aspects of the proposed measures during legislative drafting and the establishment of an independent European claims instrument , which would , amongst other things , make it possible to resolve , at least partly , problems raised by differences of opinion in national procedural law , are specific examples of the constructive and approving approach that a common and extensively discussed proposal for a resolution could have on European legislation .
In an area as important to citizens as civil law , it is necessary to respect and accommodate radically different legal approaches and constitutional traditions but it is also necessary to face up to the negative legal consequences for citizens arising out of this difference .
in writing . - This is a good regulation calling mainly for the use of every possible means to nurture a European judicial culture , particularly through legal education and training .
I hope that the actions identified in the Action Plan will be carried forward within the planned timeframe considering their importance for improving the lives of European citizens .
In particular , Italy has always supported the need to develop mutual trust between Member States of the Union and is in favour of continuing to extend EU regulations in the sector of justice and internal affairs .
From this perspective , we strongly support the approach of the whole Action Plan , which hinges on the principle of mutual recognition of decisions , to be achieved by strengthening mutual trust .
I would also emphasise the need to use all possible means to foster a European judicial culture , particularly through legal teaching and training .
I would like to express my satisfaction over the importance attributed to matters concerning civil law , such as the legislative proposal on reinforced cooperation in the divorce law sector and the recognition and creation of official public documents on inheritance .
I am particularly pleased to see the emphasis placed on the need to introduce specific actions and programmes to promote an effective European judicial culture , based on the supply of training measures , to be held under Erasmus schemes for judges and all legal operators .
The actions identified in the plan are very important for improving the guarantees of European citizens in respect of the law , but it is necessary to adopt a more strategic and less fragmentary approach based on the real needs of citizens and enterprises in the exercising of their rights .
While , on the one hand , we must consider the difficulties of legislating in a harmonised manner within an area of shared responsibility , on the other , we need to extend EU regulations in the sector of justice and internal affairs .
In this way , the parameters of legal certainty will be increasingly clear and supported and we will pave the way for a genuinely common legal theory and practice with a European Union .
Thanks to the Stockholm Programme , the citizens of Member States will be able to assert their rights throughout the European Union in the fields of civil , commercial and labour law .
The programme offers advantages and greater transparency to citizens .
It also improves the consistency of our system of legal regulations in the European Union .
However , in order to build systems which are more uniform , it is essential that there be greater coordination of what we do and that experience be exchanged between the countries of the Union .
This concerns , to a large degree , the justice system , including the extremely important questions of migration and the fight against organised crime .
A very important matter , particularly during the current economic problems , will be development of effective mechanisms of action in the area of strengthening the single market and economic integration , by which I mean more liberal principles of commercial exchange between the countries of the European Union and the establishment of legislation on commercial exchange between third countries .
From the point of view of the participants of economic processes , it is necessary , above all , to specify businesses ' and consumers ' rights of protection and to continue to monitor effectively the implementation and enforcement of legal regulations in the area of the single market .
Since the European Union acquired shared competence over justice and home affairs , huge progress has been made in the area of civil justice .
Article 67 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union establishes the importance of respecting the different legal systems and traditions within the EU and Mr Berlinguer 's report highlights this as one of the strengths of the EU .
Subsidiarity is one of the basic principles of EU law and is based on the condition that the subordinate member is able to resolve problems and carry out tasks independently .
The areas of justice and home affairs have traditionally been the responsibility of the Member States .
Each Member State has its own special features and traditions which reflect the cultural diversity of Europe .
However , in order to keep pace with the changing reality in today 's world , joint responsibility with the European Union is needed .
Nowadays , treaties with cross-border implications are the rule and partnerships or families where the partners come from different Member States are commonplace .
However , these involve challenges for national civil legislation which we will have to overcome .
As the rapporteur recommends , it is now time to develop a European judicial culture alongside the national judicial cultures .
It is a pity that this Parliament has decided simply to withdraw the debate on the Stockholm Programme from the agenda .
Where there is no opportunity to debate , there is no opportunity to put questions .
Also , if we do not allow a critical exchange of views on the integration process , it will only reinforce the concerns of many Member State citizens .
One of these concerns is the talk about creating a civil-law statute of marriage .
Many family associations in all Member States are pointing out that the mechanism of the Stockholm Programme may therefore be taken advantage of by same-sex couples .
This question can be resolved not only within the framework of civil law procedures and private international law , but also through the complex procedure of family law under Article 81 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU .
If the Stockholm Programme is misused for this purpose , it would amount to an indirect change in legislation , which is precisely what the Union has long been fighting against .
The Commission and the Council must therefore explain that neither the socio-legal mechanisms nor the Stockholm Protocol will ever lead to the creation of a statute of marriage for same-sex couples .
If we want to build a strong Union , it must not be at the cost of restricting Member State powers or the common good .
The ECR Group has submitted proposals for amendment which emphasise the powers of the Member States .
Unless these proposals are adopted , I will vote against the submitted report .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Statement by the President
I shall start with a short announcement .
I strongly condemn the attack by the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea against the South Korean island of Yeonpyeong .
I am deeply concerned regarding today 's events on the Korean Peninsula .
Using raw force and military power will not solve any issues and further loss of human lives must be avoided .
In the interests of the Korean Peninsula and the wider region , the North and South should make efforts to rebuild confidence in a durable way .
This is why I welcome the announcement by President Lee Myung-bak that the South Korean Government intends to avoid escalation of the worrying situation .
I call on the government of the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea to immediately stop any hostile actions and to refrain from all activities that risk further escalation .
The Korean Armistice Agreement must be fully respected by the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
2011 budget ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the 2011 budget .
I would like to begin our discussion .
Mr Barroso , Mr Wathelet , Mr Chastel , during the conciliation meetings , the European Parliament and the Council did not manage to reach agreement on the 2011 budget .
We regret this .
Agreement could have been reached .
The European Parliament is aware of the need to make savings .
We were prepared to agree to limiting the growth of payment appropriations in the 2011 budget to 2.91 % compared to 2010 .
In return , we wanted to establish a method of bringing the Treaty of Lisbon into force , and specifically we wanted to establish which procedures should be followed in further budget negotiations .
This is important , because the Treaty of Lisbon is in force .
We did not want to go beyond the treaty in any way .
We know that the majority of Member States wanted this agreement .
Now we have to decide as quickly as possible how to solve the problem that we have no budget .
This is the responsibility of all three European institutions .
We have said that a fast track is possible for Parliament , but only if our expectations concerning procedures for the next budget negotiations are guaranteed .
In the last few days , we have witnessed considerable progress in terms of talks with the Council .
I am sure that an agreement is within reach .
The European Parliament is ready to do a very great deal in order to reach this agreement as quickly as possible .
We ended the negotiations on 15 November shortly before midnight with the expectation from Parliament that we want to find good solutions to two fundamental matters : flexibility mechanisms , in order to ensure financing of policies resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon , and also solutions related to the participation of Parliament in the process of negotiating successive multiannual financial frameworks .
We also have such expectations regarding the proposals related to own resources for the European Union .
We think the European Commission could adopt a decisive role in this matter .
I am certain that thanks to a mutual readiness to talk , we will reach agreement .
I would like to emphasise once again that I think the role of the European Commission is crucial .
Therefore , it is with interest that we await Mr Barroso 's speech , in which he will present both the proposed new budget , which is to be put to the vote on 1 December , and a response to Parliament 's main expectations .
Of course , what is to be said by the Presidency - by Mr Wathelet - will also be of particular importance to us , as will what Mr Chastel has to say , too .

Mr President , I think that the crisis in which we currently find ourselves was triggered by events in Deauville .
I believe that the President of France and the Chancellor of Germany made a deal with David Cameron in Deauville which involved his agreement to the revision of the treaty for the Stability and Growth Pact in return for the United Kingdom 's budget demands being met .
I may be wrong , but the suspicion is there .
This would be a deal made at the expense of third parties , in other words , at the expense of the rights of the European Parliament .
Therefore , it should be no surprise that the third party , in this case this House , is not prepared to go along with this .
Incidentally , it should also be no surprise that the fate of Europe is being left in the hands of eurosceptic governments .
In this sort of situation , a government of this kind will test out how far it can go .
The British Government is currently testing out whether the rest of Europe will accept its prerogatives or not .
Therefore , this budget or budget debate is also a debate about the direction in which the European Union should develop .
It is not about money .
We have agreed on the money .
I believe that this is an important message for the voters and the citizens of Europe .
We have come to an agreement on the money and , as a Parliament , we have met the demands of the United Kingdom with regard to the money : a 2.91 % increase in spending , not the commitment appropriations , but the expenditure .
If not money , then what is it all about ?
It is about the rights of the European Parliament .
It is about the rights which are laid down in the treaty .
Everything that Parliament is calling for forms part of the treaty .
The subject of own resources is covered in Article 311 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU .
Medium-term financial planning is a procedure established in the treaty , for which a regulation must be enacted .
Flexibility in the budget involves the mutual interest of governments , the Commission and Parliament and their ability , within the framework of budgetary rules , to respond flexibly to short-term requirements .
It is not about additional spending ; it is about how efficiently Europe is governed , at least that is the case with flexibility , and it is about the primary rights of Parliament .
I am rather surprised .
The Heads of Government of the European Union are all parliamentarians .
They are all men and women who have grown up in the parliamentary tradition .
As Mr Daul has already said , which national parliament would allow its central right , the right to draw up a budget , to be interfered with by the will of the executive ?
The 27 governments of the European Union are executives .
However , we must not allow democracy in Europe to be turned upside down .
Parliament enacts the budget and Parliament controls the executive .
The wish of the British Government in this case is for the 27 governments to control the Parliament , which is the opposite of parliamentary democracy .
Therefore , this decision could set a precedent .
Parliament must not allow its rights to be taken away .
What happens next ?
After European taxpayers ' money has been transferred to Brussels from the coffers of the Member States , it no longer belongs to the Member States .
It is the EU 's money .
It must then be controlled by Parliament within the Union .
After this , the budget must be adopted by Parliament , because the European budget is not adopted by 27 national parliaments or by 27 national governments , but by a freely elected Parliament , in other words , this House .
Medium-term financial planning , the flexibility clause and the own resources are the three elements which we need to discuss with the Council , not the money .
We have talked about this over the last few hours .
I would like to make it very clear once again that Mr Lamassoure and the chairs of the groups have made a great effort to enable us to take what is , in my opinion , a relatively consistent line .
However , we must not now give up this line .
We must make it clear to the Council that these three elements concern our rights and not additional spending .
Any Parliament which allows its rights to be curtailed by a government of any kind should cease to function .
Therefore , my group has unanimously decided that either we will agree on these demands , which are nothing more than an attempt to reinforce Parliament 's rights , or there will be no budget .
If there is no budget , there will be no ITER project , no nuclear fusion reactor .
There will be no Galileo project and there will be no European External Action Service .
The Heads of Government have the choice .
They can either recognise the rights of Parliament and its projects or they can humiliate Parliament , in which case there will be no budget .
That is the unanimous line taken by my group .
( Applause )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I wonder whether the House would agree that , constitutionally speaking , there is another interpretation of the whole idea of separation of powers and checks and balances ?
In the international arena and on the European political scene , we cannot simply transfer the national model of separation of powers and checks and balances .
The way I see it - and I wonder whether colleagues would agree with me - is that , in a system of separation of powers and checks and balances , the Council actually represents nation states , and whatever remains after the Lisbon Treaty of the sovereignty and independence of nation states .
It acts on behalf of nations , whose governments are elected .
In European democracies , governments are elected via a democratic , electoral system .
On behalf of their nations and their peoples , they exercise a check and counterbalance the power of Parliament .
Would the House not agree that there is another interpretation of checks and balances ?
Mr President , there are many interpretations , Mrs Morvai .
That much is completely obvious .
It may be that your interpretation of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU is different from mine .
However , this is not about the interpretation , but about the application of the treaty and this includes a clear budgetary procedure .
Incidentally , you are , as far as I know , a member of the Hungarian Jobbik party , or if not , then a member of another party .
Please explain to the voters in your country that if we adopt the EU budget , then it will actually be possible to pay out the cohesion funds within the European Union in the long term .
If there were no budget , then the funding could not be made available .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , in December 2005 , there was a Prime Minister who sat here in the House .
I think one thing we all learned is that we really need to see a seriously reformed budget for the future .
Let us all together - the Commission , the Council , Member States and the European Parliament - work out how , in the next few years , we can build a consensus for a changed and reformed Europe in which the budget is a rational part of the future and not an unfortunate piece of horse-trading .
Well , that Prime Minister was Tony Blair , the man who made the last deal on the financial perspectives .
Here we are now five years later .
What Mr Blair said is the essential thing that Parliament wants to achieve : the engagement of the EU institutions and all involved parties to reinvent the financing of the Union and to base this financing on rational grounds and not on a horse-trading competition , which is the case today .
On the figures , let us be very clear .
It is no secret that Parliament could be ready to accept the Council figures , of course , within a broader deal .
But we need also to agree on a second element , colleagues , which is flexibility .
Let us be very clear on this .
That flexibility is not a concession from the Council side ; flexibility is necessary , indispensable , otherwise we cannot finance a number of important issues .
What is more is that flexibility is an ' acquis ' .
It forms part of the interinstitutional agreement that we have already .
In fact , the Council has broken its word by refusing this now in this budget .
Finally , and this is the most important thing , we must agree on the future financing of the Union .
Therefore , the issue of own resources must be reopened ; no doubt about it .
Let me be clear that own resources is not a question of changing the treaties .
Own resources is also not a question of new competences .
It is a question of applying the existing treaties and it is a question of financing existing competences , because the Union was always meant to have its own revenue .
Mrs Merkel , Mr Sarkozy and Mr Cameron do not know this , but the Union was founded with its own revenue .
That was the basis of the financing of the Union by the founding fathers .
However , we all know that with time and a contribution from a certain Iron Lady , the Union lost the link to its own resources , so instead we now have absurd discussions about who benefits more and who benefits less from the Union .
Not seeking the EU interest but only focusing on the net payment position of every single Member State is what the budget is today in the European Union .
That is called business for the moment in the budget issues of the Union .
This way of acting is killing the Union - it is destroying the spirit of unity in the Union and it is destroying the solidarity in the Union .
I repeat we can only require genuine own resources which can also lead to what a number of countries want , which is to have less national contributions .
If we do not change the system , governments and not citizens will stay in charge .
If , on the contrary , we go in the direction of own resources , not governments , but citizens will be in charge .
In short , you could say that own resources for Europe colleagues means more European democracy ; it is the basis for a modern European democracy .
So I have one request to you Mr Barroso .
My request is very simple .
Whatever the format is - a convention , a conference , an IGC with or without national parliaments - do not listen to the voices of the past .
Go for the future , use your right of initiative and put a formal proposal on the table as fast as possible .
The pro-European majority in this House is fully behind you and behind that initiative .
Mr President , Presidents , I believe that if we listen carefully to what everyone is saying , we are at a turning point in the history of the European Union .
The problem with the budget today , as everyone has said in his or her own way , is a problem to do with the idea of the development of the European idea .
It is not just a budget .
What is more , there is something amiss in the idea of the European Union , and it is always apparent in public debates .
We are witnessing the renationalisation - the completely absurd renationalisation - of European activities .
Why ?
Because - and we are all saying it - you want the European Union to successfully resolve problems that you are no longer able to resolve at national level but , at the same time , you want to give the resources for the task not to the European Parliament , but to the European Union .
That is why we say that we are not defending Parliament 's rights , but only the rights of the European Union and the need for the European Union .
That is why whereas , today , we are agreeing on three points , we actually need to agree on one thing , here , together : whether to take it or leave it .
Moreover , even if it takes two , three or four months - and it will be tough for everyone - we shall approve the European budget only if there is an agreement on the points we are raising .
Let us not be afraid , then , if it takes a long time and if , as may happen , we do not vote on the budget in December , or even in January or February .
If we launch this debate but stop halfway through , we will lose out for the next four years .
I therefore call on everyone to be responsible with regard to own resources , and Mr Verhofstadt has explained this .
It is , after all , quite simple , and that is why Mr Lamassoure 's idea of an agreement is interesting , because debates must be held in the European public arena with the national parliaments , with government representatives and with Commissioners .
Own resources represent an opportunity to reduce - I shall say it three times - to reduce - that time , it was for the benefit of all the conservatives - to reduce national contributions and , at the same time , to strengthen the European budget .
After all , it is not complicated !
Therefore , if we can get that message across in the European area , the people of Europe will agree with us .
I repeat : we need to reduce national contributions and strengthen the European budget .
Yes , there will be European taxes , indeed there will , but the austerity measures you are currently introducing at national level will be disastrous for you anyway , because we have known for years that austerity kills economic momentum and ultimately achieves nothing .
I therefore beg you : let us not cripple Europe , because the governments are already crippling their own economies at home .
My final comment concerns Ireland .
Ireland symbolises the failure of neoliberalism ; it symbolises the failure of deregulation .
For years , with Mr Griffith , you have been driving us mad with your ' deregulate , deregulate , reduce corporation tax ' .
Well , have you got it yet ?
This is an economic disaster , and now what is the Irish Government doing ?
It is crying ' Mummy , mummy , Europe , help us ! '
( The President cut off the speaker )

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would like to reassure Mr Cohn-Bendit that we understand what it takes not to have a budget .
Contrary to what many people may think , the ECR Group would be delighted to see an agreement between the two arms of the budgetary authority .
We feel that it is a shame not to have a budget after all these arduous conciliation talks , because the 500 million taxpayers in Europe do not understand why these two distinguished arms of the budgetary authority cannot reach an agreement in the Lisbon Treaty 's very first year of application .
I think the responsibility lies with both sides .
Parliament does not have to force governments to enter into political commitments that they are unfortunately unable or - for whatever reason - unwilling to make at this point in the midst of a crisis .
Nor does Parliament have to enforce these commitments over a longer period of time .
On the other hand , I can also say that the Council has its fair share of responsibility , because a week ago , when we were negotiating in the conciliation , not a single ambassador bothered to make any statement explaining the views of his or her own government .
Therefore , it was a kind of dialogue between two sides which were not even stating their own proposals .
The Commission is preparing a new draft based on the 2.91 % growth figure .
At this point , I should like to acknowledge and express my appreciation for the tremendous work Commissioner Lewandowski is doing in that respect .
We can reach a compromise if we can agree to use flexibility - which is not a good use of terminology , by the way , because we should be using ' reserve ' - as part of the interinstitutional agreement for the remaining three years to finance ITER and a few other key projects .
At the same time , Parliament could decide not to force any political declaration on the Council which is unacceptable to several key governments at this time .
That is how we can reach a compromise .
I think Mr Wathelet is working very hard on this .
I can only encourage you to pursue this , Mr Wathelet , because it will be an even bigger shame if we cannot reach an agreement before the end of this year .
( Blue card question to Mr Cohn-Bendit under Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) .
Mr President , it is indeed and I think you failed to catch my eye .
I have a comment and a question to Mr Cohn-Bendit , lest you think that Irish ears are not listening to you .
Would you accept that your comments in relation to corporation tax will harm , rather than help , this situation ?
Rather than your disparaging remarks about the Irish looking for help , do you not accept that by helping Ireland , is the European Union helping herself ?
I say that as an Irish mammy because I think you used that comment .
Let us be very adult in this House about what we say about other nation states , with respect .
( Replying to a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , Europe is a political body .
We have nation states with their own policies and we discuss policies .
I will continue to say that one of the reasons for the catastrophe in Ireland was the wrong economic policies .
Greens also participated in this to make it wrong .
I know that .
I can say it clearly .
I am not blind , and I will continue to say that it was the wrong policy .
If you pursue a wrong policy and it leads to a catastrophe , it is fair to say that it was the wrong policy .
If it had been the right policy , you would not be in this catastrophe .
The others who are responsible are the European banks .
They played casino , but if you lose money as a normal human being in a casino , you have lost money .
Now the banks are saying that they want their money back too , and we are in a complicated situation because we want to help the Irish people , but we have to say that it is because of the system that we are criticising that we are now where we are in Ireland .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the supporters of the Treaty of Lisbon have emphasised the fact that it does away with the democratic deficit in the EU .
In reality , the first year has shown that the European Parliament has had to fight with the Council and the Commission simply to achieve parliamentary codecision and democratic control .
The codecision of Parliament on all budgetary questions is a democratic minimum standard .
I repeat : it is a minimum standard .
This Parliament was elected to bring the European ideal to life and to act as a counterbalance to national egotism .
It is our duty not to compromise which it comes to the involvement of the European Parliament in the negotiations concerning the financial framework for the 2013 to 2020 budgets .
New tasks cannot be financed by budget reallocations , or at least only to a very limited extent .
When faced by the tight budgets in the Member States , it is completely incomprehensible that the Council is refusing to discuss the own resources with Parliament .
The European budget must be a concrete representation of the solidarity of the Member States .
Otherwise , we will move away from the fundamental idea of European integration and lose the respect of the citizens of Europe .
The net contributors seem to have forgotten this .
While their companies are making profits on the European internal market , Germany and other countries are being thoroughly miserly when it comes to overcoming the joint challenges faced by Europe .
Solidarity has been redefined and one Member State will only help the others when this is to its own advantage .
The German banks are so deeply enmeshed in the crisis in the Irish financial sector that the lifeline is just as important for the rescuers as it is for those being rescued .
In recent years , my group has rejected the EU budget .
We believe that its priorities are wrong and that too little attention has been paid to overcoming the decline in environmental and social prosperity .
This has deepened the social divide within the EU and within the Member States .
It is totally unacceptable for major projects such as ITER to be financed at the expense of projects which provide direct funding for students , the unemployed , rural areas and local communities .
To summarise , it is high time , and I admit this is a somewhat simplistic way of putting it , for us to think more closely about the people of Europe in European terms and not in egotistic national terms .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , I have a question for Mr Bisky .
Companies make profits when they manufacture products or provide services which are bought by citizens .
Is your alternative to this that companies should make losses and manufacture products which no one needs ?

( DE ) Mr President , I understand your economic questions , Mr Rübig , and they are very profound in economic terms , which I respect .
However , I believe that this is about the relationship between the budget and the European Parliament and its rights .
That is a different subject .
It has to do with products , but in a quite different sense .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , let us be honest .
Negotiations on next year 's budget collapsed due to this Parliament 's ambition to acquire more power over the financing of the European Union , even though those powers are not provided for in the Lisbon Treaty .
Such a demand - which translates into the proposal for a European tax - is , and has always been , unacceptable to us .
There have been threats to block funding to the Member States which refuse to agree to Parliament 's demands .
Believe me , this would be the best news we could give to British and all European taxpayers - those who eventually fund both national contributions and a European tax .
The auditors have refused to clear 92 % of the European Union 's expenditure for 2009 , and they estimate that at least GBP 6 billion should not have been paid out - a similar amount to that of last year , which has not yet been recovered .
Blocking funding for those who used EU money irregularly would give the European Union enough resources to cover the noble causes that it claims it wants to support .
At the same time , it would also give the European bureaucracy a certain degree of credibility .
But this , I fear , will never happen .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , three equal partners are sitting around the negotiating table for the 2011 budget : the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
The European Parliament has agreed to the budget increase of 2.9 % proposed by the Council , but only in combination with a political package .
In the context of the Treaty of Lisbon , this is a highly justified demand .
With regard to the extent of the increase , I think it is important to make it clear that we are still working with an EU budget volume which goes back to the time when there were 15 Member States and , therefore , it is geared to a Union of this size .
However , there are now 27 states in the Union with a range of new tasks to be taken into account .
In the light of the economic crisis , it seems incomprehensible that we are increasing the EU budget .
However , we have to take into consideration the fact that almost 95 % of the money is returned to the citizens of Europe in the form of direct aid , for example , via the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
It must ultimately be clear to everyone that the current budgetary situation in some of the Member States is self-imposed .
The fact is that without a 2011 budget , the three financial supervisory bodies cannot be funded .
Given the current drama in Ireland , it would have been good if these organisations could have begun work yesterday .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that no one can take pleasure in this lack of conciliation on 15 November .
It is true that we would have preferred to have had an entirely different debate today , with the end of a conciliation procedure that might have culminated in an agreement and in the possibility of this budget being passed in the European Parliament also .
It is true that we were certainly all disappointed that this conciliation procedure was not a success .
At the same time , however , I have heard both within the Commission , which has acted as a facilitator , which has truly played its role of facilitator all throughout the procedure , and especially within Parliament , a desire and a reminder of this strong desire to succeed and to seek success rather than failure .
I have also heard it within the Council .
It is therefore true that the Belgian Presidency , immediately after the failure - we must clearly regard it as such - of 15 November , sought to resume immediate contact and to press ahead in a bid to ensure that this first budgetary procedure based on the Treaty of Lisbon is a success rather than a failure .
However , I would remind you that every single one of us will always be able to find reasons not to succeed , and that is how the conciliation process broke down .
Parliament will always be able to find proposals that the Council has made that it does not agree with , and the Council will always be able to find certain proposals that Parliament has made that are unsatisfactory .
There will always be a way not to succeed .
However , I have heard both institutions express a desire to succeed .
It is important now that we all assume our responsibilities and successfully conclude this agreement rather than remain stuck in this rut .
Once again , what message would we send if we failed to conclude this conciliation with an agreement ?
What image would the European Union project convey to the outside world , in this particularly unstable and difficult economic context , if it were unable , at this difficult time , to stick together , as it were , and make the necessary compromises between institutions in order to conclude a budget , in order to successfully conclude an agreement between our various institutions ?
Let us make no mistake : aside from image , aside from an initial failure linked to this budgetary procedure based on the Treaty of Lisbon , there would also be very real consequences - and they would affect the people of Europe in particular .
Some of these consequences have already been mentioned , because a provisional twelfths budget means a ' zero growth ' budget , not to mention inflation .
There is also a European External Action Service that could be in difficulty ; financial supervision bodies that could be placed in a difficult situation ; cohesion policies - I would remind you that the proposed budget provided for a 14 % increase in payment appropriations - and , hence , cohesion policy funds that might not be released ; yet more problems linked to the 2020 strategy ; and political priorities that Parliament holds dear and which had been integrated into this 2011 draft budget , mainly under heading 1a , such as mobility , young people and education - policies that may well not be implemented either .
Therefore , aside from the negative image that the lack of an agreement could convey , it would also have very tangible , very real , very specific consequences that would certainly not help to improve the European Union 's image in the eyes of the citizens themselves .
It follows that , if we want to reverse this trend , if we want to remain credible , if we want to assume this share of the responsibility , we must take advantage of these last few weeks in order to reach an agreement and emerge from this spiral of conflict .
Let us be clear : to do so , we need to bear in mind three things .
Firstly , there is the 2011 budget as such , with its figures , a budget on which - and I have heard it said by a number of group chairs here - an agreement could be reached with regard to the 2.91 % increase in payment appropriations .
We could reach an agreement on the figures as such , on the 2011 budget , on what is , in fact , on the agenda today .
I should like to reiterate that we know that this entails a number of concessions for the European Parliament .
We know that , when it comes to the 2011 budget , Parliament has made a number of concessions with regard to its initial demands .
The second topic that almost all of you have mentioned is the multiannual financial framework for the financing of ITER , which relates to the issue of flexibility .
Once again , the Belgian Presidency , in seeking to support this principle of agreement , immediately put the flexibility-related proposals back on the table .
This is the context in which we are working at the moment .
I would remind you , however , that we will need to be unanimous if we are to take the flexibility issue further , that this must be understood in a number of areas , and , in particular , that it must preserve the neutrality of the budget during the period in which the multiannual financial framework is in force .
We will also need to take advantage of any opportunities for redeployment and transfer before referring to this flexibility idea .
However , we can make progress .
If everyone makes the necessary efforts , I believe we can make progress on this flexibility idea , on this task , and on this objective of financing ITER in 2012-2013 , alongside the issue of the 2011 budget in the strictest sense .
There remains a third topic that you have also mentioned : political declarations .
On this point , I must say that the Council cannot say any more than what was said on Monday in conciliation , although I know that Parliament was unable to agree with that at the time .
I know that the commitments that were mentioned seemed too weak to Parliament but , once again , we will have an opportunity again to raise these issues and to debate them between us .
We shall have to hold these debates because Articles 311 , 312 and 324 of the treaty mention a number of consultations that must take place between our various institutions , and we shall ensure that they do take place because they are provided for in the treaty .
The declaration referred to Articles 312 and 324 , pursuant to which we shall have to hold these debates in the future between our various institutions .
Once again , however , we will hear a whole host of reasons for not wanting an agreement .
Nevertheless , I have perceived a will to succeed among the Members of the Council and within Parliament .
Do we really want to act as scaremongers by telling each other that we prefer not to have a budget , not to implement the policies that are provided for in the 2011 budget and not to make a success of the first budget based on the Treaty of Lisbon , or , in fact , do we want to embark on a positive course of action whereby we obtain , one by one , a number of agreements to enable the European Union to move forward and to allow for the implementation , via the 2011 budget , of a number of policies that we have decided to promote ?
I hope that it really is with this aim in mind that we take advantage of the next few weeks to ensure that this first procedure under the Treaty of Lisbon is a success rather than a failure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by fully exercising their right of initiative , the Members of the Commission have just decided in a meeting held here in Strasbourg that the Commission will be presenting a new draft budget in the next few days , on 1 December at the latest .
We hope that Parliament and the Council will approve it in the coming fortnight .
This draft will take up all the points that we agreed upon before the conciliation that ended last week .
In fact , we were very close to an agreement , and I wish to thank everyone who has worked in this spirit , a true European spirit of compromise .
It is a shame that in the end , an agreement has not been possible .
However , I am keen to underline the role of Commissioner Lewandowski , who has contributed all his energy and expertise , the role of many people in this House , but also the very constructive role of the Belgian Presidency , which I thank for having done and which is continuing to do everything possible to reach an agreement .
I believe that the draft that we are going to present deserves your support and that of the Council , and that it will enable us to come up with a budget before the end of this year , so that the Union may have a budget by 1 January 2011 .
Furthermore , I believe that it would be very difficult to explain to Europe 's citizens that in a crisis such as the one we are currently going through in Europe , we are unable to reach an agreement on the budget , which really is a symbol of Europe 's ability to respond to challenges , challenges such as the one that Ireland or the European economy is having to face up to at the moment .
Our proposal will take full account of the proposal made by Parliament to increase the commitments under the headings ' Competitiveness for growth and employment ' and ' External relations ' , through the use of the flexibility instrument .
It will fix the level of payments with an increase of 2.91 % .
I am convinced that this proposal will enable us to strike a balance that can be supported .
It goes without saying that this agreement must be clear on matters relating to ' future financing ' .
We must show that all the parties involved clearly understand the implications of the treaty and that close cooperation between the institutions at the highest political level is a natural consequence of our mutual commitment to adopt the best financial framework for the future .
The Commission will take all the initiatives required for an ongoing and fruitful dialogue at all levels , including amongst the Presidents of the institutions , in order to draw up a common plan that will allow for the necessary decisions to be taken .
May I remind you of President Buzek 's important speech to the European Council on 27 October , which served to underline the enhanced role of the European Parliament , including in budgetary matters , that is laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon , a role that I have also had the opportunity to draw attention to , by supporting your President 's speech before the 27 Heads of State or Government .
I would like to be very clear on the Commission 's position regarding a number of key points .
First of all , as emerged from the recent review of the budget , we will use our right of initiative to present formal proposals on own resources before the end of June .
Clearly , pursuant to the treaty , the European Parliament will have to be consulted on these proposals , which is in line with the expectations arising from the interinstitutional agreement concluded in 2006 .
Secondly , we will argue the need to take full account of the changes envisaged by the Treaty of Lisbon when we present proposals , both for future budgets and for the multiannual financial framework as a whole .
The budget must reflect the Union 's revised priorities arising from the treaty .
I must also make it clear that , as the review of the budget has shown , the flexibility in our budgets means that the resources that we have are concentrated on the Union 's political objectives .
Therefore , flexibility must be clearly maintained to allow for adoption by a qualified majority of revisions of less than 0.03 % of gross national income .
To this end , I sincerely hope that we will receive positive news very shortly from the Council , so that we have the right political conditions to ensure the success of the 2011 budget adoption procedure .
The recent review of the Union 's budget , as presented by the Commission , has clearly shown the importance we give to optimising the added value of EU expenditure .
We cannot waste the opportunity that we are being given to ensure that the Union 's budget really makes a difference by promoting our ambitions and implementing the objectives of the treaty .
The Commission will draft a methodology aimed at demonstrating the added value of the budget , and we are also prepared to set about quantifying the costs of a ' non-Europe ' .
We must state very clearly that the advantages of Union membership cannot just come down to numbers and figures .
While we are focusing on the costs of the budget , we must also focus more closely on those who really benefit from the Union 's policies and not only on the annual budgetary costs .
Ladies and gentlemen , these are clear commitments that I am making before you today , on behalf of the Commission .
I will confirm them in writing to the Presidents of Parliament and of the Council .
If it helps to obtain this agreement , we are also prepared to reiterate them in the form of declarations to be annexed to an agreement between the Council and Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I know that many people , on all sides , have felt during this debate that the next multiannual financial framework will be a crucial test for Europe , and I share their point of view .
It will be a test of our ability to bring about real change for millions of Europeans , to use this powerful tool to stimulate our ambition for a Europe focused on growth and sustainable jobs for the future , a strong Europe on the international stage , and a Europe based on the values to which we subscribe .
It will also be a test of our ability to draft an intelligent budget , focused on the areas in which resources can best be deployed and culminating in tangible results , and not on a misdirected budget , because preference was given to political compromise rather than to the quality and efficiency of our spending .
However , as the last few weeks have shown , it may be , above all , a test of our system of governance , of our ability not only to present sound arguments but also to recognise that the strength of our Union and of the Treaty of Lisbon lies in finding the best solutions to achieve our shared objectives .
The proposals that the Commission will be presenting next June require major efforts to achieve the necessary consensus .
The Commission will be open to any ideas on how to structure the debate around our proposals on the solid foundations of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Ladies and gentlemen , the issues at stake in the discussions currently being held are huge .
They deserve our full attention .
I am convinced that all the parties will be determined to reach an agreement .
We have the broad outline of a solution based on the possibilities being offered in the current conditions which , I would stress , are very , very sensitive conditions that require all of us - Parliament , Council and the Commission - to be more responsible than we already are .
We must not forget that we are discussing the budget and not a secondary issue .
We are discussing one of the main tools that the Union has at its disposal .
This tool , far from being a luxury that we can do without during difficult periods , is absolutely essential if we wish to restore growth in Europe , create employment and generate prosperity .
The European budget is different from national budgets .
I would emphasise this point because people are sometimes very quick to make comparisons .
For a start , the European budget has no deficit : it is always balanced .
It is different from the Member States ' budgets as it is primarily an investment budget that contributes to growth , and we know how much we need this investment right now .
This tool is therefore too important to be jeopardised .
Europe needs the European Union to have a budget .
It is not a budget for Brussels , but a budget for the European citizens .
It is a budget for unemployed people who are currently looking for a new job .
It is a budget for the regions of Europe .
It is a budget for innovation in Europe .
We must therefore make it clear that it is not a budget for bureaucracy and bureaucrats .
It is a budget for the people of Europe .
We must prevent the disruption that further disputes would cause and any uncertainties linked to provisional twelfths .
They are not simply uncertainties ; they are real losses for real citizens .
If provisional twelfths alone were applied , our citizens would not understand how issues , even very important ones , could hinder a budget that has a direct impact on the livelihoods and prospects of citizens throughout the Union .
This is why I am confident that , with an additional commitment - and I appeal to the European spirit , especially of those who failed to show it last time - it will be possible to have a 2011 budget and to lay the foundations for a truly serious discussion on the prospects for financing the European Union in the future .
( DE ) Mr President , the Conference of Presidents is meeting at 17 : 00 at your invitation .
I would not have spoken again at this point if Mr Wathelet had not made these remarks .
In the light of the fact that the Conference of Presidents will be discussing and deciding on the next step for Parliament at 17.00 , I would be grateful if we could have Mr Wathelet 's speech .
I must say that what has been said represents a step backwards .
It is less than what we have so far heard from the Council .
If that is the Council 's line , then I must say to you , Mr Wathelet , and this is not an accusation directed at the Belgian Presidency , that we have tough , confrontational times ahead of us .
I would like to thank you , Mr Barroso .
Your remarks have shown that the two community institutions , Parliament and the Commission , are working along exactly the same lines .
Colleagues , if we go smoothly through our discussion , then at the end of the discussion before 17 : 00 , we can give the floor , together with our order , to President-in-Office Wathelet and he can explain everything .
Let us be patient .
This is a very important discussion .

( ES ) Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Mr Barroso , Commissioner Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , my political group wants a normal budget for 2011 .
My colleague , Mrs Skrzydlewska , and fellow Member , Mrs Trüpel , have worked extremely hard to put forward a viable plan that has the agreement of all the political groups and is consistent with the need for austerity being asked for by the Member States .
The Members of the European Parliament do not come from Mars .
We are German , British , Swedish , Hungarian and Spanish , and we are aware of and are experiencing the effects of the extremely serious economic and financial crisis in our own countries .
Nevertheless , we feel that a strong and well-financed European budget is a valuable and essential tool for restarting the EU economy .
Blocking , reducing or watering down the European budget is paradoxically contrary to the interests of the 27 Member States and 500 million Europeans .
If we do not have flexibility for the next three years , we will not implement the post-Lisbon policies .
Without a political agreement between Parliament and the Council on own resources or cooperation on the next multiannual financial framework , there will be no political or financial stability .
It is not simply a question of rights , but a question of common interest .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are entitled to come to this House as political opponents , but no one knows whom they are opposing .
This does not , however , benefit anyone , nor does it benefit the ' cohesion countries ' .
Although there is many a political leader currently interested in the 2011 budget , I would like to remind you that I have 14 years of political experience of budgetary conciliation .
Nothing that has ever been achieved in terms of budgets over all those years has been achieved through confrontation .
We have always achieved things through cooperation .
Posturing , whether in this House or in the Justus Lipsius building , where it also happens , is of no practical use whatsoever .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the European Parliament is being called upon to confirm its approach , an approach of responsibility , vision and unity .
As far as responsibility is concerned , we wish to give Europe a dignified budget .
European citizens , young people , enterprises , farmers , municipalities and regions , workers and the unemployed need a budget with a moderate , sustainable and realistic increase .
If we do not yet have this budget , it is not the fault of a spendthrift Parliament , which forgets we are living through times of crisis .
Instead , it is the fault of some selfish , falsely moralistic national governments , as quick to jump on their soapboxes as they are unwilling , as in the case of Great Britain , to relinquish their claim to nearly 30 years of unfair privileges .
If three governments are selfish and bad , the other 24 cannot be subject to their will but must react , Mr President , Mr Wathelet .
They must show what they are made of !
We hold the future of our citizens very dear when it comes to our vision for the future .
The Treaty of Lisbon and the EU 2020 strategy set us new tasks , new duties , new ambitions to build a better tomorrow .
How will we achieve these tasks ?
How will we put our shared ambitions into practice ?
What money can we use to enter into another imbroglio , like the Lisbon Strategy , which was never achieved but certainly not for want of trying by the European Parliament ?
Lastly , when we speak of unity , we mean unity between MEPs and unity with the Commission .
President Barroso 's speech this evening was good .
We do not need soothing , we need to flex our muscle with reason but with determination We have unity on this matter and this is a valuable asset , an extraordinary strength that represents 500 million citizens .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to say to both Mr Wathelet and Mr Barroso that I most definitely agree that there should be an agreement .
Of course we must have one .
That is Parliament 's opinion , too , and it is also why we were so willing to accept the compromise that the Council came up with , because the Council is not in agreement over how big the budget should be either .
We accepted the 2.91 % increase in payment appropriations .
In return , we have to demand that we have the prospect of getting a proper budget in future years .
It is a question of flexibility . It is also a question of engaging in a dialogue regarding the budget for future years .
This issue of flexibility is a very tangible one .
With the aid of flexibility , we have been able to fulfil new requests .
We would not have been able to get energy projects off the ground as part of the recovery plan - for example , by linking electricity networks from the Baltic countries with those from the Nordic countries , or linking the gas network in Bulgaria with those of Western Europe , so that Russia is no longer able to cut off our heating - if we had not found the money for this in the agricultural budget .
We need to have this sort of possibility of moving resources around in the EU budget .
We must , therefore , have flexibility .
It is also important for there to be constructive dialogue between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , including with the national parliaments , concerning the EU 's budget after 2013 .
The European Parliament must not be placed in a situation where we can only say ' yes ' or ' no ' to the medium-term financial perspectives .
There is a risk that we will say ' no ' ; there is a risk that it will go the same way as it did with the SWIFT agreement .
The EU 's own resources are to be reformed again .
It is not a question of creating an EU tax burden ; it is about creating a transparent and comprehensible system , without special rules and without rebates , so that we have a system that citizens can understand .
We need a debate now , and I am therefore pleased that the Commission has promised to take the initiative and come up with a proposal before next summer .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to emphasise once again that for this House , this self-assured European Parliament , the important issue is to honour the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is not about going beyond the terms of the treaty , as Mr Barroso has already so rightly said , but it is about keeping to the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon with regard to the additional powers for Parliament , ensuring that the Council does not turn back the clock and adhering to the arrangement on how we work together and how we come to an agreement between Parliament and the Council .
This was laid down in 2006 in the interinstitutional agreement .
All we want is for this to be confirmed again .
Thank you very much , Mr Barroso , you have rightly highlighted this issue once more .
Mr Wathelet has now attempted to persuade the House not to make such rapid progress towards a genuinely pro-European future , but instead to hold back .
If we do that , we will already be admitting defeat .
As Mr Schulz has said , this is , in fact , about a political dispute .
How will we handle the increased powers of the European Parliament and the Member States which are behaving in a more and more eurosceptic way ?
If we want the European Union and its citizens to have a powerful future , including at a global level , Parliament and the Council must reach a pro-European consensus .
Therefore , we must not give in at too early a stage .
Instead , we must fight for European added value , because this is in the interests of both the national governments and our citizens .

( CS ) Mr President , as Mr Schulz said , this is not just a debate about the budget , but it is also a debate about the future form of the European Union , and that is a fact .
It can clearly be heard here that beneath the budget debate , among other things , there is a hidden debate on how best to push through the European Union 's own financial resources , and therefore greater autonomy , and how to actually move the European Union further along the path to federalism .
In my opinion , of course , this is something quite unacceptable , which cannot and must not happen .
Moreover , I have to say that it is now tiresome to hear the persistently unfriendly tone towards the Council here , and that it is childish to listen to the various ultimatums and threats .
If the European Parliament takes this path , and if the confrontational tone we have heard from a number of Members continues , only one thing will happen : the European Parliament will be the loser , both with the media and with the public .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow , millions of Portuguese workers are going to go on strike .
They are going to go on strike with a very simple message : it is not those who work , it is not pensioners , it is not young people , and it is not the unemployed who should pay for a crisis for which they were not responsible .
The current deadlock over the European budget cannot be understood without analysing its context , which is one of social tragedy and austerity policies that are being imposed on our countries .
Austerity policies are not just unfair : they are a colossal economic mistake which promise to drag the European Union back into recession , which promise a future of unemployment , and which , above all , promise to accentuate the divergence between the countries in surplus and those in deficit .
In this context , we must be very clear about this debate on the budget .
We do not believe that there can be a currency without a substantial budget behind it and - let us be realistic - the 2011 budget under discussion is not just modest : it is a mediocre budget ; it is a budget that does not respond to the crisis but is part of the crisis .
That is exactly why it is important it is not repeated in 2012 , in 2013 or after 2014 .
This is the issue that we are discussing ; the issue of the future : do we want a Europe controlled by governments or a Europe that continues to be a Trojan horse for the interests of the financial system ?
In fact , the European left is interested in discussing own resources .
We do not want new taxes on the European public , but we definitely do want to discuss how to make financial capital pay what it has not been paying : pay what it owes .
That is the message that the public - the workers and the unemployed - are demanding from this House and from the European Union .
Either we want a European project that has so little ambition to fly that it barely makes it off the ground , or we make it clear that we will not be content with the scenario being put to us by the United Kingdom and a group of governments , which is ' do more with less money , because that is the Europe that we are offering you ' .
( FI ) Mr President , we really have an excellent situation now .
The European Union is in crisis ; all its institutions are in crisis .
That is the situation we sought , and that is the truth .
Now there is an opportunity to grow .
Centralised power and monetary policy did not work in the Soviet Union and they will not work in the West either .
There is no single currency ; there is only taxpayers ' money in different parts of Europe .
While national budgets are being cut at the same time - in Finland they could not even find EUR 1 million for a hospital for rheumatic diseases - my voters at least - and there were 130 000 of them - do not want me to be the EU 's representative in Finland , but the Finnish taxpayer 's representative in the EU , and that is what I intend to be .
Nothing comes of a centralised policy .
First Greece fell , now Ireland is falling , and behind them are Portugal and Spain .
The exercise will soon be over .
( NL ) Mr President , how pleased I am with the position of the UK and Dutch governments , in particular , so far !
Using excellent arguments , they have managed to prevent the increase in the EU budget for 2011 and have refused to agree to the introduction of own resources , for which , read European taxes .
Well done , I say .
At the same time , I do have to say that I regret that the European Parliament is not willing to learn anything from the lesson that Member States are teaching it .
The Euro clique , removed from reality as they are , thought they were just going to get a little bit more money for their own hobbies .
They have now completely lost touch with what is going on in the minds of their own citizens .
They keep asking for more and more , while Parliament and the Commission should just be marking time or even cutting their spending .
Not a bit of it .
The Netherlands and the other Member States have extremely good reasons for rejecting the increase in the EU budget and the introduction of European taxes .
We are doing this for democratic reasons and find it entirely inappropriate that some in this House , such as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , seem to think that the Netherlands ought to be punished for that .
As a founding member of the EU , the Netherlands has almost always been the largest net contributor to the EU budget .
We are talking about Dutch taxpayers ' money .
Is Mr Daul now going to call for sanctions against other Member States ?
Is this the end of the EU ?
One might almost wish it were , considering how the interests of our citizens are being bargained away .
That is really sad , Mr President , but it is we who are then going to be subject to accusations of being populist .
If populism means that we are listening closely to what people are saying , that we are representing them and offering really watertight arguments about extracting ourselves from the economic crisis , which the EU has also forced upon us , then I shall be happy to wear that title with pride .
Obviously , we will continue to oppose the increase in the 2011 budget and European taxes .
By the way , Mr Schulz , before you start , I am not blond .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is this debate about money and power ?
No , it is not .
The engine of European development is spluttering .
The revenue side of the budget has been waiting for a reform for years .
The Treaty of Lisbon said that income had to be provided from our own resources .
So why not ?
Why can we not deliberate on this ?
For years , experts have been saying that the European budget is inflexible , that this is what renders the European Union a lame duck .
So why do we not create a flexible budget ?
We cannot respond to the challenges of a rapidly changing world while hogtied - hogtied by a seven-year budget - but , at the same time , we should not disregard those basic European principles which state that differences of opinion must be resolved in an open debate and through compromise .
It is unacceptable that there are states which are not even willing to engage in a debate .
This means the end of the European spirit .
We continue to be open to discussion , and the responsibility lies with those that are reluctant to engage .
Some say that political issues must not be linked to budgetary ones .
Quite the contrary !
The history of the entire European Union has been about this .
Please research for yourselves !
Here , we represent the people , and cannot look them in the eyes while presenting them with magnificent feints again and again : the 2020 programme , the Lisbon Programme , and we have no means to implement them .
It cannot go on like this any longer !
It is not the Council arguing with Parliament .
It is those who are unable to comprehend the spirit of the times who are arguing with those wishing to have a functioning Europe .
Mr President , first , let me say thanks to the Belgian Presidency because it is really trying , but they need to do a little bit more .
The European Parliament has shown a lot of goodwill in accepting the figures for 2011 because we understand the economic situation in the Member States .
Regarding commitments , it is even , in real terms , a reduction of the budget .
We have also offered solutions to a number of practical things like ITER institutions , like the financial supervisory authorities and the External Action Service ; we have been constructive .
But we do not accept that the economic crisis will be here for ever and that the crisis should set the limits for the future of Europe .
We do not accept that single-minded austerity is the way out .
We do not accept that the crisis requires less Europe or an anti-European agenda .
More concretely , we have criticised the lack of flexibility in the European Union budget for years , and the Commission agrees with us .
So how can the solution to the budget problems suddenly be to restrict flexibility ?
How can the future of Europe be to cut funding of mutually agreed priority programmes and not fund new ones - ITER is not the only priority - or even the most important ones .
Without reasonable flexibility , we risk building up a mountain of problems for 2012 and 2013 .
Let us try to avoid that .
How can it be a problem to involve the European Parliament in a constructive dialogue on the future financial framework and the next long-term budget ?
I do not understand .
Let us try again to find an agreement , but we must find a solution to flexibility that is not less ambitious than what we already have in the interinstitutional agreement .
We must find an open and constructive procedure on the next financial framework .
That is our red line .
Please , Council , try again .
( SV ) Mr President , it is easy to agree with much of what my fellow Members have said .
For me and many others , this has actually been a question of a genuine concern about the future , a concern about how we are to get through the years ahead and the coming decade .
It is important to remember that we have jointly succeeded in agreeing on a quite - or rather very - ambitious 2020 strategy for Europe - a strategy that is to take Europe forwards .
However , it is naive to believe that such a strategy will finance itself or implement itself .
It is surely also a given that this strategy and its successes will not merely be a question of money .
Unfortunately , however , this will also come into play to a certain extent .
Neither the Council nor the Commission have yet succeeded in presenting plans for the coming years with which we are sufficiently impressed , which is one of the reasons why we ended up in the state of conflict that we found ourselves in recently .
I would like to say to the Council that you very much like to be included in the family portrait after having approved the Treaty of Lisbon and succeeded in agreeing on the 2020 strategy .
All of the eminent people happily stand there and tell everyone how much they like Europe , but when it comes to doing something and actually implementing these things , the Council suddenly has problems .
These are problems that are now reflected in the fact that we suddenly have a budgetary crisis , and these are problems that the Council , as pointed out here , ought to attend to and find solutions for , because the fact is that this is not just about next year 's budget ; it is about the future .
That is the political message that we have for the Council today .
Mr President , this weekend , a delegation from the Commission and the IMF went to Dublin to give economic advice .
Another European country has yet again had to come up with a new national budget , and for our friends across the Irish Sea , it is an extremely difficult time .
There is , of course , a deep irony in European officials opining on a national budget , when the EU 's own budget is not yet agreed .
For many months , my group has warned that with Member States facing such budget pressures at home , it is vital that the EU show restraint in its own spending , ensuring that every penny of taxpayers ' money is well spent .
The last vote in the European Parliament did not show such restraint , and it is , of course , a good sign that there is now agreement on the numbers between Parliament and the Council , though I think we could have gone even lower .
It is depressing , however , that despite agreeing the numbers , there is still no agreement on the budget .
Our markets are still far from stable ; markets are nervous when there is uncertainty , and I would urge Members of this Parliament to put aside political ambitions and get a budget agreed .
( NL ) Mr President , the European Parliament is delaying the adoption of the 2011 budget .
Its demand that it have a say in the funding of the European Union in the long term includes an EU tax , although it has not called it that in so many words .
In so doing , the European Parliament is leaving itself open to the suspicion that it does not want to play a constructive role in the annual budgetary procedure , in accordance with Article 234 of the treaty .
That does not bode very well for the financial perspective for the 2014-2020 period with which Parliament so badly wants to be involved .
With the 2.91 % budget increase , the European Parliament has already achieved more than is good for Europe and its citizens and companies and the budgets of Member States .
It is we who are responsible for making reasonable plans for the 2011 budget .
That could put an end to these budget constraints which could still prove to be instructive .
( NL ) Mr President , it would not hurt if the European Parliament set a good example , for once , and defended the principle that the European Union should cut its coat according to its cloth .
At a time when everyone is having to save and when our citizens are having to tighten their belts , arguing for a substantial increase in the EU budget is sending out totally the wrong message .
The EU is just seizing new powers for itself and wants more money to that end .
Well then , there are plenty of opportunities for making serious savings .
According to the European Court of Auditors , the financial impact of irregularities in the agricultural policy accounts for 2-5 % of the spending on agriculture .
The financial margin of error for regional funds is more than 5 % , which therefore exceeds the two most important expenditure items in the budget .
We therefore need better control of how funds are spent and more stringent sanctions for erroneous , unlawful and fraudulent use .
Instead of just urging an increase in revenue all the time , Parliament should also discuss savings every so often .
A direct EU tax , which is what the Commission wants , is unacceptable for several reasons .
It is yet another step towards a European superstate , it will inevitably lead to ever more spending and it will also inevitably lead - as , indeed , Commissioner Lewandowski has admitted - to an increase in the overall tax burden of net contributors , which will just not sell at the moment .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Mr Barroso , I should like to thank the European Commission and the Belgian Presidency for their open , cooperative and indeed European approach .
In this time of crisis , let us not forget to preserve the future .
Last year , the virtue contest between governments was about who could spend the most .
Everyone was opening the throttle .
This year it is the opposite .
Everyone is now hitting the brakes , Fine .
Parliament accepts the figure imposed on the Council by the most thrifty or miserly Member State , but on condition that we agree on protecting the future .
The Union no longer has the necessary resources to finance its budget .
Instead of being the primary instrument of solidarity between Europeans , the Community budget has become the battleground for contradictory national interests .
The Treaty of Lisbon has been in force for one year now .
It confers on the Union long-awaited new powers .
Yet no additional resource could be allocated to the 2010 budget , and the same goes for 2011 .
The same is also true for the Europe 2020 action programme .
At a time when all Member States are committed to policies aimed at massively reducing public expenditure , they have a huge interest in identifying and tapping into potential savings that could be made by pooling some expenses , either between several States or between all 27 Member States .
Europe , the European vision and European benchmarking can help us spend less .
For that reason , the European Parliament is proposing an agreement between our three institutions on a method to work together on all these proposals for the future .
On a personal level , may I add that we will save time by involving national parliaments , as they are sovereign in terms of taxation and budgetary matters .
Mr President , I would like to stress three things .
First , if the times are tough for everyone , we need to work together .
I think the lowest point in our reconciliation was when the Council refused to start discussions , and the second lowest was when it refused to start discussions on the basis of documents proposed by the Commission regarding the political part of our discussions .
But discussions are in the treaty , and they are in at least two parts .
First : regarding the multiannual financial framework , in Article 312 , it is quite clear that if we do not have discussions before we agree on the new MFF , it will not be successful .
Regarding own resources - which is perhaps very sensible for the Council - there is no big threat .
We are not starting with new taxes but we are starting discussions , which is in Article 311 .
I believe that we need a budget , one hundred percent .
There is no other solution .
But if we really want one thing - to work together and to start discussions ( we do not know what the outcome of discussions will be ) - we ask the Council to take part in this joint task .
I think that we will then make it a success .
Otherwise , I really hope that you will not go alone , according to Article 315 .
You can do it , but I believe that a joint task will be much better than a separate one .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to say that I am disappointed over the negotiations between the Council , the Commission and Parliament concerning the EU budget for 2011 .
At present , all of Europe is affected by the economic and financial crisis .
European governments are affected by falling revenues and the need to repay large debts .
The European Parliament cannot pretend to be immune from this .
It is not right in such a difficult situation for Parliament to demand a 6 % increase in the budget .
It is also not right to offer to consent to the budget in return for a promise to give Parliament its own resources .
In my opinion , the European Parliament 's negotiators should not exacerbate the situation in the talks , but , on the contrary , should aim to reach an agreement .
The citizens , households , firms , communities and states of the EU need stability , and this can only be provided through duly approved budgets , not provisional budgets .
I therefore call on the Parliament , Council and Commission to agree on the 2011 EU budget as soon as possible .
Mr President , I welcome this debate on the budget today .
These are difficult times in Member States and that is a reality that this House cannot ignore .
From talking to my constituents , it is clear that they believe that those vocalising the need for budget increases are divorced from their economic reality and , furthermore , the whole issue is eroding confidence in European institutions .
The failure to agree a budget is not due to intransigence , but is largely due to the federalist agenda and the pursuit of that Holy Grail , the concept of own resources .
An EU tax is out of the question in my view .
In response to President Barroso 's declaration today that he will bring forward proposals for such a tax before June of next year , I would call on Prime Minister Cameron to clearly state that any move in this direction would trigger a referendum in the United Kingdom .
( PL ) Mr President , speaking as rapporteur for the European Union budget for 2011 , I would like to emphasise the constructive role which has been played by the Belgian Presidency .
I would also like to express my thanks for the involvement of the European Commission .
However , our efforts are not over .
On the contrary , we should , now , intensify them .
Personally , I think the fiasco of the 2011 budget negotiations is a defeat for all of us .
However , I would like to share with you my interpretation as to why Monday 's fiasco happened .
We were witnesses to a regrettable situation in which several Member States prolonged the negotiations until midnight to make them end in failure .
We did not manage to finish the negotiations on time , because on the part of several Member States , there was simply not the will to talk .
It is for me , personally , an exasperating and very surprising situation , when around the negotiating table are seated diplomats and deputy ministers of finance and they do not want to talk about finance or about the future financing and the present financing of the European Union .
It is absolutely incomprehensible and unacceptable to me , because what is to happen next , if the politicians and diplomats do not want to talk to each other ?
My next point is that the tension concerning discussion of the 2011 budget began because the European Parliament wants to draw the attention of Member States to a problem which we see in the future and which we can already see today : that the European Union continues to take on new roles and start new areas of activity and that it has growing ambitions , but that at the same time , the Member States , which support those ambitions , also do not want to finance those ambitions , those plans , those actions and those new areas .
We must talk about this growing inconsistency .
At a time of crisis , it is all the more important to talk about finance and to talk about how the European Union is to be financed .
Furthermore , the European Parliament is all the more necessary and it is not , at the moment , the right time to make the budget a taboo subject .
( PL ) Mr President , we do , indeed , have a serious budget crisis in the European Union , and as the previous speaker has said , many parties are responsible for this .
Perhaps Parliament made somewhat of a mistake , here , in what it expected of the negotiations - we wanted to take care of too many matters at the same time .
This is a problem for the beneficiaries , but it is also , in fact , a serious political crisis which , in my opinion , stems from the fact that somewhere , the spirit of euro-enthusiasm has been lost .
That spirit of euro-enthusiasm was felt in the European Parliament when we discussed the Treaty of Lisbon , and those who were not very keen on Europe were urged to be more enthusiastic .
However , when the treaty negotiations ended and integration was improved , the discussions about money and the budget started , and it turned out that instead of euro-enthusiasm , there was euro-egoism and a desire to pay as little as possible for that increased European integration .
I would like more euro-enthusiasm over the budget .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am concerned , but not about the budget , the interinstitutional agreement or a possible twelve-part budget .
I have a general concern about the political situation facing the European Union , which has come to light today in the context of the budget .
I am concerned about the trend for intergovernmental cooperation and about the fact that the increased powers of Parliament are obviously going to be curtailed and that even the agreement made in 2006 is not being respected .
I am concerned that the Treaty of Lisbon is not being put into effect .
( Applause ) Mr Barroso , I welcome your statements .
However , perhaps it would have been more helpful if you had come 10 days earlier , to make it clearer that the Commission is on Parliament 's side .
With regard to the three main subjects of our negotiations , the first one that I would like to discuss is the flexibility instrument .
There has obviously been some movement in this area .
However , I have recently heard that there have been setbacks during the parallel negotiations in Brussels .
What is happening there ?
Is there a possibility , and is this too much to ask , of agreeing on the same level of flexibility that we had before the Treaty of Lisbon , which was the right solution and which was achieved after many years of negotiations , starting with the Agenda 2000 ?
Is it too much to ask in the case of own resources to commit to the continuation of what we - the Council , the Commission and Parliament - said in 2006 in our statement on the interinstitutional agreement ?
Is it too much to ask that those people who are rejecting the idea of a debate on own resources should try reading the treaty ?
The treaty states that this debate must take place .
Lastly , Mr President , is it too much to ask for us to enter into binding political agreements on all the issues relating to assent procedures so that we can prevent crises from occurring and so that we do not find ourselves in the same position on other questions , including external trade agreements and the next multiannual financial framework ?
If you present these things in the form that you have today , the answer from this House will be a definite ' no ' .
( RO ) Mr President , Member States are clearly going through a difficult time from a budgetary perspective .
On the other hand , it has been very obvious that the EU budget has made a major contribution to the development of every Member State , including net contributors .
I am surprised that the failure of conciliation was not due to a disagreement over figures , but to the refusal to have a practical discussion about the common future of Member States , in other words , the future of Europe .
Parliament does not wish to go beyond its remit .
It wants the treaty to be complied with and to protect the future interests of the citizens who elected it .
Which points has the Council refused to discuss ?
The European Parliament 's involvement in drafting the MFF is a provision of the treaty .
This task was performed in 2006 and I do not believe that the 2007-2013 budget was bad for the Union .
Quite the contrary .
Flexibility - this mechanism has been used effectively so far and all Member States have benefited from it .
Own resources - it is precisely the budgetary situation which Member States are going through that should spur them on to find stable methods of funding the European budget which will stop jeopardising the implementation of European policies .
The new responsibilities under the treaty and the 2020 strategy require funding .
It is not acceptable for the same institution , the Council , to set targets for 2020 and , at the same time , not approve the financial resources required to meet these demands .
I believe that we have a duty to reach an agreement .
We have a responsibility to our citizens .
We must not allow confidence to wane in Europe 's institutions .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this week , we should have approved the European Union General Budget for 2011 .
Instead , we find ourselves faced with a situation where Europe runs a serious risk of having to start the New Year with a provisional budget and greatly hindered by the application of the system of twelfths .
It is common knowledge that Parliament , the Commission and most Member States were ready to reach an agreement , which was blocked by a minority of countries that refused to open a constructive debate with Parliament on the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I believe that Parliament 's position during the negotiations was responsible and moderate .
Parliament called for the application of the Treaty of Lisbon , and continues to call for it forcefully .
For its part , the Council has proved itself incapable of reaching an agreement and has shown itself to be deeply divided over matters of fundamental importance , which a minority of States have vetoed , rejecting the idea of opening a debate with Parliament over the rules and procedures that should guide the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Now , however , we are obliged to look to the future , and build the Europe of the future together - and by that I mean the Council , Parliament and Commission - without selfishness or prevarication .
By agreeing to the limits imposed by the Council on the growth figure , the 2.91 % we are all familiar with , Parliament 's aim is to send out a strong signal that it is sensitive to the period we are living through .
We all agree , however , as the Commission also affirmed today , that we should ask for greater flexibility to meet the needs of Europe .
I agree with President Barroso 's words today when he referred to the proposals that the Commission will draw up for the use of its own resources and the adaptation of the EU budget to the Treaty of Lisbon , and I hope for greater cooperation by the Council in building the Europe of the future .
( PT ) Mr President , in the negotiations with the Council on the 2011 budget , the European Parliament did everything in order for agreement to be reached .
The only demand is to fulfil the Council 's undertakings , for example , the Europe 2020 strategy and the need to finance it , and to comply with the Treaty of Lisbon .
In truth , under the treaty , the European Parliament has to be involved - by voting , giving opinions , or being consulted - in the new interinstitutional agreement , in the next multiannual financial framework and in establishing new own resources .
These demands are logical , reasonable , in the public interest , and in the interests of preventing interinstitutional risks and conflicts : they are demands that the Council should share and uphold .
As regards the interinstitutional agreement , it is obvious that respect for the commitments made by European institutions , specifically the Council , is conditional on the existence of flexibility regarding the current multiannual financial framework .
The Europe 2020 strategy , the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor programme , the European External Action Service and the financial supervision entities are some examples of things that need financing .
The Council needs to take the Treaty of Lisbon on board , both from the point of view of the areas newly under the jurisdiction of the European Union , which are reflected in the budget , and from the point of view of the European Parliament 's strengthened powers , not least regarding the budget .
These changes in fact strengthen the democratic legitimacy of the Union 's institutions .
The use of the Community method rather than the intergovernmental approach makes our governance more democratic .
I hope that a few national egos do not obstruct the European project of peace , solidarity and progress , or put it at risk .
Mr President , this has been a most important debate - particularly the political aspects of it - but I think it is also important to talk about some of the practical parts of the debate .
I am the rapporteur for agriculture for the 2011 Budget , and there will be real implications if we do not reach agreement on the budget for the cash-flow of Member States who have made advance payments to their farmers in recent weeks .
These farmers are facing financial difficulties and income shortages .
So there are very real and practical implications and this is just one of them .
But let me talk about the future .
Right now , we are debating the future of the common agricultural policy and we are asking that policy to deliver more for Europe in terms of environmental issues , food security and the territorial dimension , and yet all of the debate thus far has been about how can we shrink the agriculture budget .
I am very concerned that , in this debate about budget 2011 , we are projecting a very negative view of the budget for agriculture and the European Union post-2013 .
The two are very much linked and I think we need to be aware of that .
( HU ) Mr President , for the past ten years , we have been telling European citizens that a Treaty on European Union was necessary , and the countries have indeed ratified it .
For the past ten years , we have been telling citizens that research and development can be better accomplished and financed at EU level .
We have been telling them that European space policy can be better accomplished at EU level , and we have been telling them that energy research and the fight against climate change can be better accomplished in the European Union than it could be at Member State level .
When we believed this , stood for this , we thought that we were telling the truth .
In for a penny , in for a pound .
If , to this day , we still believe what we have been saying for the last ten years , we must create the necessary budgetary resources , and the primary means of achieving this is flexibility , while the secondary means is the creation of Parliament 's own resources , the European Union 's own resources .
Ceterum censeo there is a need for the European Union .
Mr President , your recent joint statement after the EU-US summit was the first statement in a long time where the Commission exhibited gravitas , optimism , power and solidarity , and also coherence .
Here we have the paradox of not finding common ground on the budget .
If we want Europe to be an international power , as we are indeed , we do not have the luxury not to have a budget .
This is what I wanted to say , and keep up the good work .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the failure of the trialogue represents a major political opportunity to reflect on Europe 's recent history .
The problem is not merely political but also cultural and involves many Member States .
The current economic and financial crisis is structural and not a passing phenomenon .
It actually represents a transformation that affects the economy , employment and society of the age in which we live .
If there is no political and cultural growth with a global vision of Europe , we will not be able to take action to overcome problems linked with the start of the third millennium , such as welfare , research , energy and environmental policy and security , which can be dealt with only by a political coming together of all states making up the Union .
My message to my fellow MEPs is that while the trialogue has failed , the work carried out by Parliament is distinguished work that fully meets our mandate to represent the people .
Nowadays , Parliament counts more due to the Treaty of Lisbon and the Council can no longer take a dominant role against the popular sovereignty represented by Parliament ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that the traditional representatives of the European Parliament are calling for extensive flexibility in the budget , but I have noticed that no one has mentioned the interests of the net contributors or the interests of the citizens .
It is ultimately the net contributors which finance the EU , which were responsible for restarting the engine of the economy after the crisis , which rescued the countries with budget deficits and the euro itself and which are imposing a heavy burden on their citizens .
In my opinion , it is therefore quite comprehensible and justifiable that these countries and their citizens want to keep to the budgetary appropriations , ensure that the net balance cannot be changed retrospectively on a whim and prevent money from being diverted into different channels .
Of course , I am not referring here to the aid provided following disasters .
I am excluding that .
Equally , the critical approach to EU taxation has nothing to do with an apparent lack of solidarity .
It is simply due to the fact that the Member States are largely opposed to it .
For this reason , it is clear that we must retain the ratification by the national parliaments for the sake of subsidiarity .
( DE ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to make it clear , following repeated claims in this House , that during the budget negotiations , we have not requested a single cent more than the Council had offered us .
This means that we were completely in line with the Council 's wishes .
On the subject of the flexibility instrument , we need it because the Council regularly gets us into difficulties with its decisions on major projects for which it has not made provision for the funding .
We then have to attempt , together with the Member States , to find a solution for these projects , in order to be able to support them financially and to make sensible plans .
We have also not demanded more than what is laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Instead , we are calling for compliance with the treaty .
Nothing else , nothing more and nothing less .
On the subject of own resources , it is surely not asking too much for Parliament to say that it would at least like to discuss the issue , what form it could take and whether own resources are in place .
They cannot simply refuse to talk about this and then put the blame on Parliament .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , here is my brief supplement to what was introduced by President Barroso , after listening to the comments of the honourable Members .
The strategy of the Commission in these specific circumstances is very simple and is based on the simple assumption that unity , not divisions , is what Europe needs to face other challenges .
I think that the Belgian Presidency is acting on the same assumption .
Our role is clearly defined in the treaties in the event of agreement - and in the event of disagreement , which was not very likely , but it has happened for the first time in 26 years .
We see the frustration of millions of beneficiaries throughout the European Union .
Therefore , we need to respond .
We understand that we should move quickly and we have taken the first step today to agree on the guidelines , then , possibly on 1 December , to submit the figures , which are no longer controversial , to defend flexibility , which we need , to come up with a proposal on the arrangements for cooperation built on the Lisbon Treaty , and to defend - which is also important - the Commission 's right of initiative to present the vision of the future next year .
It is our common responsibility to deliver what was promised , what is expected by the beneficiaries , what has been built up , as a budget , on the revenue side , while fully respecting the fiscal sovereignty of Member States .
This is about a modest budget that was rising at half the rate of a national budget , despite the enlargement accommodating over 12 new states .
This was clear proof of discipline and rigour .
Therefore , let us carry out the job , while working for a better scenario .
I am appealing to your sense of responsibility .
Along with President Barroso , I feel very much encouraged by today 's debate in Parliament .
Mr President , it is true that this type of debate should help us reach an agreement rather than make the situation even more difficult .
I hope to be able to say that it is really in that spirit that we had this debate this afternoon .
Yes , there will be progress and we will have to try and find an agreement on flexibility and on financing ITER .
Yes , this prospect for the 2012 and 2013 budgets will have to be subject to agreement and we are really striving to demonstrate that we have the ability to reach an agreement on this 2012-2013 prospect , particularly on the important issue of flexibility .
Secondly , yes , we will have debates within the context of Articles 312 and 324 in order to see how , in practice , we can implement and carry this out , and ensure that these articles and these new procedures become a reality .
We will have to find common ground .
Today , I heard that the Commission was going to use its power to initiate legislation , whether on the issue of own resources , or for the multiannual framework .
On the basis of these elements , we will have to get together , we will have to discuss , we will have to make sure that we abide by Articles 312 and 324 of the treaty , which include provisions to the effect that all elements need to be implemented in order to reach an agreement , to have these meetings and to carry out this coordination which would enable these new procedures laid down by the treaty to become a reality .
Regarding the flexible part for 2012-2013 , we will have to implement these Articles 312 and 324 of the treaty , even if , once again - I must emphasise this point - we must ensure that the 2011 budget is passed .
The credibility of the European Union is at stake .
Also at stake is the effectiveness of the policies which will only be implemented if the 2011 budget is passed .
We are only talking about the cohesion policies ; that is all we are talking about .
What is truly at stake here is our credibility and the implementation of our policies .
Thirdly , let us not vindicate those who do not want a budget so that the EU has even fewer resources at its disposal to carry out its policies .
However , in order to prove them wrong , undoubtedly we need to support a conciliatory approach and make the most of these last few weeks in order to achieve this approach so that we all benefit from it , despite having had to make concessions .
Yet at least this is a rationale that entails moving forward rather than backwards , which would be the case if we do not have the 2011 budget in the next few weeks .
Mr President-in-Office , the Conference of Presidents is just about to start , so some real questions and answers are necessary in this Chamber , because it will be a very important meeting .
We need to see progress on the part of the Council .
You have probably had many discussions with the Members of the Council , with the Member States .
How could you explain this to us ?
Is it possible to move forward in our direction ?
We have certain expectations .
You know them very well , because as a matter of fact , this was the subject of our last questions - three points at the very end on 15 November , a few minutes before 12 midnight .
It is very important for us to have such an answer from you .
Mr Schulz , I did hear your question .
I believe no one has been spared .
I think that we can either choose the approach of pointing fingers at each other - your fault , our fault - or we can try and convince ourselves to take another approach , with both sides trying to make progress towards this conciliatory approach .
We could also remain in the state of mind that unfortunately led to a disagreement on 15 November .
Who is to blame ?
I could have told you that from the outset , Parliament was certainly going to say that the Council was to blame and the Council was certainly going to say that Parliament was to blame , while both would thank the Commission for having made efforts at conciliation .
We must try to move away from that kind of approach and make the most of the last few weeks and days in order to start thinking along different lines .
To answer the President 's question , can any progress be made ?
Yes , progress can be made , because we know that if we act in the same way as we did on 15 November , we would only repeat the disagreement that occurred on 15 November , particularly on the important issue of flexibility .
Why is this issue important ?
It is important because in my view , it addresses one of Parliament 's major concerns which is to have a number of prospects , at least for 2012-2013 , which is when the current multiannual framework ends .
This is the reason why , on this matter , the Belgian Presidency , following on from 15 November , immediately resumed contacts to try and make progress on these other points too .
Yes , there are possibilities for agreement in this context , but both sides will have to reverse their rationale and embrace a conciliatory approach in order to achieve results .
Otherwise , we will unfortunately witness another failure , and I previously touched on the harmful consequences that a failure would have , mainly on the implementation of our policies .
I think that the citizens of Europe deserve better than that .
President-in-Office , thank you for your activity during the negotiations and also for the discussion .
We hope that the result will be positive as soon as possible .
Thanks also to Commission President Barroso and Commissioner Lewandowski for your contribution to our discussion .
I have some important remarks to make now and I shall change to my mother tongue .
The debate is closed .
I would like to inform you that the deadlines for tabling submissions relating to this item are as follows : motions for resolutions - Wednesday , 24 November at 10 : 00 , amendments - Wednesday , 24 November at 15 : 00 .


The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 November 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
We are currently in a state of deadlock which actually extends beyond the 2011 budgetary procedure .
This is a delicate juncture which will determine the future of the Union and provide a precedent for future budgetary procedures and the role that the European Parliament will play .
Parliament 's grievances are not ridiculous .
All we want in practical terms is for the role which Parliament has been assigned by the treaty to be respected .
Parliament has made a great many concessions during these negotiations and we are still being asked to make many others .
However , I hope that we will get through this period and that we will be able to vote for the new budget during the December sitting .
Not since 1988 has Europe seen such fundamental disagreement between Parliament and its institutional partners with regard to the European budget .
This is an historic moment : will the Council , and particularly the United Kingdom , the Netherlands and Denmark , allow themselves to see that Europe is all about pooling resources to do better together ?
Some Member States are adopting an inconsistent approach : they are cutting their national budgets in the name of restraint and calling on the EU to solve their problems by giving it ambitious tasks to fulfil .
Then , just as these ambitions are about to be realised , they rebel against the voracious budgetary demands .
Galileo , ITER , the EU 2020 strategy , the European External Action Service - they all cost money !
Will we have to fight each year to obtain a token contribution from stubborn Member States that will subsequently accuse Europe of being ineffective and superfluous ?
I am therefore in favour of a debate on own resources , of respect for the Treaty of Lisbon and of an ambitious and realistic Europe .
in writing . - ( EL ) The intransigent stand by a small minority of Member States is basically an expression of their clear refusal to lay the foundations for prompt and meaningful solutions to the basic needs of European citizens now or whenever they arise in the immediate future .
We need to address issues which concern European citizens responsibly .
We must not forget that , over and above the EU 's new responsibilities post-Lisbon , the Member States are constantly proposing and adopting new policies and strategies , such as the EU 2020 strategy , which the EU is being called upon to implement ; on the other hand , they say that they are unwilling to provide the money to implement them , thereby condemning them to failure before they even start .
I , too , would stress that the European Parliament is not asking for an increase in expenditure or for more powers than those provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament is clearly arguing that the EU needs to have sufficient resources at its disposal to be able to smoothly implement policies which supplement efforts by the Member States to strengthen employment , investment and overall economic growth .
Parliament 's position is that the EU budget does not form part of the crisis ; it is - via investments in critical sectors - the answer to it .
I am greatly concerned by the confusion surrounding the 2011 EU budget since , on the one hand , we cannot abandon our ambitious plans to build a strong European Union , while , on the other , Poland will take over the Presidency of the EU Council in the second half of 2011 .
If the European Union has not adopted a budget by then and still needs to set one every month , it will be very difficult for our Presidency to discharge its duties .
We must ask ourselves what is more important : an easy short-term solution , which means giving in to a number of countries and the Presidency , or a more ambitious plan , which may be more difficult but which , in the long term , will make the EU stronger and from which we really will all gain ?
In my opinion , it is more important for us to build a strong European Union together .
A European Union of this kind needs its own resources and a strong budget based on the principle of solidarity in order to fund what is needed .
There are several EU Member States , first and foremost the United Kingdom , which do not even wish to discuss this .
We cannot afford to give in to national egoisms .
Presentation of the Commission work programme for 2011 ( debate )
I would like to remind you that 30 years ago , a terrible earthquake hit some regions of Italy , Irpinia and Basilicata , resulting in the deaths of thousands and thousands of people .
I believe we must all show our sympathy and offer our condolences and our solidarity both to the families and to the areas that were hit .
The next item is the statement by José Manuel Barroso , President of the European Commission , on the presentation of the Commission work programme for 2011 .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , today I have the honour of presenting the Commission work programme for 2011 .
The presentation marks a beginning and an end .
On the one hand , the work programme intervenes and launches a new phase of very important political work .
On the other hand , the adoption of the programme is the conclusion of the enhanced structured dialogue , which was opened with the State of the Union debate in September here in this Parliament .
The preparations leading to this year 's Commission work programme have indeed been a ' première ' , and , in my opinion , a very successful one .
By advancing the implementation of our revised Framework Agreement , we have been able to engage in in-depth discussions on the political priorities for the coming years .
Throughout this fruitful process , I have been encouraged by the large degree of convergence on the overall direction and on concrete initiatives .
It is a process which has acted to consolidate what I have called ' a special partnership ' .
European action must focus on those challenges where the EU can bring a tangible added value .
The 40 strategic initiatives which the Commission commits to present in 2011 reflect the main political priorities that we have identified together .
For the sake of transparency , the programme moreover includes 150 other proposals which the Commission is working on .
Sustaining economic recovery and securing our societies for the future remains the overarching priority in 2011 .
Our efforts will continue along three main tracks : strengthening governance , completing financial sector reform and accelerating our implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
Long-term growth must be based on a sound macro-economic foundation .
Through initiating the so-called ' European semester ' , and the follow-up to our proposals of 29 September , we will reinforce the European fiscal framework and broaden macro-economic surveillance to prevent imbalances .
An ambitious financial sector reform is already well under way and important legislation has been accomplished .
In 2011 , the Commission will table the remaining pieces of regulation .
Key priorities , such as transparency and consumer protection , will be pursued , while a bank crisis framework will aim to prevent and tackle future crises .
The Commission will seek to support Parliament and the Council in reaching agreement on the complete reform before the end of 2011 .
Europe must keep pace , focusing on our comparative advantages in this 21st century of globalisation .
When competitors are cheaper , we must be smarter .
As an example of action at European level , we will develop a more integrated European standardisation system as an important platform for sharpening the competitive edge of our companies , particularly SMEs .
For Europe to remain competitive and secure more and better jobs , the transition to a low carbon , resource-efficient society must be carefully planned .
Therefore , bringing together the policies on climate change , energy , transport and environment will be a priority .
A particular focus in 2011 will be on energy efficiency .
Adapting to a dynamic economic reality also means ensuring a high level of protection of workers ' rights in close cooperation with social partners .
Key proposals on posting of workers and working time will be developed and tabled in 2011 .
Meanwhile , the revision of the State aid rules applicable to services of general interest will be a tangible step towards establishing a quality framework which takes account of the particular nature of these services .
With the Single Market Act , the Commission has launched an ambitious process to make the single market deliver on its full potential .
Our companies should focus on business , not bureaucracy .
Not least , SMEs are often overburdened or indeed discouraged from pursuing otherwise promising cross-border projects .
As a concrete example , by clarifying the rules on collectively managed copyrights , we can simplify the current framework conditions , encourage further cross-border activity and release important job-creating potential - not least in the promising digital sector .
On the demand side , a priority will be to strengthen consumer confidence with our proposal on alternative dispute resolution as an important instrument to speed up the often much too slow process of resolving consumer problems .
Whether we act as consumers , as workers , as students , as travellers or in any other of the multiple roles we fulfil in modern , everyday life , it is when we experience new opportunities , a reduction in risks , or improvements in the quality of life , that the European Union makes sense .
This is a European Union at the service of the citizens .
The ambition of making the EU a tangible reality for citizens must go beyond the single market .
Strengthening security should always be a means of helping citizens to benefit from the opportunities of the European Union , never an end in itself .
Our proposal for ' smart borders ' will facilitate travelling in and out of the EU while deterring irregular immigration .
To keep Europe open , we will also take action against those that try to exploit our economic system for illegal purposes , while the framework for data protection will respond to a very real concern of citizens in the Internet Age .
The Union must play a role in the world that matches its economic weight , so we must ensure coherence in our external action .
As such , the work programme announces concrete action to project our 2020 objectives for jobs and growths internationally .
We will also modernise our development policy and humanitarian aid .
Those in the world in need really need a stronger Europe in the world .
Before concluding , I would like to briefly explain what you will not find in the Commission work programme and why .
As announced , we will submit the proposal for the next multiannual financial framework by mid-2011 .
The specific financial instruments and programmes will be presented in the second half of 2011 in conjunction with the overall framework .
To maintain the political nature of the work programme , implementation work as a rule has not been included .
The same applies for international negotiations , as their conclusion depends on third parties .
Meanwhile , these activities remain an important part of our core business .
We will continue to deliver and to pursue our dialogue with you on them .
In my introduction , I noted that the work programme was not only the conclusion of our fruitful dialogue , but also the beginning of a next step in our concrete efforts to steer the European Union out of the crisis and beyond .
Now is the time to maintain momentum .
We need to find ways to collectively accelerate our work .
I therefore take this opportunity to encourage Parliament and the Council to engage in trilateral discussions on how to implement the treaty provisions on Union programming .
In the Commission 's view , this could translate into agreements to move forward quicker in negotiations on selected initiatives of particular importance to attaining our political objectives .
Such a concerted effort would demonstrate our determination to deliver concrete , timely responses in the face of the crisis which has shaken us all .
Europe 's citizens would expect this .
I believe the European Union institutions should respond to citizens ' concerns .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , President Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , Europe must overcome the crisis .
Europe 's economy must be founded on work .
We must steer the countries of the European Union out of the current grave crisis by concentrating , as our main priority , on providing work opportunities to as many European citizens as possible .
For this reason , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) wholeheartedly supports job creation as the most important objective of the European Commission 's work programme for next year .
Europe has learnt much from the crisis .
This year , we have embarked on the development of a new economic governance system in an accelerated procedure and hope that Parliament can debate the new proposals related to financial regulation and economic governance next year in a way that ensures their adoption as soon as possible .
My PPE colleagues will raise important issues for each area , and I would like to mention only a few : competitiveness must be based on innovation and research .
We believe that there are not enough initiatives concerning this area in the Commission 's work programme .
There is a need for the increased protection of intellectual property rights and a viable competitive European patent system , as well .
We believe that the increased control of European food imports is important and that they should be subject to at least the quality requirement that the European Union expects of its own producers .
We would also have liked to have seen more proposals concerning the water issue set by the Hungarian Presidency as one of the major objectives .
Ladies and gentlemen , based on the Treaty of Lisbon , a new order of the European Union 's legislative and work programme began in September this year with Mr Barroso 's speech on the State of the Union .
Since the new treaty guarantees Parliament strong rights to intervene in the European Union 's programme , we believe that further measures are important .
Unfortunately , previous experiences are not good .
The Commission 's earlier work programmes were only partially realised according to plan .
As I have already mentioned several times , I question , together with a number of my fellow Members , the point of wasting immense energy and time on many occasions each year analysing and adopting a document which , in any event , only covers the reality in part .
For this reason , I would like to suggest that Parliament 's competent committee regularly examines the implementation of the Commission 's work programme in the course of the year as well , in order to better enforce the influence of the citizens we represent on the EU 's joint affairs .


Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Šefčovič , I believe that we can support much of the content of this programme , Mr Barroso .
However , you will , I am sure , understand if we look at the more critical points today , where we want to see more being done .
We live in a Europe which is increasingly under the influence of anti-European forces that are fighting against the institutions of the European Union .
We need to consider carefully what materials and methods we can use to oppose them .
I will come back to this point later on .
The first issue is growth policy .
Mr Barroso , it is right that we must regulate the financial markets and put safety nets in place .
However , we must also somehow return to the situation that you have often clearly described , in other words , to what we understand by green growth or green jobs and the restructuring of the economy .
Mr Oettinger has recently published a series of documents on energy policy which involved huge investments .
Unfortunately , the documents do not explain how these investments are to be financed .
We must emerge from this crisis with an active growth policy in place .
I am wondering where in the energy sector or the transport sector , for example , investments of this kind can be made in order to bring about green growth or create green jobs .
We simply do not have enough .
My second point concerns the internal market .
You are right , Mr Barroso .
The concept of the internal market must be made public .
You have proposed several reports based on Professor Monti 's work .
He was very critical of the social dimension of the internal market in particular .
More needs to happen in this area .
Most importantly , we are waiting for concrete proposals from you concerning the Posting of Workers Directive .
We must make it clear in the interests of the workers that this directive must not be used to create cheap labour .
Its purpose is to improve social welfare .
My third point relates to tax policy .
We believe that the proposals made in this area are too weak .
As we have just seen in the debate on Ireland , certain countries must not be allowed to set lower tax rates in order to attract businesses and then , when they get into financial difficulties , to call on other countries to finance their budget deficits , if I can put this in such a simplistic way .
Tax harmonisation is necessary to a certain degree , for example , minimum rates of corporation tax .
I believe that we need to make progress in this area .
I know that you have difficulties with many Member States , but I believe it is essential , in particular , when it comes to social issues .
The divide between rich and poor is unacceptable and we must introduce new proposals , particularly in the interests of women , who are especially hard hit by poverty .
Finally , you have spoken about citizens ' concerns , Mr Barroso .
This is a very important issue .
However , the way in which we present what we do - and this concerns you as well as Parliament - is also important .
Many people do not realise that , in the case of a large number of issues , all that we do is to issue incomprehensible press releases about our work .
We must work together to explain what we do more effectively .
The citizens ' initiative will soon be starting .
Its opponents will exploit it and use it against Europe .
We must make sure that the citizens ' initiative helps to support and develop Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , times are hard for the European economy and for the European project as a whole .
We have been devising big strategies such as the climate package , the energy package and the 2020 strategy : schemes after schemes .
We still do not seem to know where we want to go and what we want to be .
Why am I saying this ?
Because wanting to be the best is not sufficient to be the best .
The reality is that we are adopting strategies we do not all believe in .
No one - or almost no one - is implementing them and no one is ready to finance them .
It seems we have too many strategies and a lack of interest in making them a reality .
And this is why I believe it is time to get back to the basics of what made the European project possible and brought us together : simple natural things .
The single market should be our big scheme and we should put all our effort into enforcing it , because if we want to be competitive on the world stage , we need more economic integration .
The only reasonable way to achieve this is through the single market .
I welcome the Commission work programme , and specifically your proposal on the Single Market Act .
But that is not enough .
You have the monetary report .
You know what is needed - to encourage investment , attract capital and boldly cut bureaucratic expenses .
We should focus on simple things which have an obvious impact on Europe 's competitiveness , such as resource efficiency , cutting energy costs , reforming the agriculture policy , and the future of transport .
The Commission and Parliament must work hand in hand and ensure that these means match our will .
We are therefore looking forward to an ambitious multiannual financial framework proposal in 2011 .
Do we need more regulation to tackle the financial crisis ?
Yes , but only if the aim is to foster Europe 's competitiveness .
In any case , we should avoid adopting an autistic response to the crisis , hoping that the rest of the world will follow .
If the message we are sending to our citizens and to the world is not that the EU is a pragmatic association of ideas , capital and values , we will not become the global player we want to be .
Instead of influencing policies in the world , we will be affected by them .
Now a word on the European Semester .
The Commission is best placed to identify our strengths and weaknesses when planning work .
But you should be careful , because what you are proposing to EU citizens and Member States is that they should believe that Brussels knows better , and that politicians in Brussels are closer to the citizen ' interests than an MP from their constituency .
It is a difficult job , and you will commit to this through policy coordination in 2011 .
I hope you will succeed in proving this , in boosting growth and jobs - not for some , but for all .
Otherwise , we will witness the rise of real anti-Europeanism .
I wish you good luck .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , it is important to make it clear that we cannot discuss this work programme without considering the current budget debate and without thinking about Greece , Ireland and other countries which may get into difficulties .
Firstly , I would like to say that , at the end of the budget debate , I heard that you , Mr Barroso , took a very open approach to Parliament 's positions .
I believe that it is genuinely important to be honest when we adopt a work programme of this kind and not to behave as if we could achieve and implement all these wonderful objectives without a reliable budget that does not need to be constantly renegotiated .
Secondly , the discussions about Ireland have shown how far we are from reaching a real solution and a way out of the crisis that we have got ourselves into because we were too liberal with regard to the financial markets .
On behalf of my group , I would like to say that your proposals as to how we will overcome the financial crisis and how we will find escape routes contain a few good starting points , but we do not believe that the objective you have set yourself is sufficiently challenging .
If we look back at the time we have already spent discussing a successful , functioning monetary union within the European Union and if we want to guarantee that we are really taking a step towards economic governance for Europe , it becomes clear that we must not abandon this now .
We feel that your proposal lacks a positive focus on establishing a common economic policy after the end of the crisis , rather than just tackling the symptoms , and we will continue to work on this area .
Mr Swoboda has already mentioned green issues .
I am not satisfied with how the description of sustainable , fair and green growth from the Europe 2020 strategy has been represented in this work programme .
This is not what we discussed in the context of Europe 2020 and it is relevant that Mr Oettinger is one of the Commissioners who are moving further and further away from the idea of rebuilding Europe in a sustainable form .
Mr President , next year will be a test for the European institutions as to whether they can support the current economic recovery and enable long-term growth through their policies .
The European Commission work programme is a key document in this regard .
However , I would like to say at this point that less legislation can sometimes mean more .
I am therefore concerned , for example , about the planned regulatory activities of the Commission in the area of concessions on services .
In this particular case , it has to be said that the area of concessions is now explicitly excluded from the framework of public procurement , which has also been confirmed in many rulings from the European Court of Justice .
Radical changes would definitely not benefit this area .
Persons involved in the economy , including those from the public administration side , are worst affected when conditions they have learned to work with constantly change , and they therefore lack certainty as regards their decision making .
All policies must therefore be adopted a considerable time in advance , so that we can give everyone enough time to prepare during the implementation phase .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , the Commission 's reasoning seems to be permanently oblivious to the serious crisis in Europe .
You even write in your document , I quote : ' The signs of recovery are clear ' .
Where are these signs of recovery for those who are currently unemployed , living in poverty or homeless ?
Are you aware that we lent over EUR 400 billion of public money to rescue the banks and that this figure is precisely the amount of savings that will have been imposed on the people of the eight countries that are under the austerity plan ?
Your choices are therefore ineffective .
In the Commission 's programme , I suggest carrying out an assessment of the effects the implementation of the Treaties of Maastricht and Lisbon has had on European workers and citizens .
In my opinion , the solution is not austerity in wages or budgets .
Instead , it should be structured around the increase of remuneration from work , improved social protection and solidarity-based pay-as-you-go pension schemes , as well as a contribution of capital income to public finances , thereby establishing a new fiscal justice .
In fact , why not launch studies straight away into the creation of a tax on capital movements , setting up another credit with a new role for the European Central Bank , which , by means of money creation and another credit , should help Member States to refinance banks for safeguarding work , for education , for training , for all the common public assets with new public services for research and innovation .
Today , what will make Europe credible is wealth distributed differently , not the straightjacket of austerity and unemployment .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , since creation of jobs is one of the priorities in the programme we have , I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to a new era of emigration from southern Europe .
But I am afraid nobody in the Commission is listening to me .
Already in Greece , we are seeing huge numbers of young skilled and highly skilled workers emigrate to Australia , Canada and the Emirates .
The same thing is happening in Ireland .
On one hand , Germany has announced that it has a skilled labour shortage .
What I would like to say is that Germany does not have to import skilled labour from third countries .
Member States that face economic problems could provide skilled labour to Germany .
I would very much like to propose an initiative , to be taken up with the Commission , developing the notion of added value .
Why not adopt a labour market with European added value ?
Within the Member States , we have to face supply and demand .
We have to strengthen Europe with a European skilled labour force .
This is missing in the programme and I strongly propose it .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commission on its ambitious work programme , but we must attempt to align it more closely with Europe 's strategic objectives and with the long-term strategy .
I would like to ask the Commission to look more boldly and less anxiously to the future .
You have the necessary support from Parliament , while the Council , in particular , plays more of a restraining role .
The progressive forces must stick together in this case .
Competitiveness is one of the central issues that we need to deal with , to ensure that Europe remains competitive and that we can achieve our objectives , such as sustainable growth and social growth .
It is also important that we convey this message correctly .
Unfortunately , the anti-European forces have a much greater presence , particularly in the media , than the pro-European forces .
However , everyone is aware that Europe can only move forward jointly in the right direction .
We must call on the Commission to focus in its overall programme during the next few years on increasing efficiency in the field of energy , in the use of resources and raw materials , and in education .
Universities and schools must make a contribution to creating a smart Europe .
The field of research and development faces particular challenges in this respect .
We need to be aware that the rest of the world is not sleeping .
We must not look with anxiety to the future and continue with our parochial approach , as is happening to a certain extent in the Council .
Parliament and the Commission must look to the future together .
( SK ) Mr President , I believe that in this turbulent period we are going through , it cannot have been easy for the Commission to draw up such an ambitious plan , and I would therefore like to begin by offering you my congratulations .
Despite that , I do have some comments to make .
The key word of the programme is economic recovery after the crisis , and intelligent , sustainable and inclusive recovery .
I would like to say , Mr Vice-President , that I am rather sceptical about this .
In the first place , I believe it is rather premature to talk about a recovery , because , even though there are certain indications , it is still not at all certain that there will be a recovery , and I think we cannot allow ourselves further doubts .
Moreover , I believe that in many states , the Commission is supporting policies which make recovery rather unlikely .
Examples of this might include Latvia , Greece and recently also Ireland .
While it is true that the debt burden is often too high , through restrictive economic policies , we will sooner find that there is no return to growth and that the actual debt burden has increased further .
I see the attempt to assert budget discipline through introducing more stringent Europe-wide regulations in a similar light .
Such measures are counterproductive in a crisis .
In addition , budget discipline will not resolve structural imbalances in the economies of the EU , such as trade surpluses and deficits , for example .
However , I think this belongs to a longer discussion .
Where I really do support the efforts of the European Commission is in the regulation of the financial sector .
I am not quite sure whether the measures proposed and adopted are sufficient , but in principle , they clearly mark a step in the right direction .
The effort for intelligent and sustainable growth is also praiseworthy , and I understand that the programme cannot go fully into the details , but we do now need much more ambitious formulations and measures in the fight against poverty and the fight for social inclusion .
Mr President , the Commission 's programme contains some worthy priorities : sustaining economic growth , preserving and creating jobs , improving energy efficiency and developing renewable energy sources .
The SNP Scottish Government , our pro-European nationalist government , shares these objectives and is making the maximum use of its devolved , limited power and is achieving progress on other challenges as well .
The European Free Alliance Group here , which includes the SNP as well as other pro-European nationalists from Wales , Catalonia and Flanders , are contributing to good government in our own countries , but our ambition is to play a full part in EU decision making too , taking our place as normal independent Member States so that we can exercise the full range of governmental powers at home and work constructively here with colleagues towards a better Europe as well .
( ES ) Mr President , in this time of crisis , in which we find ourselves , there are two main types of policies and actions : preventive policies and actions and stimulative policies and actions .
Preventive policies are those that currently concern the supervision of financial services , governance and strengthening governance .
In other words , anything that is going to alert us to the fact that there are problems before the problems overwhelm the European economies .
However , the second type of policies - stimulative policies - are essential .
There are three fundamental aspects of these policies , Mr Barroso , Mr Wathelet .
Naturally , there are more , but I am going to highlight three : research and innovation , the development of a digital society - in other words , the digital agenda - and the internal market .
The first , research and innovation , is where I find the work programme presented by the Commission to be lacking .
President Barroso said earlier that the specific programmes will come in mid-2011 , but I do not think that is enough .
I can assure you that I and my group would very much have liked to see a reference to the Eighth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , which does not feature in your proposal .

( BG ) Mr President , Mr Šefčovič , ladies and gentlemen , discussing the work programme of the European Commission is not merely a formality .
It is a way of attracting the attention of European citizens and of signposting to the European Commission areas in which it can be supported by the members of this House .
I will dwell on a few specific topics .
The coming year will be especially important for the presence of the EU on the global stage .
Externally , we should see an increasingly more effective European External Action Service , which cannot gain strength without the support of the European Commission as a whole .
As far as enlargement policy is concerned , we would like the Commission to make use of the new energy generated in 2010 .
We are calling on the Commission to help Croatia to meet the remaining requirements to bring accession negotiations to as early a successful conclusion as possible in 2011 .
As far as the progress of Chapter 23 is of particular importance to us , we expect the Commission to report to Parliament on how the talks have progressed in the first quarter of 2011 .
The other candidate state , which the Commission must monitor with particular attention , is Turkey .
We expect Turkey to be encouraged to speed up fulfilment of its undertakings in the negotiations process after the 2011 elections and to start work on a new constitution with particular emphasis on fundamental citizens ' rights and freedoms .
We also urge the Commission to regularly inform the European Parliament on the position drafting process for Serbia 's application for EU membership .
We hope that the European neighbourhood policy review concludes with a proposal for appropriate corrections ensuring coherence between policy aims and financial instruments which guarantee these aims .
In this , the Commission will be able to count on the support of the European Parliament .
Our objectives in the Europe 2020 strategy must reflect our policy towards neighbouring countries in the Mediterranean as well as the East .
Thank you , and I wish you success in your work over the coming year .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , we want the European Commission 's legislative programme to be in line with Europe 's long-term objectives and we believe that there is room for improvement in many areas , although we very much welcome the basic approach of this legislative programme .
With regard to the internal market , an area which I am responsible for , I would like to say in particular that we want to ensure , on the basis of the paper produced by Professor Monti , that all the citizens of Europe can gain more benefits from the internal market .
When we discuss the Commission 's work programme and when we take the Monti report as our foundation , this means , of course , firstly that the Commission must tackle the requirements of this paper , in other words , it must ensure that the infringement proceedings taken by the Commission against the Member States are strengthened to enable the transposition deficit to be reduced from 1 % to 0.5 % .
Unfortunately , there is nothing about this in the work programme .
Alongside the individual measures which are addressed in this report , such as the digital agenda , mortgage credit , concessions and many others which I will not refer to individually , we believe that it is important in every case that the measures which are announced for 2011 are actually presented in 2011 .
The additional information about the fact that the Commission is evaluating certain legislative plans does not help in this respect .
Finally , I believe that we should call on the European Commission to carry out an impact assessment of all its legislative proposals , so that we can understand why they are needed .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we have made major progress on behalf of the citizens of Europe with the Treaty of Lisbon , because we have included the social market economy among the principles of European policy .
It is clear that we as Europeans and as parliamentarians expect the social market economy to be turned into a reality .
Now we are looking at the internal market itself and the issues relating to the internal market as a whole and we can see that some of the things which should have been included have been omitted .
It is not enough to carry out social impact assessments of European legislation .
We need a social clause to be put into practice , so that the promises which were made that the citizens would really benefit from Europe are fulfilled and do not simply remain on paper .
This is not just about the social clause , but also about important issues such as the services of general economic interest , which require special protection .
It is very important to me that the European Commission finally addresses this question and looks more closely at issues concerning workers than was necessary , for example , in the context of the Posting of Workers Directive , where we are still waiting to find out what will happen next .
Finally , and now I am slowly starting to get really annoyed , we have been calling on the European Commission for a long time to introduce a system for class actions at a European level .
The Commission has already carried out six or seven different studies .
What do we find now in this work programme ?
Another study has been commissioned .
We cannot go on like this .
We want the Commission to finally come up with some proposals and decisions in this area .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , as the coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I should like to emphasise two points in your programme .
Firstly , strengthening economic governance and initiating the European Semester .
We were pleased to welcome the package on economic governance .
Achieving this target is critical .
In this respect , our group would like to see effective and binding measures that go further than what is being proposed .
It is also necessary for Parliament to be truly involved in finalising the processes envisaged and in their implementation .
Legal bases should be found to prevent the treaties from being substantially amended , which would only slow down the implementation of measures that must be taken .
The second point concerns the continuation of the work on financial regulation .
The projects are on the table , or will be soon .
2011 will be a decisive year .
We appreciate Commissioner Barnier 's pro-activeness .
In 2010 , Parliament showed its determination in adopting the supervision package , the directive on alternative investment fund managers and , in all likelihood by the end of the year , the regulation that will set up the European supervision of credit rating agencies .
We want to continue on the path of a pragmatic , intelligent and effective regulation .
That is what we are expecting from the Commission today .

Mr President , first of all , President Barroso talked in his introduction about introducing some measures on posting of workers .
He was not specific on this , but I would remind him that he made a very specific commitment in the hearings , before he was reappointed as President , to revise the Posting of Workers Directive , so that social dumping would be prevented as a result of its operation and the court cases that arose from it .
I would like to remind him of that .
Could I also make the point that it is extremely essential that we introduce legislation to provide legal certainty for those in the Member States who provide social services of general interest ?
There seems to be a complete blindness on the part of the Commission with regard to the problems that exist in that area .
I am working on a report on that at the moment and I will come back to this early next year .
I also welcome the poverty platform , but I have no evidence at all that the Commission is using the 2020 strategy on which the platform is based , for instance , in the current negotiations with the Irish Government about resolving the problems there .
If the 2020 strategy is not the framework for those negotiations , what is the framework ?
What is the European contribution to resolving the difficulties in Ireland , other than resolving the issues of the banks ?
Could I just make one final point ?
I think it is entirely putting the cart before the horse for any Member of this Parliament to talk here about establishing a minimum corporation profits tax across the European Union without also talking about a common fiscal policy , without also having a budget strong enough to provide the cohesion necessary for weak and peripheral states , and a whole range of other European policies that need to be put in place before we can seriously talk about a corporation tax being the same right across the European Union .
( HU ) Mr President , as the coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I consider the work programme tabled before us to be encouraging and I especially welcome the fact that soon , we will be able to start a debate on the flagship initiative under the cover name ' new skill , new job ' .
I would like to make some political and some professional comments .
I think it is important that we start consultations in good time and that the Commission takes into consideration not only the agenda suggested by the Council but also the agendas adapting to the needs of Parliament .
I believe it is important , as others have said , that existing financial resources should back projects and priorities and , at the same time , I consider it important that the adopted programmes should be followed by tracking and monitoring as well .
Some problems : education .
We agree with raising educational and training standards , but regret the fact that legislative benefits for occupational diseases are absent .
I wish to emphasise and remind the Commission that we support more efficient implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive , but oppose all kinds of new directives .
We believe that the Social Fund , the Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the European Regional Fund must be used in a synergic manner , with special emphasis on the main priority that is needed to link these programmes , namely job creation and expansion of employment .
One final remark : the administrative burdens that weigh heavily on economic actors and , in particular , on small and medium-sized enterprises , must be eliminated , and this must apply to European programmes and European funding initiatives as well .
( HU ) Mr President , I will try to be very brief .
I wish to thank the Commission for this work programme , which must have been very difficult to prepare as the budget is not available to us .
I , too , wish to mention the points which we would have liked to have included , but were missing .
We would have liked a legislative proposal to be tabled on the long-awaited industrial policy , and likewise there should have been a step forward with the raw materials policy .
We would have been pleased to see proposals of a more concrete nature in the Commission 's work programme as regards energy efficiency and energy projects .
We very much regret the fact that the semi-annual evaluation of the research and development framework programme will not take place and wish to stress most emphatically that if agreement can be reached in the budget about the Galileo and ITER programmes , we will be able to return to this issue .
We would very much welcome a more efficient implementation of the small enterprise policy , which will soon celebrate its second birthday .
Likewise , we would be glad if this year , when we will have two semesters of successive new Member State presidencies , namely from Hungary and Poland , cohesion and integration within the EU could continue .
The gap between the eastern and western halves of the European Union , which is visible , for instance , in wages and in other respects , is unacceptable .
It would certainly be worthwhile to make progress here .
Finally , we would be very pleased if we could move forward with the Eastern Partnership , which is very important in terms of energy security .
This is true even if there are people even in Parliament who try to hinder it , for example , in connection with Euronest .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , this work programme presents the recovery of growth and jobs , as well as economic regulation , as key to restoring confidence .
That is true .
Our model of economic development can no longer make do with strengthening the enforcement aspect of a Stability Pact that has continually shown its limitations .
The recovery of growth must be centred on job creation throughout the Union in its entirety .
We need to look at employment and social standards as indicators of economic power and , from that point of view , emphasise the need to put more thought into the European tax on financial transactions and into a greater coordination between the European Union and the European ministers for employment , as well as into the Union 's economic proposals .
I support the Members who took the floor to highlight the importance of the directive on the posting of workers and on the services of general interest .
I think that the European Union 's digital strategy is a crucial factor for this new economy .
We should show more recognition of the Commission 's ambition on this point .
With regard to citizenship , the Union should put the citizens back at the heart of the European project , and the increase in financial allocations should not only focus on security aspects , in particular , on managing migratory flows .
Finally , I would end , Mr President , by saying that , in essence , this work programme for 2011 should be the very example of a policy that addresses in a positive way this temptation for nations to withdraw , which all our Member States are experiencing .
I believe the European Commission has the power to change things .
It can rely on a Parliament which will be a proactive force and will support it if it shows more ambition .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , I would like to make three brief points .
Firstly , I believe , with regard to external relations , that the Commission , which has a particular responsibility in this area , should take a more conceptual approach to the Eastern Partnership than it has done in the past and should call for a multilateral relationship between the members of the partnership .
In particular , we should carry out a much more effective evaluation of the Eastern Partnership in our own interest , not only from an energy perspective , and we should make this one of our priorities .
Secondly , I do not know what the situation is with structural funds in other areas , but the process for the financial management of the programmes for external relations is unbearably slow .
By the time the money is made available , the political objective is already a year old .
We have seen this in the case of the Middle East programmes , the Eastern Partnership and in many other areas .
I know that this also has to do with Parliament and the Financial Regulation of the European Union and that it causes so many problems as a result of the procedures which we had under the Santer Commission 10 years ago .
However , if we really want to put all this money to good use and to ensure that it does not just have a deadweight effect or always arrive too late , because the train has already departed in the other direction , and to promote our own policy interests , we need some good ideas from the Commission as to how decisions on the establishment and implementation of programmes and payments of money in these areas can be made much more quickly .
My third point , Mr Barroso , is that the question of the Transatlantic Economic Council and the economic relationship with the USA , and not only its economic significance but also its strategic importance , seem to me not to be covered in sufficient detail in the Commission 's paper .
( RO ) Mr President , Europe 's citizens expect that in 2011 , European institutions will focus on creating new jobs and on social Europe .
As Vice-Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I wish to express my dismay that you have postponed the White Paper on the future of European transport until 2011 .
This document is vital to both the future financial outlook and the future of the cohesion policy , which we have already begun to discuss .
I wish to highlight from the work programme for 2011 the importance of the legislative initiatives in the following areas : personal data protection , improvement of information and network security based on public procurement standards and recommendations , electronic signatures and reciprocal recognition of electronic identification and authentication mechanisms .
These initiatives are absolutely imperative for implementing the digital agenda and achieving the internal market , including in the services sector .
We are also anticipating with interest the legislative initiative on smart energy networks .
These networks are necessary both to make it possible to obtain electricity generated from renewable energy resources , in which Member States have made huge investments in recent years , and to prepare the necessary infrastructure for electric vehicles .
I will say by way of conclusion that the digital agenda and energy efficiency , which are areas that contribute to both job creation and the European Union 's competitiveness , should be , along with social Europe , our main priorities for 2011 .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , the Commission has put forward an incredibly wide-ranging programme for 2011 and I would like to make it quite clear that I think it would be good if the prioritisation were improved .
We now have around 30 Directorates-General and 26 Commissioners .
I do not believe that every Directorate-General and every Commissioner should have to justify their existence by producing large numbers of legislative proposals .
I am convinced that it would sometimes be good for Europe if we were to set genuine priorities and restrict ourselves to the essentials .
Europe 's strength lies not in concerning itself with as many issues as possible , but in taking more time for important questions .
I would like to make some points relating to external trade in particular , as I am the coordinator for my group in this area .
I would be pleased if we could at last make some progress with the transatlantic relationship , as Elmar Brok has already said .
The Transatlantic Economic Council has been on the agenda for years , but has not yet had any real successes .
If we look at how the world has changed during this time and how the economic power of different regions in the world has shifted , we can see that we urgently need to work much more closely with the Americans .
It would be good if the Commission could remember during the course of its work that the European Parliament is a colegislator in the field of external trade since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force .
Both sides , Parliament and the Commission , will have to learn how to deal with one another and how to draw up legislation jointly , with regard to external trade in particular .
I would be very happy if the Commission were to pay special attention to this area and , most importantly , to allow plenty of time for the dialogue and for transparent , joint activities .
( GA ) Mr President , firstly , I welcome the work done by the Commission to advance this agenda .
The European Union is making every effort to end this economic crisis .
However , despite the amount of work done and the amount still to be done , we cannot forget the people in the developing world .
Mr President , as the joint PPE coordinator on the Development Committee , may I say that it is absolutely shocking to understand that , after we agreed to meet a commitment of 0.7 % of GNP to assist the developing world , that budget is the first budget - or is certainly in the front line - to be cut every time there is financial retrenchment in our Member States .
I understand - we all understand - that when GNI goes down , the contribution will go down , but it should not go down as a percentage of GNI and then go down again .
I ask the Commission to do everything in its power , so soon after the Millennium Development Review in New York , to ensure that Member States face up to their commitment .
We are not asking them not to reduce their contributions .
We are asking that they do not reduce their contributions as a percentage of their reduced GNI .
( MT ) Mr President , briefly , I just wanted to say that , due to the economic times we are currently living through , it is easy and natural to focus simply on the economic aspect .
Europe , however , is not solely made up of the European market but of the European citizen , too .
Therefore , we must push ahead with the implementation of the Stockholm Programme , because it is the Stockholm Programme , on which we have just reached agreement , that will lead us to create a Europe for our citizens .
In more concrete terms , what we need for next year is further development to counter terrorism and ensure general security for our citizens , because our citizens are demanding more security from the European Union .
We must also strengthen our fight against organised crime , especially in the area of corruption .
Furthermore , we need to reinforce our citizens ' rights in , for example , the protection of victims of crime .
Finally , we need to create a single common asylum and immigration policy that is based on the principle of solidarity .
Thank you very much .
( LT ) Mr President , the work programme for 2011 presented by the European Commission really does seem rather ambitious .
I hope that this document becomes a founding document for the future - a more competitive , more united and more prosperous European future .
Nevertheless , in the past , there were many ambitious documents and plans , not all of which were implemented .
I remember well how , a few years ago , those countries that are now experiencing a huge financial crisis were held up as an example of how to conduct financial and economic policy .
Today , however , life has brought massive changes .
I therefore entirely support greater monitoring of the financial market , the creation of a common energy market and the development of principles to integrate countries into our economy to a greater extent .
Only then will we be able to ensure in future that the European Union is more competitive , and that our people will be better provided for in terms of jobs and incomes .
Mr President , reading the Commission work programme for 2011 , one principal point stands out : use of the crisis to grab power for the Commission .
Coordination of economic and fiscal policies , broader and enhanced surveillance of fiscal policies , better coordination of macro-economic policy and , more chillingly , new enforcement mechanisms .
We have heard that this will produce smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , but if we look at the Commission 's Europe 2020 document , it is disarmingly frank : 23 million unemployed , 4 % fall in GDP in 2009 .
As long as we embrace globalism , we shall not dig ourselves out of the crisis .
The 2020 document refers to Member States being the most innovative in the world , but if emerging low wage economies are able to steal inventions with impunity , innovation will not help us .
We must protect our economies from piratical and slave-labour economies .
2020 refers to the people of Europe as talented and creative ; perhaps we should follow demographic policies that foster those talents and protect and preserve that creativity .
( PL ) Mr President , the Commission work programme is ambitious , but I think there is one thing missing - I would like the Commission to place greater emphasis on the implementation of rules , laws , strategies and policies which are already in existence .
We are creating more strategies and drafting new documents , but very many things are simply not being put into effect , particularly in the field of energy .
Therefore , I think this should be a separate , special item in the Commission 's work .
If the Commission does not make sure that laws which have already been passed are put into effect , it will simply not be very credible and will lose its legitimacy .
This is also how we allowed major financial problems to occur in Europe - when we did not observe the Maastricht criteria .
Many countries slowly began to ignore them or violate them , and now we have very great problems .
Yes , this may be rather unimpressive , it may not look very good on paper , but I think it is crucial for the work of the Commission .
( LT ) Mr President , although the Commission planned to revive job creation as soon as possible , in the area of employment and social affairs , the Commission work programme for 2011 sadly does not contain specific proposals on the creation of new and good quality jobs .
Again , the Commission proposes the same legislative initiatives on the posting of workers and working time as it did in the work programme for the previous year , and pledges to improve the rights of migrant workers throughout the European Union .
However , that really is not enough .
We are having a thorough debate on the future of pensions in the European Union and one of the proposals is to increase the retirement age , but the Commission has not provided specific proposals on the employment of elderly people .
Secondly , under the conditions of the economic and financial crisis , illegal work and the shadow economy have grown significantly .
There really is a lack of concrete proposals on how we should combat this malady together .
Thirdly , in order to overcome poverty and really reduce the number of people living in poverty in the European Union , I truly hope that the Commission will introduce a directive on minimum income as soon as possible .
( PL ) Mr President , when drawing up the work programme , continuation is always assumed on the one hand , and changes are assumed on the other .
In what proportions , and what will the relationship be between them in 2011 ?
Without doubt , work related to exiting the crisis , improving economic growth and creating jobs should be continued .
Our objectives for 2011 have , therefore , been established .
The number of strategies which we have adopted is sufficient .
However , we have to change the depth of reforms related to economic governance .
This can be seen in the Monti report in the area of essential measures for the single market .
We must act similarly in the reform of financial institutions and their supervision .
2011 should be a year of implementing measures which have been adopted and a year when the new agencies commence operation .
An improvement in competitiveness can occur mainly by a growth in efficiency , with the use of innovative and modern methods .
Finally , a further important task is work on the objectives and the multiannual financial frameworks for 2014-2020 .
It is necessary , here , to concentrate on improved economic integration in the future .
( SK ) Mr President , the work programme submitted is ambitious .
It includes areas which will help to fulfil the 2020 strategy .
Much is said there , but I would rather inquire into what is not said , or not fully said .
Specifically , how does the Commission want to prioritise the accelerated adoption of urgent proposals ?
I place the emphasis on accelerated adoption .
We all know what a lengthy business European legislation is .
I would also like to ask - the programme ends by emphasising cooperation between the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council .
My question is : Do you think that constructive cooperation with the Council is possible when there is no tone of cooperation being sounded by Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the honourable Members for their positive and kind words concerning the Commission 's work programme .
If you look through your interventions , you will see that there is a considerable convergence in the goals we would like to achieve together .
I think it is because the Commission 's work programme was , to a great extent , our joint endeavour .
The structural dialogue we introduced this year , the intense communication between the committees and the Commissioners really paid off .
We ended up with a Commission work programme that contains the converging aims between Parliament and the Commission .
Several of you highlighted the importance of focusing on appropriate implementation , so that our programmes and proposals would not simply stay on paper .
I absolutely understand this request and , therefore , we also included in the Commission 's work programme monitoring of the ongoing work .
I will be very happy to come to Parliament on a regular basis and to brief you on how we are progressing and implementing the Commission 's work programme so we can have a debate , not just once a year but on a regular basis , about how we are progressing with the fulfilment of the Commission 's work programme .
So far this year , out of the 34 initiatives we promised for this year , we will definitely fulfil 30 .
This is relatively good progress but , of course , we will be ready to discuss this issue further with you and to keep you informed on a regular basis .
I am also very glad that you urge us to do more , not less , with some exceptions .
This is , of course , a very welcome tendency from Parliament towards the Commission .
I agree with all of you who say that we need to do better .
We have not only to perform well to fulfil our goals , but we need to show that with high quality work , we can use the result as the best counter-argument and best instrument to tackle Euroscepticism in Europe and the ghosts of the past , which always emerge when we face tough times : protectionism , racism , xenophobia and many of the phenomena you have just described here .
With good work and good cooperation , we can tackle these ghosts of the past .
It is true that we need a lot of investment in infrastructure , but we are also absolutely sure that we need modern infrastructure .
If we want to compete on a global level and to preserve our competitive edge , it is very clear that we need to upgrade our infrastructure .
It is not only important for our economic goals , but it is also important for the greening of our economies and for resource-efficient economies to be developed .
For that , we need to use , more than ever , the project-oriented EU bonds , we need to engage more with the EIB and we need to find ways to use public-private partnerships more in the future .
You will also find this in our programme .
Regarding the single market , I welcome all the remarks and the focus on the single market , because this is really the EU 's main crown jewel .
We have achieved a lot with the single market and we know that we can achieve even more if we can release the potential of the single market .
We need to get rid of the barriers to the single market that still remain , we need to get rid of bottlenecks and we need to use the new areas of the economy .
Some of you referred to the digital economy and how much we could improve life in Europe if we used more e-services , e-government or e-commerce , and these are new areas in which we have to engage more .
Mario Monti presented an excellent report and Michel Barnier used this report as a basis for our range of proposals .
We started the debate on how to make the European single market better , more open and more competitive , so that it brings us even better results than we have today .
So let us participate and look at which of the proposals Michel Barnier put on the table could be the most important ones and which proposals should have higher priority .
I believe that together , we will achieve a better and stronger single market .
Regarding the administrative burden , as you know , Günter Verheugen included in the programme a reduction in the administrative burden by 25 % before 2012 .
I am very happy to tell you that the Commission is working very hard so that this limit will be passed .
Now , we are aiming to reach the level of 30 % , but we also need to be very clear that it is not only the Commission that can deliver results .
Very often , the administrative burden increases at national level when they are implementing European legislation with different kinds of strings attached .
We need to work on this issue from both levels , from a European level and also from a national level .
Concerning the importance of the social dimension of the European single market , I absolutely agree with you .
We learned the lessons of the past and we will be coming with proposals on posted workers , on a time directive and also on the services of general interest , which would reflect this very important social dimension , because we know that the single market will work only when it is embraced by the citizens .
Therefore , we need to include this very solid social impact assessment in the proposals we make so we know that the proposals we will be bringing to citizens will be accepted and supported by them .
Ms Tzavela made a very passionate plea related to the potential brain drain , that we are losing young well-educated Europeans who go to work elsewhere outside the European Union .
Sometimes it is because of remaining barriers on the labour market in Europe , sometimes it is because of a lack of information , but often it is also because our education does not match the needs of European businesses .
Therefore , I am very glad that in a few moments , you will start the discussion on the new flagship initiative .
I see that my colleagues , Commissioner Vassiliou and Commissioner Andor , are here .
They will explain how we would like to do it better , how to match the skills with the needs in such a way that young people will not be unemployed but will bring their potential to the European economy , and we will all benefit from that .
Several of you highlighted the importance of the regulation of financial markets and the importance of fast decision making and how we should achieve it .
We have already highlighted that , in future , we need to progress with better coordination between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
We would like to do it in a new form of Union programming , where we will decide on the priorities , the timing and the deadlines , so we can deliver the results faster and can accelerate the legislative process even at a faster pace than today .
I can assure you that , as regards the multiannual financial framework , we will do our utmost to bring an ambitious project to you .
We need your help in explaining at all levels - to the media , to national audiences - the proportions of this debate , how much we in Europe can achieve with just 1 % of GDP , the structure of the European budget with almost 95 % of this budget going back to national economies with high value-added from the European Union .
This debate must also be taken to the national capitals and we need to talk to citizens , to inform them about how this budget is structured so we can gain strong support for our ambitious proposals .
Elmar Brok referred to very important areas in external relations - the Eastern Partnership , the enlargement process - where we also need to work for credibility on both sides .
We must be very credible in how we negotiate and monitor the criteria that are fulfilled by the candidate countries , but we must also be credible in what we are offering to candidates so that we have trust built on both sides .
The United States is a very important partner and , if we manage to get rid of some of the barriers to mutual trade , it would be enormously beneficial and I agree that we need to invest more effort in this area .
On trade , you know that Europe is ready to negotiate and is ready to move , but we need partners .
We cannot just forge agreements when we are not sure that they will be equally matched by the other side .
But I agree that we need to be tackling this issue all the time , coming up with proposals and looking for new openings , because global trade will definitely benefit the global economy and this is what most of the world economy needs at this moment .
Lastly , on freedom , security and justice , we are fully aware that this is one of the areas of major interest and concern for our citizens and this is why we devoted such a large proportion of our programme to this area .
I am sure that my colleagues , Mrs Malmström and Mrs Reding , will pay attention to how to tackle all these concerns , which have been raised both in this debate and in the structural dialogue they had with their respective committees .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the part-session in December .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Commission 's work programme for 2011 is clearly based on continuity .
Among the proclamations of ' intelligent , sustainable and inclusive growth ' are the guidelines that have prevailed , which have given rise to serious imbalances within the EU , the real divergence of EU economies , the severe crisis and the recessionary outlook that some Member States are facing , with unemployment and deep social injustices .
It also includes guidelines such as maintaining the irrational criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact , liberalisation and the devaluation of the workforce , and I would highlight its insistence on putting forward a new proposal to amend the directive on the organisation of working time .
It is also worth noting the statement in the programme with regard to financial regulation that most of the measures to bridge gaps which have been revealed by the crisis have already been put forward .
This shows that the promises to bring an end to tax havens and financial derivatives have fallen by the wayside .
This shows that financial speculation is continuing unchecked .
New attacks on citizen 's rights , freedoms and guarantees are on the horizon , including the travellers ' registration programme , and this is a matter for close attention and active concern .
The communication from the Commission outlining its work programme for 2011 emphasises coming out of the crisis and stimulating economic growth .
One significant element is the virtual market , which still has huge potential for development - on condition , however , of the establishment of a truly single market in the Internet .
In relation to this , I strongly encourage the Commission to complete a thorough implementation of the Digital Agenda , which is referred to in the communication .
I think use of the potential given to us by information technologies should also be seen as a way out of the economic crisis .
The development of Internet commerce , measures in the field of intellectual property rights and making the cultural heritage of Europe available online , should be seen as a test of the European Union 's effectiveness .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs in the area of better lawmaking ( 2008 report ) , I would like to express my satisfaction at the fact that the Commission has decided to include proposals from my report in the plan of work for the year .
I am thinking of the greater emphasis placed on ex-post evaluation of European law and the prolongation of the public consultation period for new proposals from 8 to 12 weeks .
I welcome the fact that the European Commission is starting the coming year with a substantial work programme .
These days , we are witnessing how the rapidly changing economic , financial and international political circumstances override our plans almost every week .
I consider it important , therefore , to review the Commission 's work programme several times in the course of next year .
I am pleased that the document names job creation as one of the top priorities for 2011 , but at the same time , I regret the lack of legislative initiatives for employment and social purposes .
The Commission has finally decided to draw up the European Roma framework strategy , but I consider it essential that this be accompanied by draft legislation aimed at integration and prohibiting discrimination .
When the Barroso Commission was created , it promised that the submission of its proposals will , in each case , be preceded by an evaluation of their social impact ; however , I do not see any trace of this in the current work programme .
I expect the Commission to be ready , from the beginning of 2011 , to accept and address citizens ' initiatives bearing the signatures of one million EU citizens .
At a time when , in certain Member States , we see overt and covert attacks on media freedom and infringements of fundamental democratic rights , I consider it particularly important that the European Commission , as the guardian of the treaties , should pay greater attention than ever to government decisions that threaten the independence of the news media , the system of democratic checks and balances and the rule of law , and should , if necessary , take action in defence of fundamental democratic values .
in writing . - As a woman and politician dealing with gender equality , I am disappointed with the Commission work programme for 2011 .
Women are completely forgotten by and left out of this programme .
I really had to work to find at least once the word ' women ' ... in the Annex .
Even there , I quote : ' Depending on the outcome of the consultation , the Commission may adopt a legislative proposal on reconciliation , including on paternity and filial leave , in 2012 . '
' Depending on ' .
' May adopt ' .
' In 2012 ' .
This sentence is from a Commission that rushed to produce an empty , so-called Women 's Charter in March , and that neglected the Parliament when it came to negotiating the new gender equality strategy , which , I might add , is no more concrete than the Commission work programme here .
We knew in March that Reding 's Charter was only a façade with no substance .
We asked repeatedly for a strong legislative text , but Reding did not want to hear about it .
Why can we accept a Europe that sanctions Member States when they are financially not in line with EU rules and agreements but we cannot accept a Europe that sanctions Member States that neglect gender equality and compose governments with few or no women ministers ?
It is not surprising that the three countries which brought about the collapse of the budget negotiations are net payers and , moreover , recipients of the rebate .
Indeed , there can be no doubt that the UK has commenced the obligatory battle for its rebate .
The excuses chosen by the budget wreckers are rather feeble .
It is quite irresponsible to limit budget flexibility in a time of crisis .
We must , on the contrary , increase flexibility in a crisis .
The refusal to discuss with Parliament new financial resources for the EU budget in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , and the refusal to enter into dialogue over the multiannual financial framework , constitute sad caricatures of the once-lauded British sense of humour .
The Commission work programme for 2011 must contain a proposal for a directive to combat violence against women and an EU programme for financing sport .
The Commission has committed itself to these things .
It is time they were done .
Violence against women is currently the most serious manifestation of discrimination against women and is a violation of human rights .
In Europe , as many as 45 % of women - that is 100 million - have been the victims of violence .
Every day , violence is suffered by between 1 and 2 million European women .
There is no justification for the delays in drafting a directive on this matter .
I also draw attention to the question of sport , which , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , is included in the competences of the European Union .
Once again , the Commission , by appealing to budgetary restrictions at national and European level , has put off presentation of an EU programme in this area .
I fear that if we accept such an approach , there will never be a programme , because there will always be matters which are more important than sport .
However , promoting physical activity brings indisputable benefits in the form of an improvement to the health and wellbeing of Europeans as well as to their efficiency and effectiveness at work .
This helps to reduce illnesses and so reduces the costs of healthcare , and it also combats social exclusion .
It is also very important to use the potential of older people in the labour market .
I hope the Commission will take account of this matter , which has been raised many times , in its future proposals concerning employment and the creation of new jobs .
An agenda for new skills and jobs ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the agenda for new skills and jobs .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today , there are 23 million unemployed people across the European Union , corresponding to an unemployment rate of about 10 % .

This situation emerged as a consequence of the financial and economic crisis and we have to face dramatic consequences , but this situation did not deter the European Commission from proposing ambitious objectives in the Europe 2020 strategy , and the European Union has set ambitious targets to meet in the not too distant future .
We have a headline target for an employment rate of 75 % for men and women by 2020 , and today , the Commission adopted yet another flagship initiative under the Europe 2020 strategy : an ' agenda for new skills and jobs ' outlining how we intend to make progress towards full employment .
It is complementary to the flagship ' Youth on the move ' adopted in September .
Both should contribute to reach our 2020 employment and education targets .
Yes , the crisis has wiped out millions of jobs .
Yes , we face increasing international competition , but that is no excuse to shy away from taking action .
On the contrary , it is a call to act and shape our future .
Creating more and better jobs is in our hands .
Employment policy is largely a Member State responsibility but , as EU policy makers , we in the Commission , together with the European Parliament and the social partners , must do our bit .
We must enable everyone who can work to actually do so .
We need to allow the workforce to generate new ideas and set up new businesses .
We need to ensure that the younger generation can benefit from the social model we have developed .
We need better job quality and working conditions for all employees .
An agenda for new skills and jobs sets out action in four areas : functioning of labour markets ; skills ; job quality and working conditions ; and job creation .
The agenda proposes 13 specific actions at EU level to be carried out in partnership with governments , social partners and civil society .
First , we have to make sure our labour markets function better by carrying out labour reforms that ensure the necessary flexibility and security .
One of the lessons learned in the past two years is that flexicurity policies have contributed to weathering the crisis .
We now propose to discuss with Member States and social partners all components of flexicurity and how to improve them , building on the EU common principles of flexicurity .
The agenda points to flexible , but reliable , contractual arrangements , comprehensive lifelong learning , active labour market policies , and modern social security systems .
There are highly segmented labour markets in the EU where employees with permanent safe contracts coexist , and sometimes work side by side in the same workplace doing the same job , with employees who live under temporary contracts with few social safeguards and slim prospects of a permanent job .
To improve the situation and reduce existing disparities , one possible avenue for discussion offered by the agenda adopted today could be to extend the use of open-ended contractual arrangements .
These would have a sufficiently long probation period and a gradual increase in protection rights , access to training , lifelong learning and career guidance for all employees .
Over time , this would allow employees to acquire full rights while firms would have sufficient , but decreasing , flexibility during the probation period , removing the inhibiting elements that often prevent employees from taking on new recruits for the long term .
Second , we need to equip people with the right skills for the jobs on the market today and in the future .
We know that even now , some employers are struggling to fill vacancies because they cannot find people with the right skills .
This reveals not only that we need more skills and the right skills , but also that there are persistent mismatches in the EU labour market between available skills and needs .
In the foreseeable future , there could be even more serious shortages of workers than today - ICT practitioners , doctors , nurses , researchers , as well as people with the green skills to help us move towards a greener economy .
' New skills and jobs ' proposes practical tools in this respect .
We will bring more transparency on skill needs and promote better matching , namely through the EU skills panorama to help people see more easily which skills are most needed now and in the future .
Commissioner Vassiliou will be able to say more about this .
What is clear is that we must work closely with all relevant stakeholders to bridge the gap between education and training and the working world .
Third , we propose to improve the quality of jobs and ensure better working conditions .
The EU has very ambitious legislation in this field which needs now to be reviewed .
Experience with implementation tells us when and where there is room for improvement .
We need to make sure the legislation works better , that it is in line with new working patterns and new technology , and that it is easier to understand and apply for people and businesses .
In practice , we propose to review the Working Time Directive and make a legislative proposal aimed at improving the implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive and we will also make proposals in the area of occupational health and safety .
In addition to reviewing EU legislation , the agenda on new skills and jobs proposes an integrated approach that includes so-called soft instruments from codes of conduct and recommendations to implementing guidelines , benchmarking and exchange of good practices .
I look forward to discussing these issues with you and I am confident that together with the European Parliament , the Member States and the social partners , we can make them work better .
Last , but certainly not least , we need to create more jobs .
Job creation is needed for growth , but there are too many obstacles in the way .
We propose to improve the framework conditions for job creation , especially in fast-moving and R & D-intensive sectors , by reducing the administrative burden and taxes on labour , and by helping entrepreneurs .
We also propose action to foster entrepreneurship and support people who are in the process of setting up a business or have done so recently .
In this respect , one can never reiterate too often the importance of the new micro-finance facility as a tool to help people set up their own businesses .
The European Union has plenty of talent .
Let us make sure that the ideas and innovations around lead to the creation of quality jobs .
Today , the Commission has presented its priorities on how to make progress towards full employment .
An agenda for new skills and jobs can make a real difference if we all work together .
I call on you all to play your part in moving forward in our endeavour to reach full employment in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioners , although befitting Parliament 's traditions , we tend to approach proposals with a helpful intention , yet critically , I must say now that I wholeheartedly welcome and support the notion just outlined .
I am particularly pleased about the definition used by Commissioner Andor in connection with full employment as the target , that whoever is able to and wants to should be given the means and opportunity to work .
I also support the four main priorities : better functioning labour markets , better quality jobs , more efficient job creation policies and better working conditions , even if we see that it will not be easy to achieve them .
We agree with what has been said on flexicurity , although I must say that it is indeed high time we talked about the details .
We use the term frequently and interpret what it really means in a variety of ways .
In harmony with the basic principles of better legislation , we believe it is necessary to react to changing working conditions .
Thus , it is justified to review the Working Time Directive , although I wish to point out that we do not feel the necessity for a new directive where the Posting of Workers Directive is concerned , but are ready to discuss implementation and the experience gained in the course of implementation and , if need be , make amendments .
However , I wish to draw attention to the regulation of atypical forms of work .
This means entirely new employer and employee relations in respect of both social security and other conditions , and obviously there are still many gaps in this field .
Mobility must be increased and more attention needs to be paid to the cooperation of state employment services .
Finally , Mr President , I can see that time is running out , I fully agree that in a sense , low qualifications cost more than the crisis .
Therefore , we must make sure , for everyone 's benefit , that we continue to think in terms of appropriate and flexible training , acknowledging the possibility of formal and informal training .
Mr President , I listened to the statements by the two Commissioners with a great deal of pleasure .
In times of crisis , especially acute crisis , we need a vision .
These two statements give us a vision .
They are ambitious .
They set four objectives which I think every European citizen will want to support .
But - however nice things are , there is always a ' but ' - I first of all want to raise the question of security .
Flexibility and security need to go hand in hand and , in our opinion , priority needs to be given to security .
The question of education and training is a very , very basic question because , as Commissioner Andor quite rightly said , not only do we need new skills , we need to send the old skills in the direction we want .
There are issues relating to entrepreneurship .
We must make it easier for young people to open their own business .
We must make it easier for businesses to take on more people .
To close , I should like to refer to Commission Vassiliou 's very nice idea : a European skills passport .
That immediately puts me in mind of seconded workers and I think and ask myself : if I have a passport with exceptional skills and I come from country A and I go and work in country B , will the question of my contract of employment have been resolved ?
We are at your side ; we shall monitor and fight with you .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , I will deal with just one of your four key priorities : stronger policies to promote job creation and demand for labour .
According to this document , recovery must be based on job-creating growth but , since the economic crisis , economic growth in Europe has been uneven and weak .
As an Irish MEP , I am acutely aware of how we are being told to implement austerity measures and the real fear is that this will smother any opportunity for growth .
So my question is : will this agenda for new jobs and growth not apply to Ireland or Greece or , indeed , any country that is implementing these severe austerity measures ?
Where will the growth come from and , consequently , where will the jobs come from ?
There are excellent ideas in this document ; I am not trying to minimise them .
One crucial one is how we connect our investment and research and development and innovation to the production system itself .
There is an absolute necessity to lock the two together .
Proposals to engage the social economy , cooperatives , mutual societies and micro-enterprises in a sustained effort to provide employment opportunities at local level are very timely and , indeed , I believe that mobilisation at local level and on a not-for-profit basis , through mutual societies , can be a driver for sustainable development .
The promotion of entrepreneurship will allow citizens themselves to play a real part in our economic recovery .
The matching of skills to jobs is crucial , but I am very concerned on many fronts , Commissioner .
Last week , I hosted a meeting in Parliament on social inclusion and mental illness and a mild-mannered lady from Austria said that politicians have to stop talking about jobs and growth - nobody believes them !
I do not know about you , Commissioner , but that shook me .
I am not saying that that feeling is widespread , but it is spreading , and I think that is why our words here have to be translated into action .
There is a real urgency about this and we need to start thinking outside the box .
Yes to green jobs , digital jobs , but do not forget local jobs and , as I said , the promotion of a not-for-profit ethos , not as a replacement , but as a counterbalance to the profit-driven model , which right now threatens the euro and the stability of the Union .

Mr President , Mrs Vassiliou , Mr Andor , we had great expectations of the agenda for new skills and jobs .
It was intended to create an impetus which would help employees in Europe to prepare for environmental change .
Most importantly , after Parliament came up with a series of ideas in its resolution on green jobs , we expected the Commission to take up these ideas , develop them further and then propose specific measures which define how new jobs can be created by means of environmental change or existing jobs adapted so that they can be preserved , in order to make European industrial society greener for the benefit of the workers .
What have you done instead ?
You have revived the old subject of flexicurity .
Do you really believe that new jobs can be created by means of deregulation ?
We have just established that the precarious jobs are the ones which are lost during a crisis and they are the first ones to go .
All I can say here is that you are wrong if you think that a knowledge-based , sustainable economy can be developed on the basis of uncertainty and poor working conditions .
Your focus is on poverty through work , instead of on increasing prosperity .
However , poverty is not a good accompaniment to progress .
In order to make environmental progress , we need a wide-ranging programme of education and training for all employees and , in particular , for those at lower levels .
Please continue to work on this agenda and introduce the necessary improvements .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not intend my speech to be the usual eurosceptic exercise in rhetoric but a call for the EU to start to look at the contents more than the packaging and abandon propaganda in favour of hard facts .
Now that the Lisbon Strategy has failed , the EU has come up with a new slogan ' EU 2020 ' , but it has not actually come up with any innovative response to employment problems .
The statistics bear this out : the unemployment rate in Europe stands at 9.6 % , the youth unemployment rate at 20.2 % .
In Italy , the third net contributor to the EU budget , the situation for young people is even more dramatic , with 25.9 % of young people jobless .
I would prefer a Europe where resources are not wasted in promotional campaigns , but there are efficient investments so that the training available prepares professionals for the internal market sector where there are proper job opportunities .
I would like to conclude by emphasising the importance of vocational training , a symbol of excellence in our nations .
The craft sector offers employment potential and a unique wealth of knowledge that must be used to sustain the competitiveness of the European system .

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Andor , Mrs Vassiliou , ladies and gentlemen , we have set ourselves the goal of identifying the needs of the job market in the coming years .
This means we are speaking of the future of young Europeans , of the professions and the economies that will sustain our communities tomorrow .
For all too long , we have been wondering about the types of jobs that will be available in ten years , about how qualifications will change and about the skills required throughout the Union .
We ask ourselves continually whether the education and training currently offered to European citizens will help them find a job easily .
I wonder how the Commission actually intends to go about adopting new measures to achieve the goals it has set itself .
Are we sure we know all the needs of young people ?
Are we sure that e-learning is the solution , or can we study new and more telling forms of education and training ?
Only six months are left before the pilot project launched in May 2010 concludes , meaning it is already time to draw up budgets .
Will the results we achieve be positive ?
Will they be encouraging ?
We must aim to train young people using European educational policies that are capable of anticipating future needs .
Not long ago , I heard a long list of things we ' have to do ' .
To use medical terminology , I have heard a lot about diagnosis but not a lot about the cure .
We must not be content with a lot of hot air but must work with substantial ideas , as the EU 2020 strategy demands .
This is the challenge that all Member States and enterprises must tackle and this is the best legacy that we can leave to our children .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Andor , Mrs Vassiliou , new skills for new jobs is a very important subject .
Why is this ?
Because it is all about the future .
It is not just about us muddling our way through the challenges that we are already aware of , such as demographic change and the economic crisis .
It is also about the fact that additional qualifications will give people the opportunity to design the jobs of the future and , therefore , to make an active contribution to an innovative economy .
Mr Andor , you place a great deal of importance on the social partnership , which is a good thing .
However , I would like to encourage the Commission to focus on working conditions and the physical and , above all , mental stresses of a busy working life .
What use is it to society if people produce high levels of performance in the short term , but in the long term , turn into burnt-out wrecks ?
None at all .
Therefore , the systematic evaluation of the acquis communautaire should be based on this approach and not on better regulation .
On the subject of flexicurity , I do not approve of the Commission proposal for a kind of introductory employment contract , which only offers full employment rights after a certain period of time .
It seems to me rather shabby to treat young people , who are so important for our future , in this way right at the start of their professional careers .
Does this mean that the Commission is more or less giving up on precarious employment relations ?
I would very much like to see the Commission making improvements in this area .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Andor , Mrs Vassiliou , it is true that combating unemployment and the goal of full employment together represent one of our most urgent tasks .
As Mrs Harkin said , the people of Europe do not want concepts ; they want concrete solutions .
I would like to thank you for your initiative .
There are a lot of positive approaches here which two colleagues from my group have referred to .
However , I believe that some improvements are needed , because more flexibility and more mobility will not create a single new job .
I would like to endorse what Mrs Schroedter said in this respect .
We need good , secure jobs in Europe and the Member States and businesses must ensure that these are permanent jobs which allow people to earn a good living .
This must become a general rule once again and we must work towards this on a European level and choose the right course .
In the agenda , you refer to new forms of employment contract with fewer rights for employees who are just starting their careers .
You refer to these as open-ended contractual arrangements .
In my view , this will not create any new jobs .
Experience shows , and the Social Democratic government in Germany found this out a few years ago , that weakening employees ' rights will not result in any jobs being created .
Measures of this kind simply turn secure jobs into precarious jobs .
We must not allow this to happen in future .
( RO ) Mr President , the timing of this debate is particularly apt , with the EU economy 's recovery remaining fragile and Member States still facing a depressed situation on the labour market .
This is why European society needs to become a knowledge-based society .
The EU must ensure that there is a better correlation between the demand and supply for jobs and that the workforce has the necessary skills to take up the newly created jobs .
With regard to Romania , the most recent Commission monitoring report indicates that the labour market has been stable since the start of 2010 .
However , the recovery cannot be accompanied immediately by a reduction in unemployment .
Unfortunately , young people in Romania are still one of the groups hardest hit .
More than 20 % of them do not have a job .
In this respect , I think that the European Commission 's instrument is useful , given that its prime objective is to boost the involvement of young people in the labour market .
( SK ) Mr President , if we are discussing unemployment , it is surely necessary to cry out loud about unemployment among the young , which runs at twice , and in some countries , four times the European average .
I welcome the agenda presented much more than the strategy .
We must adopt specific measures to support employment and effective monitoring .
We must definitely boost cooperation between national ministries of labour and education and create a long-term strategy on what the labour market will demand from potential job seekers , and not just what it demands now .
Education and training for a profession is a long-term process , and we therefore need to know what we will need in 10 years , and not just now , so that we can support the next generation .
The Commissioner mentioned better education and investment in people .
I fully agree with her on this .
Only through greater investment in educating the young will we manage to create a competitive generation and a better European Union .
I would therefore like to call on the EU Member States not to cut education and youth budgets but , in these difficult times , to make them even stronger .
Every cent more spent on education will produce a hundredfold return in a contented and strong future generation .
( DE ) Mr President , the focus of these measures must be to make the best possible use of the human resources available within the European Union , rather than opting for mass immigration .
In specific terms , this means developing new , long-term skills , which match the new requirements of the labour market .
We need a programme of further training for those EU citizens who have interrupted their education either at school , during an apprenticeship or at university .
In addition , we need incentives for further education , retraining measures and lifelong learning .
When the labour market is opened up to the countries of Eastern Europe in 2011 , the EU will be obliged to take measures to protect citizens in those Member States that will be particularly affected by the opening up of the labour market .
Less skilled workers and also self-employed contractors in these Member States will be the first victims of this change .
I expect the Commission to provide these people with adequate protection against unemployment , cheap labour and social dumping .

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Andor , Mrs Vassiliou , ladies and gentlemen , there can be no doubt that at a time of such great difficulty for the European Union , the fact of having the courage and determination to carry forward initiatives such as the one submitted by the Commissioners can only be looked on with great favour .
More targeted training , real education directed at acquiring knowledge and abilities that serve the labour market , development of young people through their training and their knowledge - which must be enriched on a daily basis - and a labour market that needs new skills , but which needs to put migratory flows to the best possible use .
The four objectives are encouraging , but there is no doubt that we must put the many instruments that the Commission has at its disposal to better use .
We must be far-sighted and prudent , but by the same token , the new frontier of technology must guide our choices to ensure that the 2020 strategy is consistent with effective training and a real will to pave the way for a labour market that serves European society and , above all , young people .
( RO ) Mr President , the main concern of European citizens is linked to keeping their jobs .
As a result of the economic and financial crisis , the unemployment rate has reached 10 % , with the rate of youth unemployment at 20 % .
Young people and the over-50s are encountering difficulties in finding a job and are often forced to accept temporary labour contracts or a job below the qualifications they have obtained .
The agenda for creating new jobs and new skills must be linked to the Union 's industrial policy and innovation policy .
In order to maintain the Union 's competitiveness , we must not only develop an innovative capacity , but also recreate the production capacity , which means creating jobs in the European Union .
An eco-efficient economy obviously requires new skills .
I wish to draw attention to the high school dropout rate .
An ever growing number of young people are unable to attend a secondary school or university .
Education guarantees a future for young people .
This is why it is our duty to guarantee young people access to education .
Member of the Commission . - I am very happy that the fundamental principles of this flagship initiative to boost and improve employment in Europe and finally reach an ambitious target by 2020 have been welcomed .
We are , of course , open to discussing the various details now and at a later stage .
I would like to address some of the points that have been discussed or perhaps even challenged in the discussion , because some of them need further explanation .
First of all , we maintain the concept of flexicurity , but this does not mean that we want to put the emphasis only on flexibility , in which case we would use this concept the way it was used before .
I would like to give you some examples where there is clearly a reflection of the current times and a reflection of the new challenges .
We are definitely making this initiative more age-conscious , and when we speak about lifelong learning , we want to put a greater emphasis on the lifelong learning opportunities of older workers , because we have to assume that active working life is becoming longer and people will have to be assisted more with career changes or career developments .
We have to have a better focus on young people , which is clearly a key consideration for Europe 2020 .
But a separate flagship initiative - ' Youth on the move ' - already exists , where most of the initiatives and strategies in connection with the young generation are outlined in very concrete terms .
Youth is the age group where we do not want to push for a greater level of flexibility , because there is already enough .
There is more flexibility for young workers in Europe than in the United States .
We want to facilitate more mobility , because we believe that the young generation is the one that can better take advantage of the integrated European labour market and develop their own skills and improve their competitiveness through taking advantage not only of the market itself but also of the institutions that the European Union provides .
What I spoke about was better working conditions and quality jobs .
I regret that Ms Schroedter did not understand it perfectly .
We want to address segmentation as a major challenge of the current European labour market , and we put forward a very concrete example : the open-ended contract , which can help .
It is not about removing people from permanent contracts , it is helping those who , so far , only had a chance to have a short-term or fixed-term contract , to have an open-ended one and build up their rights .
This will help , to some extent , to provide more jobs , but it will definitely help to provide more rights .
This is also very important if we want to speak about quality jobs .
When we speak about investing in human capital , we should not forget that the European Social Fund is there to support all these initiatives in all Member States , and we hope that it will remain a robust instrument of the EU in supporting all these initiatives on employment and social inclusion .
These are initiatives for 10 years and for all Member States .
It is not about addressing short-term emergency financial situations in certain Member States .
We cannot assume that all the 10 years will be spent amidst financial emergencies .
This is obviously not a policy that can be so specific as to address this situation , but it does apply to Greece and to Ireland .
It is clear that Greece is one of the countries where more flexibility could help to boost the business investment climate , as is the case with Spain .
Ireland is a country which could rebalance competitiveness factors and have a greater focus on investing in skills and education , as opposed to other sources of competitiveness that have been extensively used recently .
We must , of course , pay attention to the very critical situation we are in at this moment , and maybe next year there will be little chance of increasing the level of employment .
But we also have to look at the overall picture , which will start to improve from the first half of next year , because the major economies driving the recovery forward are already experiencing job growth .
We believe that , despite the disturbances in the financial sector , this process will continue and the European policies which we have put forward , although not being able to micromanage job creation in the Member States , will create the right framework and provide guidance for the Member States to continue working towards full employment .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The current economic crisis and structural factors such as globalisation , technological progress , an ageing population and the move towards a low carbon economy have highlighted the need to adapt European employment policies and made EU institutions devise relevant solutions for tackling the rise in unemployment and fighting poverty .
Indeed , the Commission 's initiative as part of the EU 2020 strategy offers a response from the European Union to the challenges raised by the current economic climate and the economic and social changes taking place on the labour market .
I wish to emphasise how important it is to achieve the two objectives mentioned by the Commission in this initiative .
These are to exit the economic crisis using skills improvement as a tool for doing this and to guarantee the European economy 's long-term competitiveness by anticipating future needs and ensuring a harmonious balance between the supply and demand for skills on the labour market .
Europe needs to increase its competitiveness in an ever-growing global competitive environment .
Skills provide the key to exiting the crisis and enabling Europe 's citizens to improve their standard of living .
I welcome this initiative which encourages the exchange of information and the involvement of Member States in discussions aimed at identifying solutions or practices conducive to creating new jobs .
The European Union has very ambitiously committed to increasing employment by as much as 75 % over the coming decade .
In order for this to become a reality , we must take concrete measures both at EU and national levels .
I feel that it is particularly important to enhance social partnership and social dialogue with specific measures at all levels - EU , national , regional , sectoral and company .
Secondly , employees ' skills and qualifications must be improved continually and must satisfy the needs of the labour market .
Therefore , it is necessary to bring the general , vocational and higher education systems closer to the needs of the labour market .
We are constantly hearing that there need to be more jobs , but how can they be created ?
There must be a specific mechanism providing incentives and certain tax incentives to create jobs for young people and the elderly .
Furthermore , it is necessary to analyse the impact of micro-finance instruments on the labour market and to allow more flexibility to use money from the European Social Fund .
I really hope that an agenda for new skills and jobs would provide concrete results for people in our countries .
in writing . - According to the joint statement of the November EU-US summit , job creation is a priority in the Euroatlantic context .
The Commission should be alert , however , to the increasing phenomenon of external migration that is being recorded in Greece ; young , skilled and highly skilled members of the labour force are emigrating to Canada , Australia and the Emirates .
It seems that the same process has started in Ireland , as well .
On the other hand , Germany has announced that it needs skilled labour .
There is no reason for Germany to import such labour from third countries .
It could collaborate with the southern Member States to employ a skilled European labour force .
Is the Commission willing to initiate a sensible employment policy among the Member States supporting the European labour market with a European labour force ?
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0563 / 2010 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Subject : Young people in precarious employment
As the Commission notes in its communication ' Youth on the move ' , young people are often trapped in a chain of temporary employment contracts that reduces their chances of moving on to more stable contracts and exacerbates their job insecurity .
The problem is even more acute in Member States where labour law is particularly protectionist .
Can the Commission answer the following questions :
Does it believe that the often doubtful quality and uncontrolled duration of traineeships exacerbate this problem ?
Will it take specific action as part of the objectives set in the Europe 2020 strategy and the Youth on the Move programme to support youth employment and strengthen their job security ?
Will the Commission pursue specific and even more targeted policies to promote and strengthen youth employment in those Member States that are facing an economic recession ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , two months ago , the Commission presented the ' Youth on the move ' flagship initiative as part of the Europe 2020 strategy .
This sends a clear signal that the Commission has a special concern for young people .
' Youth on the move ' has three objectives : to improve education , increase employment and foster mobility for young people across the European Union .
It will involve action to make education and training more relevant to young people 's needs , encourage them to take advantage of EU grants to study or train in another country and overcome obstacles to entering and making progress in the labour market .
The two labour market problems which the honourable Member has raised , namely , traineeships and labour market segmentation , are among the topics ' Youth on the move ' takes up .
I am grateful for the opportunity to explain the Commission 's views and aims regarding these two topics .
I want to stress , first and foremost , that both fall within the Member States ' national competence in terms of practical implementation .
Let me start with traineeships , or internships as they are also sometimes called .
I know that the European Parliament regards these as very important , as Ms Turunen 's report earlier this year showed .
The underlying problem is that employers are reluctant to recruit young workers with little or no practical experience .
This is why acquiring initial work experience through traineeships has grown in importance for young people over the years .
However , they must be of high quality and have clear learning objectives .
In addition , they should not replace normal jobs or probation periods at the start of a work contract .
The Commission intends to develop a quality framework for traineeships but , as a first step , we need to improve our knowledge in this area .
The Commission will soon be launching a study to gain an overview of existing legal arrangements and practice across the Member States .
This is part of a pilot project involving measures for employment maintenance , for which Parliament has provided the Commission with an extra budget for 2010 .
A second set of issues is labour market segmentation .
Young people are in a difficult position in terms of job security .
Too many have short-term contracts , often alternating with unemployment , and many young people - even those who are well qualified - have little chance of getting more stable contracts .
We need to tackle labour market segmentation as a matter of urgency , in particular , because it affects young people and their employment prospects most and because it endangers the future competitiveness of the European economy .
A report on employment in Europe , to be released by the Commission in a few days , finds that temporary workers are paid 14 % less and receive less training than workers on permanent contracts .
This has a negative impact on productivity .
This applies to young people especially .
Those with temporary jobs account for 40 % of the total , against 13 % among the overall working-age population .
This means that young people bear the brunt of adjustment .
In addition , young people are experiencing more and more difficulties in getting into the labour market .
The percentage of young people who are not in education , employment or training ranges from about 4 % in Denmark and the Netherlands to 16 to 20 % in Italy , Cyprus and Bulgaria .
Reducing labour market segmentation is , first and foremost , the responsibility of the Member States .
The Commission has identified this as one of the priorities the Member States should focus on in line with the common flexicurity principles under EU 2020 and the European Employment strategy .
In practical terms , the Commission proposes that Member States with segmented labour markets should consider introducing an open-ended single contract that provides for a sufficiently long probation period and a gradual increase in protection in place of the current legal disparities between permanent and temporary contracts .
The Youth Employment Framework under ' Youth on the move ' gives guidance on how policy makers , stakeholders and institutions can make progress in this area .
Closer policy coordination under the European Semester , which we are currently preparing with the Member States , will offer the right framework for stimulating the development of policy and reforms that will benefit young people .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
Today , I read in the European Commission 's communications about the adoption of an agenda for new skills and work .
Today 's communications refer , among other things , to the decision to promote an open single contract to replace the various types of temporary and permanent contracts .
My question is very straightforward : will the Commission be able to guarantee under this initiative that open single contracts will improve young people 's sense of security at work ?
In other words , will the current situation be improved , insofar as it can be improved ?
( DE ) Mr President , obtaining a permanent job and establishing a decent lifestyle are very important goals for most young people .
They have been hard hit by the most recent economic crisis and are often forced to take short-term jobs or low paid internships , which also means , of course , that they are not contributing to a pension .
This makes long-term life planning difficult .
Therefore , I would like to know : Does the Commission intend to put measures in place which will guarantee permanent jobs for young people in particular ?
Or to put it another way : Are directives being planned which will introduce standards for temporary jobs ?
( LT ) Commissioner , thank you for your answer , because all initiatives are necessary , especially for assessing how young people have suffered during this difficult period .
However , I would like to ask whether the Commission feels we should adopt a separate European Union youth entrepreneurship and innovation programme which would promote and support young people 's creativity and enterprise ?
Where would you stand as regards opportunities for young people to take advantage of microcredits ?
Should the procedure for recognising companies established by young people be legally regulated ?
Member of the Commission . - The previous discussion extensively covered the open-ended contract , which I think is one of the practical solutions .
In addition to that , we have seen during this year that the Commission discussed the situation of young people and the impact of the crisis on youth employment , and ' Youth on the move ' has already addressed this in concrete terms .
Further initiatives are obviously possible .
We will have to monitor the situation and work with the Member States .
During this phase , we have just gathered details of the national programmes developed by the Member States , and after analysing these and looking at the practical solutions and undertakings they made , we will be able to come forward with further suggestions .
The most important one here , however , is to shape a macro-economic environment in Europe that will facilitate a continued , robust recovery .
One further point I would like to make is that young people have , of course , been among those who have suffered most from job losses and the lack of opportunities in the last couple of years .
We are aware of the long-term risk of this which is not just as an immediate employment or social question .
If we do not take action , it can have an impact on demography trends which are already extremely complicated , so in the next term , in a kind of alliance or cooperation with the Hungarian Presidency , we will discuss this in the context of a demographic discussion , because demography and family policies also have to be looked at in the same context as job security and income security for young people in Europe .
Subject : Enhancing competitiveness through alternative energies
It is the objective of the Commission , and of us all , to guarantee our fellow citizens a comfortable and secure standard of living within a framework that fosters the competitiveness of European companies .
Use of alternative energy sources is one solution that can help improve the competitiveness of production .
Unfortunately , few countries can boast impressive figures in this field , and these are mostly in the North of Europe .
The spread of technologies using alternative energy sources is slow in the new Member States , particularly in the East .
What incentives and promotional measures has the Commission taken , or does it intend to take , to target Member States that make little use of alternative energies or in which this technology is slow to spread , so that these countries and the European Union as a whole become more competitive on a global scale ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the honourable Member has been speaking about the subject of renewable energy and asking what we plan to do to achieve our joint targets .
Three years ago , the European Council set us some ambitious climate goals .
One of these concerns renewable energy , which , by 2020 , must make up 20 % of the total energy consumption in the European Union .
Each Member State must exploit the opportunities available to it and make a mandatory contribution to achieving this goal .
If we divide this 20 % across the various different sectors , such as transport , heating , electricity , industry and agriculture , it is clear that electricity generation is the most important .
In order to achieve the target of 20 % of total energy consumption , we need around 35 % of our electricity to be generated from renewable sources .
If we are to do this efficiently and ensure that the price is affordable for consumers , we must make use of the best locations .
Each Member State has different strengths and weaknesses , which must be exploited , and these include wind from the North Sea , sun in the southern part of the European Union and biogas from rural areas .
Obviously , in order to ensure our security of supply , we need to make significant improvements in the quality and capacity of our infrastructure , our transport networks and our storage facilities .
The Commission took this point into consideration a few days ago when we discussed and adopted an energy infrastructure package which focuses , in part , on integrating and feeding in renewable energy .
We have set binding targets for renewable energy for every Member State .
In a few days , on 5 December , we will reach the transposition deadline and the Commission will begin following up on the implementation of the directive , in order to ensure that the appropriate incentives have been put in place and that suitable subsidy measures have been taken , which will allow the binding targets to be achieved .
The Member States must concentrate on creating the ideal conditions for the use of renewable energy .
Among other things , the European Union directive calls for Member States to produce national action plans specifying the necessary measures and the concrete , binding national targets , broken down by sector , such as transport , heating , electricity conversion and industry .
The next step involves removing the administrative obstacles to renewable energy .
A third important area is the construction industry .
Around 40 % of our energy is used in industrial buildings , service sector premises and private homes .
By the end of 2012 , we want qualification and certification schemes to be in place for the installation of renewable energy facilities .
These include distribution and transmission networks which must be prepared for the development and increase in renewable energy and which must also guarantee priority access for renewable energy .
The Member States can be flexible in their choice of technologies .
They can decide which types of renewable energy they will invest in to achieve the binding targets .
The Commission will subsidise innovations and projects which aim to research into , develop and commercialise technologies for renewable energy , using funding from the seventh framework programme that you in this House have made available to us .
The Commission also has money from the European Economic Recovery Plan for three years which is specifically intended for renewable energy projects , in this case , for the development of offshore wind energy .
I would like to emphasise to the new Member States that cohesion programmes and funding to promote renewable energy are also available .
Renewable energy has a high priority in our energy and climate policy , in particular , with regard to reducing our dependency on imported fossil fuels .
Only by working together will we succeed in achieving our ambitious climate goals and increasing Europe 's competitiveness .
I am relying on a close partnership with the Member States regarding the use of the different energy resources .
( DE ) Thank you very much , Mr Oettinger , for your clear and convincing answer .
I believe that the Commission has done a great deal towards achieving these objectives .
However , in my opinion , it should be possible to provide the public with more information and to win over the mass media , in order to gain more support in this area .
This is not what is happening in my country , Lithuania , for example .
Of course , that is the responsibility of the national governments , but the Commission could provide them with assistance .
My final question is : In your opinion , which states have been relatively successful in meeting the 2020 objectives and which have not ?
( RO ) Bearing in mind that the energy and climate change package already imposes certain targets on Member States for reducing polluting emissions and increasing energy efficiency , I would like to ask you what measures you are taking to support businesses in industrial sectors which are major consumers of energy in modernising their facilities so that they become more energy efficient and cause less pollution .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his very comprehensive response to the question .
I have two questions , firstly regarding the 2020 strategy .
Is he confident that we will reach the 20 % target for renewable energies in that strategy ?
Secondly , he mentioned grids .
How realistic , desirable and affordable would a Europe-wide grid be , and is it attainable ?
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a few weeks , we will be submitting to you , the European Parliament , the Council and the Member States our proposal on how we plan to achieve a 20 % increase in energy efficiency .
Looking at the three targets which you have set us , with regard to the 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions , we are making good progress towards this objective .
I am sure that , if we continue with our current efforts , we will reach or even exceed the target of 20 % less CO2 in 10 years .
On the subject of 20 % renewable energy , we are also doing well , although the progress made in the different Member States varies .
Some Member States were already a long way ahead when compared with the reference year .
For example , Austria had a 23 % share of renewable energy five years ago and is expected to reach a level of 34 % by 2020 .
In contrast , the figure for the United Kingdom was only 1.3 % and for Malta 0 % , which meant that these countries had to start virtually from scratch .
The leaders include Sweden , which is aiming for 49 % , and Finland and Portugal with a goal of 38 % .
The Baltic States , with targets of 25 % , 40 % and 23 % , have also been very successful and their figures are above the European average in this important area .
The target of a 20 % increase in energy efficiency is the one which gives me most concern .
This involves making intelligent energy savings and using energy in a targeted way .
I will be happy to talk to Parliament about this during the first quarter of next year when I will be able to submit to you our proposal for achieving a 20 % improvement in energy efficiency .
You mentioned the media .
In fact , on the subject of renewable energy and consumers , more can be done by industry and investors , both investors in technology and financial investors .
I have a proposal for you .
I am planning to visit the three Baltic States next spring .
I will be happy to attend a conference of representatives of the media , the banks and business , if you can suggest suitable candidates , in order to increase awareness in your country , using my modest resources , and to open up opportunities for new programmes and cofinancing .
The next question was : What do I think of a European energy network ?
I want to answer this very openly .
If you look at the transport infrastructure in Europe , we have roads , motorways , railways , the European airspace , with its large and small regional airports , and major ports , such as Genoa , Marseilles , Hamburg and Rotterdam .
There are also terminals for liquid natural gas and for oil in the Mediterranean , the Black Sea , the Baltic , the North Sea and the Atlantic .
In addition , we have a digital infrastructure for information , communications and navigation , including our mobile phone network .
In comparison to these areas , our energy networks are lagging far behind .
We can transport televisions , pig carcasses , tinned foods and other goods from Portugal to Latvia and from Holland to Greece , we can transport workers and tourists and we can transfer information and financial services , but our gas and electricity networks are still divided up along the lines of 19th century principalities .
We need to integrate the markets in the Baltic States , Finland , central Europe and Greece , before Serbia and Croatia join the European Union .
We also need bridges and interconnectors to transport electricity in both directions between Spain , France and Germany .
Over the next 20 years , we must put in place the financing and the legislation to ensure that our transport networks for electricity and gas are of the same quality and have the same capacity as our road and rail networks and our airspace , which can be used to transport goods and give people freedom of movement .
Otherwise , we will not have security of supply or be able to show solidarity in an emergency .
We will not be in a position to exchange storage capacity or establish renewable energy facilities in the best locations and bring the electricity to the centres of population .
In addition , we will not have the competition which consumers want or be able to establish an internal market , which has always been one of the basic principles of the European Union and which must become a reality for gas and electricity .
For this reason , I strongly support a major initiative to develop the transport networks for electricity , gas and oil .
Subject : Structural Funds and disability
Many reports on the use of the Structural Funds show that , even if resources reach those who need them most , this is not done in the manner that would be most beneficial for them or in such a way as to bring about a genuine improvement in the quality of their lives .
How does the Commission plan to prevent the Structural Funds being used to finance the institutionalisation of people with disabilities ?
How does it plan to encourage their use to finance community-based alternatives to institutional care and promote the social inclusion of people with disabilities ?
Member of the Commission . - As you are aware , social policy , including policy relating to people with disabilities , is primarily a national responsibility .
However , stepping up support for disadvantaged groups and , in particular , for people with disabilities , including people living in institutions , is a key strand for action under the European Social Fund .
According to some estimates , people with disabilities account for at least 16 % of the EU working age population , but only 40 % of people with disabilities are employed .
The Commission encourages a shift from institutional to community-based care and is working closely with the Member States and , in particular , the managing authorities of the ESF and the ERDF and NGOs in this field .
In 2009 , the Commission published a report by an ad hoc expert group on the switchover from institutional to community-based care .
In line with the principle of shared management , the Member States are responsible for selecting operations for financing under the structural funds .
In the current programming period , the European Social and Regional Development Funds are supporting some de-institutionalisation schemes and the switch-over from residential care to community-based services .
This is particularly true in certain Member States that joined the EU after 2004 .
Thus , projects are being financed in Bulgaria and Slovakia .
As you know , the Commission is currently working on new provisions on the structural funds for the post-2013 period and will put forward proposals in 2011 .
To step up the fight against discrimination and promote social inclusion of people with disabilities , future operational programmes may , for example , be required to identify the groups at risk of discrimination and exclusion .
The Commission will explore the role that national equality bodies could play and may consider stricter requirements on Member States ' reporting of measures to combat discrimination , implemented with support from the structural funds .
In addition , one of the aims of the European Disability Strategy for 2010 to 2020 , which the Commission adopted on 15 November , is to give impetus to Member States ' efforts to ease the transition from institutional to community-based care .
The strategy seeks to do this by identifying good practice in using the structural funds to encourage people to live independently and in the community and aims to develop awareness-raising initiatives that target structural fund managing bodies at EU and national level .
For example , a toolkit on how to use the structural funds to support the development of community-based services will be developed for the managing authorities .
( HU ) Mr President , indeed , it was this issue that I wished to pose further questions about and comment on .
I was pleased to hear the Commissioner 's answer .
In fact , my supplementary question is whether , on the basis of these principles , the Commission plans to introduce a kind of new conditionality in the next budget period that prevents the strengthening of segregation but allows , say , the use of these funds to target social integration specifically .
The problem was that these funds were often used for building and rebuilding large institutions rather than for integrated housing .
I believe there are many good experts who will willingly help the Commission as well as the Member States in this .
( LT ) Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
I would like to congratulate the European Commission which earlier this month presented the new European Disability Strategy 2010-2020 .
However , I have the following question .
What specific programmes does the Commission plan to prepare on the basis of this strategy and when , so that there are more favourable conditions for disabled people to enter the labour market , or so that their environment and infrastructure are adapted for them ?
Member of the Commission . - The Belgian Presidency held a conference in Liège about the future of cohesion policies on the basis of the Fifth Cohesion Report , which we jointly published with Commissioner Hahn .
Conditionality was one of the main discussion points and , as regards the European Social Fund , the situation described by Mrs Göncz is being covered , and we would like to develop conditionality in that sense .
Conditionality has various meanings and , unfortunately , some of these are seen as unfair or counterproductive .
We believe that the real meaning of conditionality , as regards the structural funds , is that awareness and responsibility have to be raised not just as regards the content , but also the context of the projects and the operational programmes .
We really have to connect with the social reality when we fund programmes in various regions and microregions , and we will take this very seriously .
We have been working recently with some Member States on community-based services .
For example , in Bulgaria , a joint project was financed by the European Social and Regional Development Fund to close down institutions for children with disabilities , as a first step in implementing an ambitious action plan to close down all existing institutions for children and providing family-type care and new services to support families .
This particular programme was in the range of EUR 39 million but there are also similar ones not only in Bulgaria , but also in Slovakia .
Subject : Anglo Irish Bank
Commissioner Almunia in a statement on the Irish financial sector said that there were ' a number of important aspects that still needed to be clarified ' in relation to Anglo Irish Bank .
Will the Commission explain what these important issues are ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , when Mr Mitchell tabled these questions on 7 October , the situation was not the same as it is today in Ireland and in the Irish banking sector .
My answer will take into account what has happened since this question was asked .
Seven days before your question was tabled , on 30 September , the Irish Finance Minister , Mr Lenihan , discussed the total cost of the restructuring of the Anglo Irish Bank , giving two possible figures : a mid-range estimate of EUR 29 billion and a higher estimate of EUR 34 billion .


At the time , total capital injections from public funds to Anglo Irish amounted to around EUR 23 billion .
As always , since the beginning of this crisis , according to our banking and restructuring information , when financial institutions receive injections of public capital , they have to present a restructuring plan to the Commission .
Following much discussion on Anglo Irish , this restructuring plan was presented by the Irish Government on 26 October .
In this draft restructuring plan , they considered a winding-down scenario for Anglo Irish proposing the split of Anglo into two banks - an asset recovery bank to wind down the assets of the bank and a funding bank to get the resources needed to keep it running during the process of winding down its assets .
A scenario in which assets are wound down is less problematic than one in which the bank continues to operate , both in terms of State aid rules and competition .
Consequently , I made some public statements saying that , in our opinion , the task was therefore not as difficult as negotiations concerning certain restructuring plans for other financial institutions in many Member States .
We had been working on this draft restructuring plan from the time the government presented us with the document until last Sunday , when the Irish Government decided to ask for a programme making use of the different mechanisms to support Member States in the euro area with financial difficulties .
Now , due account should be paid to the restructuring plan for Anglo in the ongoing negotiations on this programme .
Hopefully , the Irish programme will be agreed and adopted in the coming days .
I very much hope so .
In this framework , I can give you some more precise answers on the Anglo Irish Bank restructuring plan presented by the Irish Government that will be considered by my services pending a decision .
I hope this will take place as soon as possible after the adoption of the programme .
In any case , I must say that I very much hope that the adoption and implementation of the programme will lead to a more favourable climate for tackling Ireland 's financial and economic problems .
Hopefully , the sound and strong fundamentals of the Irish economy will receive very good treatment , taking into account the need to restructure the financial sector that is the origin of the problems in your country .
I thank the Commissioner for that response .
This word ' restructuring ' is being bandied about a lot outside the House .
Could the Commissioner tell the House if he sees any possibility for a takeover or merger of part of Anglo Irish Bank with any other entity as a possible contribution to this , or does he anticipate that the bank will eventually be wound down ?
In that case , will the Irish taxpayers get some , or all , of their money back ?
What is the Commissioner 's view on that ?
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the Commissioner for this information .
However , my question is about a slightly different matter .
You were speaking , Commissioner , about a very large bank - about Anglo Irish Bank - but information which has reached us indicates that other large banks in Ireland are also having problems .
Could you tell us if similar negotiations are also under way concerning other banks in Ireland ?
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer as well .
With regard to the specific issue of Anglo , is it the view of the Commission that Anglo is different to the existing clearing banks , as we call them in Ireland , like Allied Irish Banks , Bank of Ireland , Ulster Bank and so on ?
Secondly , with regard to the clarification that he was talking about , is this also linked into the proposal coming forward from the government in Ireland tomorrow with regard to the banking finance facility which is being discussed with the IMF and with the European Central Bank ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Unfortunately , given that the negotiations on the programme that has been requested are ongoing during these days and hours , I cannot go into details .
What I can tell Mr Mitchell is that these restructuring plans for the financial institutions in Ireland , and in general , the programme to finance the financial needs of Ireland at these difficult times , will hopefully have the positive outcome of putting an end to this very difficult and challenging situation in order to put the Irish economy back on the path of recovery and sustainable growth , as was the case in the past .
Ireland was one of the best examples of economic success in the euro area and in the EU .
This is the way to tell Irish taxpayers that their money which is now being used for this restructuring , together with financing that hopefully will come after the adoption of the programme from the two European mechanisms , plus the IMF cooperation in this programme , will be returned to them as the positive result of a successful solution to the present Irish problem .
I cannot go into the details .
I also ask for your understanding on this .
What I can say is that there are other financial institutions , other Irish financial institutions , under the restructuring plans being negotiated , or that have been analysed by the Commission .
You have seen our State aid rules competences .
In the case of Bank of Ireland , we adopted a positive decision on the restructuring plan .
In the case of the Allied Irish Bank , we are also negotiating the conditions of the restructuring plan .
In the case of two building societies , EBS and INBS , we are also considering the restructuring of these financial institutions .
I have to say that in two cases , the Anglo Irish Bank and the INBS building society , we are working on a winding-down scenario .
In the other cases , the restructuring will hopefully put those financial institutions in the market in better conditions , in viable conditions , after their restructuring is decided and implemented .
Subject : Creating a common European conscience
The creation of a common European conscience among EU citizens is vital if the enterprise of European unification is to survive .
Given that mobility among those working in the cultural and arts sectors is the most effective way of forging a common European identity , what specific measures will the Commission take to encourage exchanges of experience and knowledge among European artists , establish a funding programme solely for artistic events in the EU and promote the administrative streamlining and financial support of cross-border artistic cooperation programmes ?
Mr President , the Commission agrees completely with the honourable Member as regards the huge importance of cross-border mobility of those working in the cultural and arts sectors .
We , too , are making efforts to eliminate obstacles to their mobility .
These efforts include coordination of social security , passport visa rules for artists from third countries , taxation and , of course , better information on mobility issues .
Experts in the cultural sector are debating how to promote mobility , in working parties where the Member States and the cultural sector are represented , with a view to applying the objectives of the European Agenda for Culture .
Under the Culture programme ( 2007-2013 ) , the Commission is supporting projects and activities which promote cross-border mobility of those working in the cultural sector , encourage the transnational circulation of artistic and cultural works and foster intercultural dialogue .
In 2009 , approximately 80 % of the projects funded by the Commission focused on the circulation of cultural works and the mobility of those working in the cultural sector .
Of course , the Commission is still making an effort , as I said , to facilitate access to the programme .
The programme guide , the calendar , which is for the period 2008 to 2013 , good examples of projects and the cultural contact points in each country all help to simplify access .
The experience acquired to date will be useful in developing procedures for future culture programmes .
Following an initiative passed by Parliament , the Commission also applied pilot projects to encourage mobility of artists , both in 2008 and 2009 .
The aim of these projects is to give European artists a chance to extend the scope of their activities and to reach a new public , as well as to exchange experiences and learn from each other in order to further their career .
The results of these pilot projects will be input into future culture programmes and are , of course , of help to the working parties of Member State experts within the framework of the open method of coordination .
In the long term , everything I have just mentioned will help to forge a common European conscience among the citizens of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , my thanks to the Commissioner for her detailed reply .
On the European cultural weather map , the clouds of de-unification are gathering , as we all know .
There is the Europe of numbers , the technical Europe , but there are also those of us who envisage a Europe of culture , of education , of art , of mobility of artists , of encouragement for cross-European cultural creation .
I am one of those who believe that these are the foundations , the cultural foundations of Europe , and can act as a secure , stabilising factor for further dynamic support for the process of European unification .
Give culture and artistic creation impetus and as a percentage - to waive my own rule for a moment and talk in numbers - let us increase the contribution to European GDP via culture and artistic creation .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for this interesting information , but my question and my concern are related to the budgetary situation .
We are well aware that we are , today , in an uncertain situation as to what budget will be available next year .
In relation to this , I would like to ask you , Commissioner , if these problems might in any specific way affect the very interesting plans which you have presented ?
Mr President , may I start by saying to Mr Papastamkos that I absolutely agree with him .
I attended a huge ' Soul for Europe ' forum in Berlin a few days ago , which was also attended by representatives of all the cultural agencies .
We discussed these issues and said that Europe is not just an economic Union ; it starts with culture .
As Jean Monnet says in his memoirs , ' if I could start again , I would start with culture ' .
So I absolutely agree and the efforts we are making are in this direction .
I agree with you , but I fear , like everybody else , that governments , when they start cutting budgets in times of austerity , start with the obvious : culture - as we have seen already in certain cases - education and health .
I agree it is a very narrow-minded policy and we should oppose it because , in the long run , we shall all feel the repercussions of such cuts .
Subject : Structured dialogue between the EU and sporting federations on matters of shared interest and possible specific measures
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon and the recognition of the special nature of sport , the way is now open for giving sport a truly European dimension .
New provisions allow the European Union to support , coordinate and integrate the actions of the Member States , promoting fairness and openness in sporting competitions and cooperation between bodies responsible for sports .
The treaty also recognises the importance of protecting the physical and moral integrity of sportspeople , especially young people .
In the light of the treaty provisions , what steps does the Commission expect international sporting federations to take with a view to launching an ever more fruitful dialogue on matters of shared interest ?
What specific measures will the Commission take to support this dialogue and to make full use of the powers relating to sport laid down in the treaty ?
Member of the Commission . - In 2007 , the Commission set up a structured dialogue with sports stakeholders on the basis of the 2007 White Paper on sport .
Following calls from EU sports ministers and the European Council in 2008 , the Commission committed itself to further strengthening the dialogue and to giving international sports organisations a more prominent place in the dialogue with the European Union .
This has led to regular exchanges between the Commission and the International Olympic Committee and international sports federations .
In 2008 , the Commission established the EU Sport Forum .
This is considered to be at the heart of this structured dialogue , gathering together once a year all key sports stakeholders at international , European and national level , including governing bodies as well as non-governmental sports organisations .
The next forum will take place in February 2011 in Budapest , where the Commission intends to present its communication on a new EU sports agenda to sports stakeholders .
The Commission has paid great attention to the need to ensure a balanced and inclusive representation of the sports movement when organising meetings and events .
It is committed to this dialogue , taking into account the specific organisation of sport , the complexity of topics to be addressed and , of course , the diversity of sports actors .
The reinforcement of this structured dialogue with the sports movement will be essential for the success of the EU agenda for sport , which the Commission intends to propose , based on the Lisbon Treaty .
Within this strengthened dialogue , Member States , Parliament and the Commission should all have their place .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon and the recognition of the special nature of sport , the way is now open for giving sport a truly European dimension .
New provisions allow the European Union to support , coordinate and integrate the actions of the Member States , promoting fairness and openness in sporting competitions and cooperation between bodies responsible for sports .
The treaty also recognises the importance of protecting the physical and moral integrity of sportspeople , especially young people .
In the light of the treaty provisions , what steps does the Commission expect international sporting federations to take with a view to launching an ever more fruitful dialogue on matters of shared interest ?
What specific measures will the Commission take to support this dialogue and to make full use of the powers relating to sport laid down in the treaty ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I listened very attentively to the Commission 's response .
I would like to ask the Commission about its stance on illegal betting , the illicit bets that are such a feature of football and other sports competitions , and if it intends , as part of the programme we have just heard described , to devote special attention to this aspect , which risks blighting every competition and spoiling the fairness that should characterise sporting competitions .
Member of the Commission . - Let me start with the last question .
Commissioner Barnier is dealing with this question .
Of course , I will follow very closely what he does .
I understand he is going to present a Green Paper in 2011 in order to start the consultation on this very important issue .
I assure you that because of my interest in my portfolio , I will follow what happens very closely .
As I said in my introduction , I am going to present a communication on sport .
It will be the first ever communication presenting the political agenda on sport - hopefully at the beginning of January - and all the issues mentioned by the honourable Member will be discussed in this communication .
The first presentation and discussion will take place , as I said , during the structured dialogue in the context of the sport forum in Budapest next February .
Subject : Tax burden in Greece
By signing the memorandum of understanding , Greece has placed itself at the forefront in Europe when it comes to basic taxation , with the result that Greece now has the third highest rate of VAT , the third highest tax on fuel , the third highest rate of social security contributions and one of the highest rates of business taxation and nominal taxes .
The imposition of this tax burden in Greece , combined with parallel cuts in salaries and pensions , is not leading to the anticipated increase in revenue . On the contrary , it is worsening the recession and stifling the market , increasing the level of poverty , particularly with regard to basic needs , making it difficult for wage earners and pensioners to meet their living expenses and leading to the closure of hundreds of businesses .
Given that the EU 's objective is to guarantee both fiscal consolidation and social adequacy , how does the Commission , as a party to the memorandum of understanding , assess the above fiscal measures ?
Member of the Commission . - As the honourable Member is aware , Greece has introduced a number of tax policy measures to reduce its deficit .
This economic adjustment programme was agreed with the Commission , the IMF and the ECB .
It conditioned the EUR 110 billion financing that is being provided by the euro area Member States and the IMF .
On 6 August 2010 , a report was submitted by the Greek Government to the Council and the Commission discussing the implementation of those tax measures , as well as of wide-ranging structural reforms .
The honourable Member can refer to the communication from the Commission to the Council of 19 August 2010 for a detailed and thorough assessment of the measures adopted in the first half of 2010 by Greece to comply with Council Decision 2010 / 320 / EC of 10 May 2010 .
This assessment mainly concludes that the budgetary execution shows positive developments over the first half of 2010 with a deficit declining faster than planned , mainly as a result of lower than expected expenditure .
Moreover , within the framework of the planned fiscal adjustment , the choice of the mix between expenditure and revenue measures made by the Greek Government takes into account important social and economic aspects , in particular , in terms of potential complementarities with a package of structural reforms and measures to improve the micro-economic environment and the functioning of the public sector .
( EL ) Commissioner , I should like to ask the European Commission the following supplementary question : as a party to the memorandum , what recommendations does it intend to make to Greece , bearing in mind that the current high level of taxation has already resulted in the closure or relocation of businesses to other , more tax-lenient , neighbouring countries and , at the same time , in a reduction in incoming investment capital , the return on capital and entrepreneurship in general .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to come back to an issue raised in my honourable friend 's question .
With the increase and the tax policy being applied by the government based on the memorandum , inflation has rocketed in Greece and is now over 6 % , the highest rate in Europe .
Mr Rehn agreed , in answer to a question , that high inflation is due to the increase in the VAT rate , in other words , to fiscal policy .
I would like to ask you if the Commission believes that these tax measures really have led to the spiralling inflation that is undermining the competitiveness of the Greek economy and what measures you are proposing to the Greek Government to address this issue .
Member of the Commission . - Actually , the questions are rather similar and here I have to emphasise that in the case of Greece , we had a huge deficit which needed to be addressed .
We all know that , in addressing the deficit , there are no miracle solutions .
The Member State has either to reduce expenditure , increase taxes or both in order to consolidate its fiscal position .
The Commission 's attitude to this is very clear : that it is the Member State which has to choose the measures to address the shortfall .
Greece chose a mixture of measures on both the expenditure side and the revenue side .
The Commission cannot dictate to the Member States what specific taxes they can increase or reduce .
It is the Member State which decides on this matter .
So far , the Greek programme is functioning well and I believe that the Greek authorities will take all necessary future measures to fix their fiscal position .
Subject : Fraud and customs losses due to cigarette smuggling
Is the Commission concerned that there is an alarming level of smuggling of illegal cigarettes into countries like Ireland from third countries ?
The effect of this is that the EU is losing out on customs revenue , which is an important source of finance , given that it makes up 15 % of the EU budget .
Member States are also losing out on excise duties .
Does the Commission have any plans to enable , or indeed force , Member States to increase their checks at external EU borders , in order to tackle the issue of customs fraud ?
Member of the Commission . - In relation to border controls , customs controls must balance the protection of a range of EU financial , safety and security interests with the interests of legitimate traders .
For this reason , a Community risk management framework was developed enabling customs controls for security and safety to be carried out on the basis of common risk criteria and standards .
In the EU , 1.5 million tonnes of sea cargo and 12 million tonnes of air cargo are checked each year .
Under Article 209 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the Member States ' customs services are responsible for the application of the EU legislation concerned .
Therefore , they are in charge of organising customs controls at physical frontiers and elsewhere on the basis of risk management techniques as specified in the EU 's Customs Code .
With regard to cigarette smuggling , the Commission plays an active role in helping Member States to tackle the phenomenon of international cigarette smuggling and to dismantle the criminal gangs responsible for this trade .
In particular , the European Anti-Fraud Office assists law enforcement authorities throughout the European Union with their operational cases and coordinates major customs and criminal investigations with the Member States and third countries .
Using the provisions of European mutual assistance in customs matters and a number of agreements concluded between the EU and third countries , OLAF organises joint customs operations between EU Member States and with third countries aimed at targeting specific problems , such as Operation Matthew II , targeting road traffic on the eastern border , or Operation Sirocco , focused on deep-sea container transports from China to the Union .
Finally , OLAF provides financial support to Member States from the Hercule II programme for measures specifically targeting cigarette smuggling , such as the purchase of specialist x-ray scanning equipment to be used at border points and the organisation of regional actions .
Moreover , cooperation agreements were signed with British American Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco Limited in 2010 , and agreements were signed with Philip Morris International and Japan Tobacco International in 2004 and 2007 respectively .
These legally binding agreements provide a comprehensive set of measures designed to limit the presence of the products of these companies on the illicit tobacco market .
I want to thank the Commissioner for his very comprehensive reply .
As he said , tobacco smuggling is a very lucrative business .
There is a lot of ingenuity , they are perfectly wrapped , perfectly presented and perfectly labelled .
Recently , I met with the head of the customs authorities in Ireland in Dublin Castle , and she told me that one in every five cigarettes - 20 % of the cigarettes smoked in Ireland , a small country - actually comes via China , and that when they actually seized them and analysed them , they found a mixture of tobacco and canine excrement .
We really need to tighten up our regulations .
I welcome international cooperation , but we still have an awful lot of work to do .
I would basically ask that OLAF , the EU anti-fraud agency , needs to be given increased resources .
Member of the Commission . - I will try to be very brief .
The answer in this case is probably not needed , but I would like to share your concerns .
Next month , I am going to China to discuss , among other issues related to customs matters , the issue of cigarette smuggling .
We are implementing a number of measures , working together with the Chinese authorities , in order to address this issue .
It is true , as you rightly pointed out , that China is still a major source of counterfeited cigarettes , so we have to work in close cooperation with them in order to tackle this issue .
I have to emphasise that the Chinese authorities are ready for this cooperation .
Subject : Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base
Can the Commission say what its current proposals are on the adoption of a common consolidated corporate tax base , indicate a proposed timeframe and outline its reasons for pursuing this policy ?
Subject : Ireland 's corporation tax rate
There is a considerable amount of speculation ongoing in international media so it would provide a welcome signal to international markets in a time of crisis that this key element of Ireland 's economic model will not be affected in any way by any proposal by the Commission .
Can the Commission outline clearly and unequivocally that the EU will not bring forward any measures that have any influence on Ireland 's corporation tax rate ?
Subject : Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB )
Can the Commission make a statement confirming that the proposed CCCTB initiative will not impact upon the ability of Member States to set their individual corporation tax rate ?
Member of the Commission . - Do you mean these three questions on the CCCTB ?
The Commission has no plans to make proposals on corporate tax rates .
Differences in rates allow a certain degree of tax competition to be maintained in the internal market .
In addition , fair tax competition based on rates offers more transparency and allows Member States to consider both their market competitiveness and budgetary needs in fixing their tax rates .
In relation to the issue of corporate tax bases , conversely , the Commission has been working for some time on a proposal for a common consolidated corporate tax base .
This initiative is included in the Commission work programme for 2011 as a strategic initiative to tap the potential of the single market for growth .
It is also quoted as a key proposal in the Single Market Act , which was adopted on 27 October 2010 .
Currently , the Commission 's plan is to adopt a proposal by the end of the first quarter of 2011 .
The CCCTB is a common system of rules for calculating the tax base of companies ; it has no bearing on tax rates .
Member States will continue to decide their own corporate tax rates .
The Commission believes that progressing with the CCCTB is the appropriate solution to tackling cross-border fiscal impediments to growth in a comprehensive manner .
Currently , the existence of 27 highly disparate corporate tax systems in the EU means that companies are faced with significant tax obstacles and an administrative burden which discourage , if not impede , their activities in the single market and negatively affect their competitiveness , in particular , in the case of SMEs .
Such a highly fragmented landscape gives rise to significant market distortions and barriers and creates considerable compliance costs .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I understand perfectly what he says about the difference between tax rates and tax bases , but one of the issues for companies - particularly for foreign direct investment coming into Europe - is the ability for those companies to know in advance , with certainty , the tax implications of a transaction .
If part of that calculation is sales by destination , that cannot be determined beforehand , so there is real uncertainty for those companies .
I think that acts as a disincentive for foreign direct investment .
I have many other questions but I know we are tight on time so , if the Commissioner could answer that one , I would be happy .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his comprehensive response but also ask him if he could acknowledge that the Lisbon Treaty includes a detailed protocol with respect to taxation and a Member State 's right to veto tax proposals .
Member of the Commission . - We can disagree on certain principles of taxation , which is always a rather sensitive matter .
The biggest support for the CCCTB comes from businesses ; we have clear evidence of this .
I understand this because , when dealing with 27 different Member States with 27 different corporate tax systems , it is really a mess for them .
Concerning foreign direct investment , if we are able to agree on this proposal , we have to do so unanimously .
If we are able to agree , this will facilitate foreign direct investment because foreign investors who want to invest , not in one Member State but in several , will be able to deal with one corporate tax system instead of several corporate tax systems , and that is a big advantage for foreign investors .
Throughout bilateral discussions with potential investors , they really emphasise the issue of 27 corporate tax systems as an impediment to facilitating foreign direct investment .
Finally , when we are talking about the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base , we are not talking about tax rates .
It is clear that this has nothing to do with the sovereignty of Member States in deciding tax matters because , even within the CCCTB environment , they will be able to decide on corporate tax rates , based on their needs , their social systems , public services and so on .
So the proposal itself does not reduce the sovereignty of Member States in tax matters .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 35 and resumed at 21 : 00 )

Measures to be taken to free Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo ( debate )
The next item is the statements on measures to be taken to free Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo .
Madam President , honourable Members - if I have understood correctly this time - it is on behalf of Lady Ashton , our High Representative , that I have the honour of taking the floor before you .
The European Union continues to monitor on a daily basis , through its delegation in Beijing and its bilateral embassies , the situation with respect to Mr Liu Xiaobo , Nobel Peace Prize winner , his wife Liu Xia , as well as their friends and lawyers .
Their situation is receiving our constant attention .
The house arrest that Mrs Liu Xia and many human rights activists in China have been under since 8 October worries us as much as it disappoints us , and we condemn it .
As you know , the European Union has not waited for Mr Liu Xiaobo to receive this prestigious award to remind the Chinese Government of its international commitments regarding respect for freedom of expression .
In this particular case , the European Union has always considered that Charter 08 was a peaceful manifesto , calling for more respect for human rights in China .
What is more , the Union has published four public declarations since December 2008 , calling for Liu Xiaobo to be released .
Our position could not be any different when the Nobel Committee announced on 8 October , entirely independently need I point out , its decision .
We have congratulated Liu Xiaobo via the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs , Lady Ashton , and via the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Barroso , and we have stressed how important his release is to us .
We regret that the Chinese authorities have not heeded the calls that the international community has been eager to amplify .
It is regrettable that the European Union should take note , once again and with concern , of the intimidation and house arrest that Mr Liu Xiaobo 's wife , Mrs Liu Xia , has been subjected to for the last six weeks .
We deplore just as vigorously the threats , surveillance and ban on leaving the country , as well as the arrests that many of Liu Xiaobo 's relatives and friends have been subjected to since he was awarded the Nobel Prize .
Madam President , the European Union will continue with consistency and determination the efforts that it has undertaken for nearly two years now to see Liu Xiaobo freed so that he can exercise his rights in full and take part , as he would like to , in the public debate that he initiated in China with Charter 08 .
We carry on hoping that he will be able to collect the Nobel Peace Prize in person on 10 December .
We call on China to remove the restrictions on freedom of movement and of expression to which his wife Liu Xia and many of his friends are subjected .
Madam President , Minister , honourable Members , the Commission fully supports the Belgian Presidency 's statement .
The European Union has repeatedly maintained that it considers Charter 08 to be a legitimate exercise of freedom of expression and , as the Presidency has just noted , the European Union has reiterated several times the serious concerns it has about Liu Xiaobo 's arrest , trial and imprisonment .
Both President Barroso and the Vice-President of the Commission and EU High Representative , Cathy Ashton , have welcomed the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo on 8 October .
However , the Commission regrets the fact that the Chinese authorities have reacted by putting his wife , Mrs Liu Xia , under house arrest , and by restricting freedom of movement for many of his friends .
The Commission reiterates its call on China to release Liu Xiaobo immediately from prison and to lift his wife 's house arrest order , as well as to remove all restrictions on his friends ' freedom of movement .
The Commission , as mentioned by the Vice-President of the Commission and EU High Representative , Cathy Ashton , in her statement , hopes that Liu Xiaobo will be able to collect the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize in person , in Oslo .
Madam President , ten months ago in this House , I was saying that the 11-year prison sentence given to Liu Xiaobo by the Chinese Government simply for expressing his views was symptomatic of the Chinese authorities stepping up their campaign against human rights activists .
At this very moment , I believe that awarding the Nobel Prize to Liu Xiaobo is an appropriate act to emphasise that , although China has made great progress in economic and sometimes in social matters , the real sign of progress is respect for human rights .
A country can be admired for its economic achievements . However , it will not gain the respect of other countries if it restricts freedom instead of protecting it .
Indeed , I find the actions taken by the Chinese Government in an attempt to intimidate the countries invited to attend the ceremony extremely worrying .
It is just as worrying that some countries have given in to this blackmail .
We are dealing with an unacceptable situation because a country is taking a stance in its international relations against one of its own citizens .
In fact , China would gain , as I was saying , the respect of the other countries if it allowed Liu Xiaobo now to go to Oslo to receive his prize instead of making these threats against other countries .
However , the Chinese authorities ' attitude seems , for the time being , to be much more hard line than that of the Soviets because not even a member of Liu Xiaobo 's family or his lawyer is able to get to Oslo .
This is why I welcome the initiative proposed by Lech Wałęsa to represent the Chinese dissident symbolically in Oslo .
However , I hope that the Chinese authorities will decide at the last moment to release Liu Xiaobo .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , tonight , we in the Socialist and Democrat Group give our full support to this European Parliament demand that Liu Xiaobo is allowed to go to Oslo , and does not earn a different prize as the first laureate or laureate 's representative in its one hundred year history to be unable to be present to receive the Nobel Peace Prize .
Arrested for taking part in demonstrations , banned from teaching , sent for re-education and now imprisoned for seeking to exercise freedom of expression , the Chinese called Liu Xiaobo a criminal whilst the rest of the world awards him the accolade for peace .
I went to China personally on behalf of this House and saw that there are people ready to enter into dialogue with us on issues of labour rights and corporate social responsibility .
But the fact remains that , when this Parliament 's Human Rights Subcommittee sought visas from China , no reply was ever given ; and when the EU pressed for a meeting of our human rights dialogue with China , the Chinese deliberately offered a date between Christmas this year and the New Year .
It now looks almost certain that there will not be a meeting under this Presidency .
This is not serious .
All who wish to express solidarity tonight with Liu , his wife Liu Xia and all prisoners of conscience in China , should recognise that the rest of the world has too often put trade interests with China before our mutual obligations on human rights .
This is exemplified by British Prime Minister David Cameron , who this month took a 48-strong trade delegation to Beijing but failed to include anyone to represent an interest or expertise in poverty reduction , environmental degradation or labour rights .
The truth is that five socially conscious individuals who make up the awards committee in Norway have arguably done more than this European Union , the US or the rest of the international community to put pressure on the Chinese Government to reform .
Let us remember that Andrei Sakharov , Lech Wałęsa and Nelson Mandela were all Nobel laureates who once lived in repressive countries which were ultimately transformed , and tonight express our hope that Liu Xiaobo may join this list not simply in the China of today but in a China where human rights are fully respected one day in the future .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , this debate in a sense catalyses several years of effort by many Members who are present here , and others , to try and focus attention on the real China .
The sense of unity being displayed by Council and Commission , and by the diplomatic representatives in Oslo , concerning the ceremony which may take place on 10 December , is encouraging .
Of course we hope that Liu Xiaobo will be present , but it is unlikely .
What we have seen in the last few weeks , in diplomatic terms , is a car crash organised by Beijing .
It is one of the most disastrous , cack-handed episodes in the history of diplomacy .
But at the heart of this lies the clash between the free world and what remains a dictatorship .
On my last visit to Beijing , all the people with whom I had contact were subsequently arrested , imprisoned and , in some cases , tortured .
There are between seven and eight million people imprisoned across China , there are at least 5 000 executions a year .
I have seen a list of more than 3 400 people who , in the last 10 years , have died under torture in that regime for their religious convictions .
In sum , this is a terror state .
We want to congratulate the Nobel Peace Prize Committee for its courage in making this award .
I hope that in Oslo , on 10 December , should the ceremony take place , we have the most muscular presence on behalf of the European Union , standing by its foreign policy priorities of human rights and democracy .
The world 's most populous country deserves what we enjoy in Europe .
Madam President , Liu Xiaobo has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and we are very pleased about this because it is a demonstration of the universality of human rights , which lies at the heart of our political self-understanding .
We were also happy to see that our pleasure was shared by many countries throughout the world and also by many people in China .
The Chinese Government has responded harshly to the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize .
It has reacted excessively harshly , both internally and externally .
I believe that this is regrettable .
It does not seem to me to be a good idea to acknowledge this negative response , if I can express it like this , by caricaturing China 's current position .
With all due respect , I must make it clear , although I agree with the previous speaker about supporting the call for the release of Liu Xiaobo , that I think it is not only wrong , but also harmful to describe the China of today as a terrorist state .
In my opinion , this is not true , nor does it help the positive relationship which it is important for us to have with China .
China will have to accept that we support universal human rights , because we will continue to do so .
However , we must not confuse this with a strategy of confrontation .
No one would benefit from this , least of all the supporters of human rights within China .
I have already said and , in summing up , I will say again that China has reacted excessively harshly to the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize .
It is attempting to exert diplomatic pressure on other countries not to attend the ceremony in Oslo .
That is simply unacceptable .
Parliament will not accept this and , therefore , I am pleased that the President has already agreed that the European Parliament will be represented in Oslo .
Madam President , I come from a country which , only 20 years ago , was ruled by a Communist dictatorship .
I had the misfortune to live in that system and I know what the situation is like in such a country .
Indeed , I remember how important the voice of what , at the time , we called ' the free world ' was for us then .
I mean the voice coming from here - from Western Europe and the United States .
I remember how , at the time , it created the feeling that what we were doing there - fighting for liberty and democracy - made sense .
I think that , today , we are under an obligation to help people such as Liu Xiaobo .
Besides , he consciously makes reference to the experience of democracy and of those who fought for democracy in Central Europe .
The name Charter 08 is , after all , a conscious reference to Charter 77 .
I think that all of us here may differ in our economic or political views , but on questions of human rights we should be completely united .
I hope that in this House we will be just that .
Madam President , following the release of Aung San Suu Kyi , Liu Xiaobo is now the only Nobel laureate who is incarcerated , in prison .
From the speeches that we have already heard from the Council and here in Parliament , all of us here hope that he will be able to receive this Nobel Prize in freedom , or that he will be freed as soon as possible .
That would honour the person that he is : committed to the peaceful transformation of China ; a literary critic , teacher and author , who has always sought to bring freedom of expression and democracy to China through the world of ideas and words .
The document Charter 08 , for which Liu Xiaobo was imprisoned , is , as Mr Chastel has already reminded us , a constructive and peaceful one , which caused Liu Xiaobo to be incarcerated .
We know what we have to do now : work towards the release of Liu Xiaobo and all China 's political prisoners .
We must also work towards the release of Liu Xia , Liu Xiaobo 's wife , who is under house arrest , and bring an end to the siege of their family , friends and lawyers .
For this to be achieved , China will have to ask itself why , for example , it responded to the recent release of Aung San Suu Kyi by calling her an important political figure , even though it does not recognise that many people across the world believe that Liu Xiaobo , too , is an important political figure .
However , above all , China needs to realise what a sad , awful figure it cut with its bitter worldwide diplomatic offensive to prevent the world 's high diplomatic representatives being present in Oslo for the Nobel Prize ceremony .
Clearly , the people who run China can want to live in a fantasy world , and we understand why it is that they want to live in a fantasy world , where there is no opposition .
What they cannot do is want to force us to live according to the rules of that fantasy world .
That , I believe , is fundamentally our main issue .
It is very easy for us in this Chamber to bring our indignation before the Chinese authorities and put all our complaints to them , but I think that first , we should look at the European authorities and start with our own governments .
When my country , Portugal , was receiving a visit from high Chinese dignitaries recently , the government steered a demonstration by Amnesty International away from the place that the entourage was going to pass through to somewhere a few hundred metres away ; the same thing happened in France , where a demonstration was moved to the Eiffel Tower .
Moreover , as we have already seen , David Cameron recently travelled to China , very interested in doing business with the country , but forgetting to make a single forceful reference to human rights .
We know that there are double standards here in Europe .
We say a few passing words about Liu Xiaobo , but our governments are interested in doing business .
We must therefore start the housecleaning here .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , it is hard for us to imagine the sheer physical and moral courage required by Mr Liu to stand up against the murderous tyranny of the Chinese Communist Party .
Those of us who enjoy the most basic freedoms of free speech and free assembly and democratic politics have a duty to speak out on behalf of Mr Liu and those like him .
Mr Liu wants nothing more for China than those basic freedoms and civil rights that we take for granted .
The values that he espouses are the best hope for freedom , peace and democracy for China and the world and it is fitting that he has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of his efforts and his sacrifices .
He wants nothing more than democratic reforms and the end of one-party Communist rule in China .
It should surprise no one that the Chinese Communist Party prevents him or his family representative from collecting the award .
The Chinese Communist Party is a party of murderous gangsters that has no more purpose than the continuation of its own existence .
China is a big and powerful country and it is inevitable that our governments must maintain political , diplomatic and trading relations with them .
The Chinese Communist Party warns foreign governments not to attend the ceremony .
Our governments should send representatives and show their and our support for Mr Liu and the Chinese democracy movement as a whole .
I represent many Chinese exiles in London and I am pleased to offer what small support I can by speaking out on behalf of Mr Liu and their democratic aspirations .
( PL ) Madam President , it is very good indeed that Parliament and the Commission have decided that the situation of Liu Xiaobo should be discussed at a plenary sitting of the European Parliament .
It is a pity there are so few of us here for such a debate .
After all , the international community , of which we are one of the most important members , should be united in such situations and should support the fight for respect for human rights together , because solidarity is the key word in this debate .
In 1989 , when my country finally defeated the communist dictatorship , Liu Xiaobo was protesting in Tiananmen Square , demanding exactly the democratic freedoms which were shortly to be enjoyed by almost the whole of Europe .
He has not given up his efforts - despite having spent years in prison , he signed an appeal for democratisation of the country , for which he was sentenced to a further 11 years ' imprisonment .
Just like Liu , our leader , Lech Wałęsa , strove for a bloodless transition and for freedom .
We enjoyed the support of democratic countries .
Wałęsa , too , was not able to receive his Nobel Peace Prize in person , but even so , that prize was the hope of liberty to us Poles .
That Nobel Prize became a catalyst of change .
Today is a good time to draw the attention of world opinion to people just such as Liu Xiaobo .
We must not forget that apart from such leading figures as himself , there are many others who are not being spoken about , for example , the human rights activist , Mao Hengfeng , who is currently in a re-education / labour camp precisely for protesting against the imprisonment of Liu Xiaobo .
The European Union should attach the highest importance to human rights in contacts with China .
This should be a priority for meetings such as the European Union-China summit which was held on 6 October .
I want to express my disappointment at the omission of this fundamental matter .
We must show we are not blind to human rights , and an opportunity to do this will be the award ceremony for the Nobel Prize in Oslo , at which , I hope , the whole world and all ambassadors will be present .
( PT ) Madam President , the Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo has been a consistent and courageous human rights defender since the time of the Tiananmen Square massacre .
Parliament therefore joins Baroness Ashton and the Commission in demanding that he be freed immediately so he can go to Oslo in December to receive the Nobel Prize , and demands freedom of movement for his wife , family and friends , who have been especially restricted since the announcement of the Nobel Prize on 8 October .
The Chinese authorities ' threats and intimidating manoeuvres to prevent the ceremony in Oslo are a disgrace .
No government that succumbed to this despicable blackmail would be worthy of respect .
China is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and , according to the UN Charter , it has special responsibilities to respect and promote respect for human rights domestically and abroad .
China has already done much for some of the economic , social and cultural rights of millions of Chinese , whom it has dragged out of poverty and penury , but it cannot stop there .
It must respect and promote respect for the civil and political rights of its citizens : if it does not , its own development will eventually be hindered .
Liu Xiaobo is not a criminal : he is a brave and committed citizen who brings prestige across the world to China and the Chinese people , and of whom the Chinese people should only be proud .
Beijing must free Liu Xiaobo , his wife and his friends ; it must free the Sakharov laureate , Hu Jia , and all the other brave Chinese citizens who dare to fight for democracy , for freedom and for their most basic rights .
If they are not freed , it is China that will lose prestige .
It is the Chinese regime that has shown itself incapable of turning its country into a respectable and influential power on the international stage .
We will not stop clamouring for the release of Liu Xiaobo and of all those who are struggling for freedom in China .
Madam President , awarding the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo is testimony to the personal cost of human rights advocacy in China today .
It is imperative that he and all other human rights defenders in China be released immediately .
There are other cases pending .
I remain painfully aware of the situation of Dhondup Wangchen , the Tibetan film maker , who suffers from hepatitis B and is in need of urgent medical attention in prison .
The decision to award the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo must be considered as strong support for the struggle for freedom of expression in China .
It also serves , however , as a reminder to the international community of the need for reform in China .
Even Chinese premier , Wen Jiabao , has warned that China may lose what it has already achieved through economic restructuring if there is no consequent political restructuring - and , colleagues , he was censured by the Chinese media .
Delaying such reform has a terrible human cost .
In addition , pressuring countries to stay away from the Peace Prize ceremony shows that China has not yet matured into an international actor .
China is a superpower and it should start acting like one responsibly .
I am very humbled to say that I have been invited to the ceremony as one of the 50 persons who are going to represent Liu Xiaobo at that ceremony .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Alfred Nobel , founder of the peace prize , wrote in his will that human rights are a pre-requisite for brotherhood between nations and that a prize of this magnitude should be awarded to someone who had struggled and made sacrifices in the name of freedom , democracy and human rights .
Liu Xiaobo , the Chinese dissident who won the Nobel Peace Prize , has been a great defender of the application of these values during his lifetime .
During the course of his long and non-violent battle , he has always stressed how all these rights are constantly violated in China by violent repressive methods .
He has had first-hand experience of being sentenced to forced imprisonment without the chance of a fair trial or of communicating with the outside world .
For this very reason , we must do all we can as European institutions to secure his freedom .
Rights first and then economic and trade relations , otherwise we Europeans must consider ourselves beaten as well .
( DE ) Madam President , the relationship between the European Union and China is not always a simple one .
Above all , this is due to the fact that we have a different understanding of the importance of human rights , freedom and free speech .
The European Union has taken the responsibility for promoting these values throughout the world and , therefore , for supporting human rights defenders in other states , such as Liu Xiaobo in China , so that they can bring about changes in the situation in their own countries .
For this reason , I believe that it is very important that Parliament , but also the Council and the Commission , clearly commit to attending the award ceremony for the Nobel Peace Prize .
Heidi Hautala will be taking part as an individual , but I hope very much that the European governments , the Council , the Belgian Presidency and the Commission will be represented at the highest level .
This is the only way that we can make it clear that our arguments are rational and that our call for respect for human rights throughout the world is a credible one .
Madam President , honourable Members , by way of conclusion to this important debate and to answer the questions that a number of Members have , I would like to say two things .
Firstly , the European Union will , of course , be present as a whole , as it has been every year , with at least the same presence as last year - like all the Union 's diplomatic delegations - at the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Mr Liu Xiaobo in Oslo on 10 December .
That was the first thing I wanted to share with you today .
Secondly , the European Union has been holding a regular dialogue on the issue of human rights with China for 15 years , and although there is always more one could do in this respect , we attach great importance to this task , which seems to us more pertinent than ever at a time when people are speaking out in China and are calling for the scope of human rights to be broadened .
Inspired by mutual respect and a deep understanding of the Chinese political context , we will continue to raise the universal issues of human rights , in particular , the case of Mr Liu Xiaobo , Nobel Peace Prize winner , with the Chinese authorities .
The debate is closed .
CAP simplification ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on CAP simplification by James Nicholson , Janusz Wojciechowski , on behalf of the ECR Group , Albert Deß , on behalf of the PPE Group , and George Lyon , on behalf of the ALDE Group - B7-0566 / 2010 ) .

Madam President , Mr Cioloş , I am pleased that you are here today to answer questions .
On 18 May , the European Parliament adopted with a large majority a resolution to simplify the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
Of course , it has not been possible for you to implement this resolution yet , but I would like to ask you , Mr Cioloş , to take into consideration all the demands made in this motion for a resolution when you begin restructuring agricultural policy .
Unfortunately , I have to point out one fly in the ointment .
I have just had a discussion with a group of farmers who were concerned that your proposals for the first pillar , Mr Cioloş , would not reduce the amount of red tape , but could instead lead to a huge increase in bureaucracy .
The European Union cannot be held responsible for every piece of red tape , Mr Cioloş .
A large proportion of the responsibility lies with the Member States .
This is why I am asking you to ensure that we can work together on the forthcoming reform so that it is structured in such a way that it can be implemented with as little administrative and supervisory effort as possible .
This will allow farmers to focus on their main job , in other words , producing food , rather than requiring them to check the current legislation to find out what they need to be aware of before they do anything out in their fields or their barns .
In no other agricultural area in the world are farmers burdened with so many requirements and regulations as in the European Union .
You are not yet responsible for this , Mr Cioloş .
You have the chance to be the first Commissioner - before you eventually step down , and I do not know when that will happen - who can say that during his period of office , the amount of bureaucracy has been reduced rather than increased .
As the rapporteur for agricultural reform , I would like to offer you the opportunity to work together with us to find a solution , so that this goal can be achieved .
author . - Madam President , Commissioner , it is good to see you here with us to tonight .
Clearly , simplification and stripping out the bureaucracy from the CAP is a key objective of the next reform , because certainly back in Scotland , many farmers are frustrated and angry about the bureaucracy and the disproportionate nature of the penalty system .
Public money has to be spent wisely and properly audited , and we do not dispute that whatsoever , but there is a lack of proportionality in the current penalty system both at Member State level and at farmer level as well .
That is something that needs to be addressed in the reform .
In Scotland , farmers are currently being punished for small mistakes with very , very large fines in some instances .
Since May , the inspections have been ramped up and swingeing penalties are being handed out .
The Scottish Government , I am afraid , blame you , Commissioner , for that particular measure - for the ramping up of the inspections and the penalty systems .
Another explanation , however , might be that the European Commission auditors were due to come and inspect Scotland both in October and last week in November .
It may well be that the Scottish Government were panicking slightly and that the huge fines and draconian penalties that have been put in place in the last three or four months are the response to worries that all might not be well when the auditors arrived in Scotland and carried out their inspection .
They have also looked across the water to our colleagues in Northern Ireland - I am sure my colleague , Jim Nicholson , might say one or two words about that - and looked at the fate of the government there which is facing a huge fine for the misinterpretation of eligible lands .
That may well lie behind the measures taken in Scotland .
Commissioner , in your wind-up speech , can you clarify if it is indeed you that is behind and is responsible for the new draconian regime in Scotland , and can you confirm when we will know the outcome of the auditors ' inspections that have taken place in October and November of this year ?
author . - Madam President , I would like to apologise , because it is not normal that I do not turn up when I am supposed to speak .
I apologise most profusely for that .
The House will be aware that my colleague Mr Ashworth 's report on simplification of the CAP was adopted in this House last May .
It advocated the removal of unnecessary red tape and bureaucracy imposed upon European farmers which , in my opinion , has become over-burdensome and seriously impinges upon the time that they would rather spend actually farming .
One central feature of this report was that a reformed CAP should be simplified and the policy streamlined .
I fear , however , that what we are getting is not that .
We are going to get more bureaucracy , more red tape - and when you talk about greening the first pillar , what do you mean ?
You mean more bureaucracy and red tape ; more paperwork for the farmer and more inspections , which is what they do not want .
We want one inspection of every farm ; that should be enough anywhere to inspect .
I have to say to the Commissioner : you have enough tools in the box at the moment with cross-compliance ; we do not need more .
We do not need any more over-emphasis on this particular position .
I am appealing to you on behalf of the people who are trying to produce the food .
We talk about food security in Europe ; if you want food security , we are giving it to you - we are giving you food safety .
Let the farmers produce the food .
Can I comment on what Mr Lyon just said ?
My farmers in Northern Ireland are facing a reduction of EUR 60 million because of mapping .
No one would argue that the maps that were created many years ago are totally perfect .
But no one will tell me that , south of the border from me in the Republic of Ireland , the maps are any better , or that they are any better in Italy - maps that were created years ago .
Why are we having this ?
Why are we having these draconian measures placed upon our farmers when they do not need it or want it , and when all they want to do is produce good food ?

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me firstly to provide answers to your written question regarding the simplification of the common agricultural policy , an important subject , as I have repeatedly said since I became Commissioner , and which we will take into consideration for future legislation .
I would like to start with the first part of your question : what has the Commission done until now to make things easier for farmers ?
I think that if we look at what has been done these last few years , the answer is clear : it has already done a lot to make things easier , and it has already put in place many measures to make things easier for farmers .
In March 2009 , the Commission presented the communication ' A simplified CAP for Europe - a success for all ' .
This communication highlights the activities that have taken place over the last few years and provides information on the reduced administrative burden obtained .
I do not wish to repeat every element from this communication , but I would like to expand on a few examples .
First of all , the adoption in 2007 of the Council regulation establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets has led to a substantial reduction in red tape in the application framework of the European legislation on the CAP .
Because of its technical features , this single common market organisation did not intend to change the underlying policy but to harmonise the provisions , thus making CAP rules simpler to manage , lighter , more accessible and less difficult to apply .
Simplification was also one of the main reasons that motivated the Commission 's ' health check ' proposals .
The regulation adopted in 2009 simplifies the provisions of the single payment system , thereby improving the effectiveness of the 2003 CAP reform .
Furthermore , to illustrate the progress accomplished in the farming sector , I would also like to mention the action programme to reduce the administrative burden in the European Union .
In the context of this programme , several assessments have been conducted .
The outcome of these assessments shows that the administrative burden in the farming sector has been cut by 36 % , which is much more than the programme 's general target of 25 % .
Last year , my predecessor presented the first response from the Commission services to the list of 39 simplification suggestions that had been proposed by 13 Member States in April 2009 .
Some of the 39 suggestions were implemented at the end of 2009 and the beginning of 2010 .
Others can be found in the ' simplification ' package that has just been adopted by the Commission with reference to direct payments and rural development , and regulations were presented to the Council and to Parliament .
As for the second pillar , the Commission has launched a study on the administrative burden that stems from implementing rural development programmes for beneficiaries .
The study concentrated on two categories of measures : agro-environmental and farm modernisation .
The results of this study will be used in our reflection on the CAP for the period after 2013 .
To end on this first point , I would also like to inform you that the programme is ongoing , and that it includes time spent on a farm for staff of the Directorate General for Agriculture and Rural Development .
This programme , also called ' Harvest experience ' , helps us to have direct contact with what is really happening on the ground and to use that experience in the decisions we prepare .
Now to the second part of your question : how will the Commission take into account Parliament 's suggestions in its work on the post-2013 CAP ?
Here , too , I can assure you that these questions are of concern to me and that we are going to take into account all the analyses that we have already conducted with a view to simplification , but also the proposals that we will be making , which do not move in the direction of more red tape but rather in the direction of more assurance for the taxpayer that the money is well used .
On this point too , I am open to any technical proposal that you wish to make .
In early December , I will go before your fellow Members from the Committee on Budgetary Control , which is also asking what the Commission is doing to ensure that public money is well spent .
The Commission , in this case , can only apply regulations that have been adopted by the Council , often after considering Parliament 's opinion .
It is not the Commission that is adding administrative tasks .
The Commission only applies existing Council regulations .
On that , I can assure you that in future , we will not be making proposals that complicate things unnecessarily ; on the contrary , we will be making proposals that make the CAP more credible in content .
As for farmers , their main role is , as I have already said , agricultural production ; they are the ones who work with these natural resources and it is also because of this activity that a portion of CAP funding is allocated to that policy .
With regard to what we plan to do after 2013 , I would like to inform you that in parallel to preparing the legislative package for the CAP after 2013 , I decided to create a high-level technical group with the Commission and Member States in order to ensure that this legislative package will not produce more red tape , but instead will simplify things wherever possible .
As Mr Lyon said , often the red tape encountered by the farmer on the ground does not only come from the Commission .
You know that management is shared with Member States and we often have applications that are different from one Member State to the other , precisely because of the national administrations .
As far as these are concerned , it is not up to the Commission to simplify .
As I have already said , the Commission has already simplified things .
There is still the need to simplify at Member State level .
To answer Mr Lyon 's question regarding Scotland , here too , the Commission is only complying with the regulations that stipulate that for those farmers who do not adhere to the cross-compliance standards , penalties should apply not only in Scotland , but also in Northern Ireland and elsewhere in Europe .
Once again , this is a rule that , if we do not comply with it , discredits us in respect of the commitments that farmers make to adhere to European legislation , since cross-compliance is not a standard added by the Commission , by a Member State or by any other body , but stems from European legislation which is reflected in these regulations .
Governments will receive more details by early December , when the Commission is to present the findings of its audits .
Madam President , Commissioner , you have a good command of the French language and you know my country well .
In France , there is an expression that describes something one dreams of but which never materialises , we talk about the Arlésienne .
For farmers , simplification is undoubtedly one of the forms , one of the faces of the Arlésienne .
As you have said , the Commission has already taken action to try and simplify procedures and I would like to go into a bit more detail .
To my mind , there are two aspects to this issue .
Firstly , there is everything to do with the requests for aid .
I think it should be recognised that there has been an effort to simplify the paperwork during these last few years and months , and we give you credit for that .
Secondly , there are the restrictions relating to all the conditions , the never-ending reporting requested from farmers for everything they do : taking a trailer full of manure to a field , using a dose of fertiliser in another field , using a dose of plant protection product in a third field , and if they make a mistake , they are sanctioned .
Faced with this situation , Commissioner , I believe that we certainly need to find solutions .
Last week , while presenting the proposal for the future common agricultural policy , you mentioned a few integrative measures that could be implemented and that could , in fact , lead , through the outcome produced by these measures , to measures that can be controlled by opinion , by farmers as well as by the Commission , measures for which we can be sure of the scientific effect .
I have in mind the example of crop rotation .
These measures should enable us to simplify the obligations imposed on farmers .
This represents a considerable amount of work for the future .
Furthermore , today as you did last week , you mentioned what is incumbent on Member States and I think you are right .
Every year , the Commission controllers visit Member States before visiting the farmers .
They go there with a critical eye to find what is not right .
Yet could we not change their mission slightly , Commissioner , and ask them to also list - this would be beneficial to the Member States - areas where the Member States are going too far in applying EU legislation ?
Going too far is to impose on farmers obligations which are pointless in relation to the regulations .
By doing so , you would have improved Europe 's image among our fellow citizens .
Madam President , Commissioner , the simplification of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is a goal that we have all been proclaiming for years .
However , it is still a very long way from being fully achieved , despite the efforts that the Commission has been making , which must be acknowledged .
Nevertheless , I should like to make it very clear that , for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , simplification cannot , in any sense , be understood as clearing the way for corner cutting , or for reduced stringency in the control or monitoring of public aid .
No pretext may be invoked to get around this crucial requirement of transparency .
With the start of new discussions on the post-2013 CAP , we now have an excellent opportunity to achieve this goal .
Nonetheless , there will not be significant progress on simplification without simplifying the CAP architecture itself and it is about this that the S & D Group has been expressing its opinions .
In April , we published a document advocating the reorganisation of the two pillars and we note with satisfaction that the Commission has accepted some of our suggestions along these lines .
I do not understand how it is possible for aid which is not linked to production , and which is subject to similar criteria of an essentially environmental nature - such as direct payments , agro-environmental measures or compensation payments for disadvantaged regions - to be subject to different bureaucratic treatment and controls , and not be included in a single , unified system .
I also find it very hard to understand how many of those who talk about simplification are the very ones who are most resistant to changing the current CAP architecture .
Therefore , Commissioner , I look forward to the work you are about to do , as well as the production of the guidance document that you have just presented to us .
I would also take this opportunity to express my hope that all those who want true simplification demonstrate it by taking part in the discussion that we are about to start on the future of the CAP .

Madam President , Mr Cioloş , ladies and gentlemen , one of our top priorities as Members of the European Parliament is to reduce bureaucracy and simplify legislation and regulations in all the political areas of the European Union .
This is the only way in which we can manage taxpayers ' money efficiently and increase the acceptance of our political decisions among the citizens of Europe .
For this reason , it is important for farmers to feel the direct effect of simplification measures of this kind in the agricultural sector .
Their job is to produce food , not to write books .
At a time when local authority budgets are becoming increasingly tight , it is also important for us to reduce the amount of work to be done by their administrative staff .
Regulations must be drawn up in such a way that they are not padded out unnecessarily .
In addition , we must ensure that the sanctions we impose are in proportion to the breach of regulations .
An efficient , long-term policy is characterised by the fact that it places a greater emphasis on advice than it does on punishment .
This is the only way that we can give our citizens and our farmers the incentives to implement new findings and to fulfil society 's requirements .
We need to take all of this into account when we discuss the future common agricultural policy .
We also need to focus more closely on ensuring that there is no duplication of formalities and controls and that forms are only filled out when they provide real added value for the administrative bodies and for the farmers themselves .
We must finally learn to work together and not against one another .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of the Green / EFA Group , I congratulate the Commissioner for coming here this evening and I congratulate colleagues , and Mr Ashworth in particular , for the original resolution which has spurred tonight 's discussion .
Commissioner , I would refer you in particular to paragraphs 52 and 53 of the original resolution on transparency of penalties .
I think that domestic mischief-making aside , we do have a difficulty across Scotland , and across the EU as a whole , in how our farmers perceive the transparency of enforcement , particularly of cross-compliance .
I think that going forward , we need a far greater degree of clarity in terms of what is required and expected of farmers and what the consequences of non-compliance are .
Going forward as well , we also need to see a greater degree of understanding , a greater degree of flexibility .
Much as I appreciate that you have to deal with the regulations as they are written , we are here to rewrite the regulations - and that is what we are looking forward to doing .
There is a world of difference between accident and fraud and presently , as things are implied , farmers are treated more or less the same way in either case , when there is a world of difference in the real world as to how that works .
On paragraph 66 , in particular , going forward , I would be very grateful for an indication from you , Commissioner , of how you view the call from us for a three-year moratorium on EID - electronic identification of sheep - cross-compliance penalties .
We in Scotland are trying to make the technology work , but it is very far from perfect and it would just rub an awful lot of salt into an existing wound to see a non-proportionate approach taken in the cross-compliance of the EID regulations .
We are trying to make it work and we have heard you will flexible .
I would be grateful for a reassurance tonight that that will be the case .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I wrote the original report .
In that report , I talked about the challenges confronting agriculture and highlighted the ways in which the common agricultural policy is going to have to change in order to meet those challenges .
In the report , I drew attention to the fact that many sectors of farming , and the livestock sector in particular , are experiencing real financial hardship at this time , and there is now an urgent need to lower the burden , both in terms of time and cost , imposed on farmers by unnecessary and disproportionate regulation from the common agricultural policy .
I gave many examples of cases where regulation and penalties are disproportionate - even unfair in many cases .
I talked of the need for impact assessments , of the need for more harmonisation of inspection standards , and I suggested that there is no reason why self-regulation could not be successfully used in agriculture .
Above all , I call for a change in the common agricultural policy culture .
Of course I understand the need for financial integrity , but the Court of Auditors made it perfectly clear that over-complication has very often been the cause of the problem , and likewise I certainly understand that management and interpretation of regulations varies far too much from one nation to another .
Since writing the report , I have been heartened to notice that a number of national governments , as well as leading agricultural organisations , have called for simplification of the common agricultural policy .
Surely , Commissioner , now that we are negotiating common agricultural policy reform , there has never been a better time to prove that we can help the industry and not hinder it with unnecessary red tape and unnecessary costs .
Whilst I understand perfectly the advances you have made and I am grateful for that , I am dismayed that this is not being communicated at the farm gate back in the country where I come from .
Madam President , in May , at the time of the vote in this House on the resolution on simplifying the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , we pointed out that this simplification must not result in either less aid for farmers or in the abolition of the means of organising the markets .
I recall that the resolution that we adopted itself also gave this warning .
Six months have passed since the resolution was adopted and serious reasons for concern remain , which the recent Commission communication has only served to exacerbate .
The so-called traditional means of organising the markets , such as public intervention and others , neither should nor could be abolished on the pretext of alleged rationalisation and simplification , as to do so would continue and intensify the destruction of small and medium-sized agriculture that is under way in many countries .
There is certainly much to do regarding the simplification of the CAP , much of which is positive and even necessary .
I am referring , amongst many other possibilities , to the need to amend the penalties , not least when these relate to infringements which are not the farmer 's fault , to simplifying the application process , and to changes in animal identification .
However , above and beyond simplification that would benefit all farmers , and small and medium-sized producers particularly , a profound shake-up of the CAP is also needed that reinforces intervention instruments , guaranteeing farmers fair prices ; that restores the instruments regulating production , such as quotas and production rights ; that - since we are talking about simplification - guarantees each country something as simple as the right to production , as well as the right to food security and sovereignty ; and that establishes the principles of modelling and capping for aid , overcoming the current imbalances between producer countries and production levels .
Commissioner , we are very concerned about the Commission 's insistence on subjecting agriculture and food production to the market and competitiveness .
The result of this liberalisation policy has already been demonstrated : the unstoppable abandonment of production by millions of small and medium-sized farms , income insecurity and increased price volatility , and the exacerbation of food dependence in countless countries and regions .
We agree with a simplification that serves farmers ' interests - in particular , those of small and medium-sized farmers - and enables them to carry on producing .
We object to a simplification that kills off production and producers , and we will continue to fight it in this House .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , the thrust of the CAP reform report largely outlines measures illustrated under option 2 .
I imagine this is the Commission 's favoured approach .
I have concerns about the lack of clarity and the timescale for approval .
Will we be expected to decide the best option for the CAP before a refinement of proposals ?
I fear heavier bureaucratic burdens for farmers , despite the report calling for a simpler , more specific support scheme including simplification of cross-compliance rules .
The report focuses on small and active farms , without defining how size and activity may be measured and monitored .
The report states that the two pillars of the common agricultural policy should focus on efficiency , but I fear incentivising small farms while rewarding environmental development could see domestic farmers move away from production-focused farming in order to benefit from the CAP .
I am concerned that , despite the report recognising long-term food security and growing global demand , our agricultural competitiveness will be squeezed .
The report talks about enhancing Europe 's latent productivity potential , while respecting EU commitments in international trade .
It observes that the share of agriculture in the food supply chain decreased , while the share of the wholesale and distribution sectors increased .
Bilateral agreements with Mercosur , including agriculture re-importation , could undermine the capacity for European farmers to trade at a fair market price .
The report admits that European farmers face global competition , while having to respect environmental , food safety , quality and welfare objectives .
Yet some South American farmers exploit deforestation and are able to mass-produce and then outprice European farmers due to less stringent regulation .
( HU ) Madam President , the European Union is rather unpopular among Hungarian farmers , particularly smallholders .
This is not only because 100 % of our markets had to be sacrificed for the benefit of foreign food imports in exchange for a small fraction of the agricultural support granted to farmers in old Member States , but also because of the subject of today 's sitting , exaggerated bureaucracy and the awful administrative burdens that indeed , as it has been stated a number of times , prevent Hungarian farmers as well from actually doing their job - that of farming .
Allow me to point out that in the old Member States , and therefore in Hungary , there is another major complication ; namely , the state socialist or communist tradition , where some civil servants believe that it is not they who exist for the citizens and , in this case , for the farmers , but vice versa , that the citizens exist for the state and for the bureaucratic civil servants .
Such civil servants make the lives of farmers more difficult absolutely unnecessarily , in a manner that humiliates and abuses , by regulating farmers beyond the rules already in place .
We are continuously inundated with complaints .
The last one , for example , was that payment of the costs of an event organised by tender under the second pillar was refused , stating that the farmer in question failed to obtain three quotations for the scones he served to participants .
This is a typical case of humiliation , superfluous regulation and arbitrary use of power .
How can this be remedied ?
By ensuring that complaints against such abuses can be made not only to the decision maker , which we know to be an entirely futile attempt , but to the European Union itself , now that we have joined it and the European Union grants such aid from payments .
The European Union should create a control mechanism for people to turn to , where humiliations and abuses of this type could be investigated and sanctioned .
( RO ) Madam President , I would first of all like to welcome the commitment expressed by the Commission in the recent communication it presented to continue the process for simplifying the common agricultural policy .
Excessive regulation means less competitiveness , while excessive inflexibility means less efficient operation .
One of the reasons for the current request to reform the CAP is undoubtedly the need to simplify it .
I would like to mention a few extremely important aspects of the resolution on CAP simplification adopted by this Parliament .
My colleague , Michel Dantin , has mentioned those states which are going too far in their application of European legislation .
I think that administrative formalities must be reduced to the bare essentials , not only at EU level , but at Member State level too .
The Commission ought to consider the possibility of a common regulatory framework for the documentation requested .
I would describe such a recommendation as the maximum tolerable level of bureaucracy .
It is well known that where EU bureaucracy requests three signatures for approval , the national bureaucracies will , in turn , add another five signatures .
Only those regulations and terms which are relevant and absolutely necessary , and which provide undeniable benefit , must continue to be applied .
Simplification itself is not sufficient .
Measures providing training and information to potential beneficiaries must also be expanded .
For instance , it ought to be compulsory for a fixed share of the rural development funds to be allocated to measures of this kind .
Given that simplification is directly linked to transparency , I will take advantage of the Commissioner 's presence in plenary to ask him a question out of context .
In view of the recent decision made by the European Court of Justice concerning the beneficiaries of the European agricultural funds , what measures is the Commission considering in order to continue to ensure that information is published about these people ?


( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too , like Mr Niculescu , welcome the Commission 's intention to keep up efforts towards simplifying the common agricultural policy , but I am also worried about the follow-up given to the report by Mr Ashworth on administrative simplification .
Indeed , given the difficult economic climate in which our farmers currently find themselves , I would want the post-2013 CAP to enable farmers to concentrate on the main objective , which entails producing safe and quality foodstuffs , whilst at the same time encouraging them to provide non-commercial public services .
It is high time to lighten the administrative burden carried by our producers , to root out unnecessary legislation , and to give the farmers of the 27 Member States the same chances of understanding what their obligations are but also what their rights are .
What they need is a simpler and more responsive CAP .
At a time when it is considered inevitable that farmers around the world are being pitted against each other , and this despite the successive farming and food crises , both in the North and in the South , at a time when farmers have to fight to get fair prices , a fairer remuneration for their work , the least we could do to help them is to ask the Commission to consult the stakeholders in the farming sector on a regular basis in order to assess the impact of our regulations on the ground and to define simple and transparent practical rules for our farmers and our taxpayers .
To end with , I will quote Charles Baudelaire who said that absolute simplicity is the best way to distinguish oneself .
So I invite the European Commission to devote itself to this vital mission and in that respect , I naturally fully trust that Mr Cioloş will reach that goal .
Madam President , Commissioner , for me , the single most important sentence in the resolution is paragraph 7 , which says , ' Expects that , in line with the principles of better regulation , all future legislation will be accompanied by a full impact assessment with consideration for regulatory and administrative burdens and ensuring that any new regulation is proportionate to the aims it seeks to achieve ' .
I want to ask you whether we can have any hope that this will happen .
Can you tell us , Commissioner , that those principles will be central to the work we do on the CAP post-2013 ?
I looked at your excellent document from last week .
Some of the headlines tell us that agriculture is to guarantee food security and traceability .
It is to provide European citizens with quality , value and diversity of food , to create local employment and deliver multiple economic , social , environmental and territorial benefits .
It has to ensure effective public policy returns .
It must be greener and contribute to climate change mitigation .
It must address issues such as sustainable land management and biodiversity loss , promote renewable energies , foster animal and plant health and guarantee animal welfare .
It must adhere to cross-compliance rules and abide by veterinary and phytosanitary regulations .
It has to deal with volatility in the market and survive as the weakest link in the food chain .
It has to compete with food imports from third countries produced under very different conditions .
All of this , perhaps , on a decreasing budget .
Commissioner , you said that next week , you have to justify the CAP to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I think you have plenty of ammunition .
( CS ) Madam President , trimming back an overgrown and unnecessary bureaucracy is naturally in everyone 's interests , and particularly the entirely legitimate demand of farmers , who need as much time and energy as possible for their own work - crop production and rearing livestock - rather than for ploughing through red tape and filling in forms .
In 2005 , the European Commission undertook to simplify the common agricultural policy .
At the time , it set the ambitious target of a 25 % reduction in the administrative burden by 2012 .
Although it cannot be denied that the Commission has made some effort , the actions to date have failed to bring either the expected simplification or an actual elimination of the inequalities between Member States .
At the same time , it is absolutely essential to ensure a sufficiently flexible framework for the common agricultural policy , and especially for the system of direct payments .
It is also necessary , within the framework of supporting diversity , to minimise the risk of providing support only to uncompetitive and inefficient production areas in the European Union .
There is also a need to balance the aim of simplification with efforts to achieve maximum efficiency .
Madam President , I welcome this oral question and the focused return to a very important issue .
Over the past few months , I have carried out a number of rural meetings across Northern Ireland .
At each event , I asked farmers to identify the main areas of change that are needed within the sector .
Of huge importance was the need to reduce red tape , which is seen as both adding unnecessary cost and taking up valuable time .
The level of paperwork and the complexity of the detail needed is creating a huge burden on farmers and increasing fears of penalties .
I also recently met with the chairs of local groups who are implementing the rural development programme in Northern Ireland .
They firmly blame the heavy and bureaucratic nature of the audit requirements as a reason for the high levels of drop-out .
I , like you Commissioner , believe that there is a need for accountability of how we spend taxpayers ' money , but this bureaucratic burden is hindering the programme and the very people it was intended to help .
( RO ) Madam President , there is a great deal of talk at EU level about simplifying the common agricultural policy .
However , our farmers continue to complain about the administrative problems obstructing them when they access funds or need to apply European legislation .
Not only the Commission , but Member States , too , must take measures to simplify the red tape involved with the common agricultural policy .
I believe that it is vital for European agricultural legislation to be implemented in Member States in such a way that farmers are not discouraged from continuing with farming .
Many farmers in my country complain that they are poorly informed , that it is difficult for them to start up a venture in this sector , or that it is extremely difficult to access agricultural funds .
I would like to ask the Commission to keep encouraging Member States to use technology more efficiently , not only to keep farmers better informed , but also to reduce the administrative tasks facing this sector .
I also hope that the new common agricultural policy will be simpler , more transparent and fairer .
( NL ) Madam President , this Parliament has been discussing reducing bureaucracy for years and years now .
The Commission has formed an internal working group comprising senior officials who have been tasked with ensuring that regulation does not become too excessive .
That is a rather strange set-up , a bit like having a butcher inspecting the quality of his own meat .
On Parliament 's initiative , a working group which is external to the Commission , headed by the former Prime Minister of Bavaria , Mr Stoiber , was formed in response to that situation .
After four years of the Stoiber committee 's existence , is the Commission able to say which approach is the best and most effective ?
The Commission 's internal working group or Mr Stoiber 's working group , which is external to the Commission ?
Now , moving to regulation itself , which is carried out by Member States , and sometimes by five to eleven different supervisory authorities in Member States .
That is far too many .
Would it not be possible for the Commission to start working together with the private sector , which also sets strict demands and which , therefore , on many occasions , renders supervision by Member States redundant ?
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , in May , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on simplification of the common agricultural policy .
Can the Commission explain what action has so far been taken with the aim of reducing the bureaucratic burden on farmers throughout the European Union ?
Can the Commission tell us how it intends to adapt to the recommendations contained in the European Parliament resolution on simplification of the CAP in view of the anticipated reform of this policy ?
Farmers are demanding simplification of the CAP because they are being harassed , both in Poland and in the other Member States of the European Union .
The European Parliament has expressed its opinion on this matter many times , including recently in the Ashworth report on simplification of the CAP .
It is time to act upon this report .
Bureaucracy must not ruin us .
If the European Union wants to develop , it must not create barriers , especially not bureaucratic ones .
( RO ) Madam President , the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation published a report last week highlighting that mankind is perilously close to a new global food crisis .
This is why agricultural producers have been asked to increase their production , especially of wheat and maize , and build up their food stocks again in 2012 .
Global food demand will continue to grow in future .
The European Union ought to be able to help meet global food demand .
As a result , it is vital for the Union 's agricultural sector to maintain its production capacity and improve it .
In particular , small , medium-sized and family-owned farms need simpler and more easily accessible instruments , both in terms of subsidies and direct payments aimed at attracting them to the market .
The key to long-term food security is to encourage investment in agriculture , especially through simplifying the bureaucracy faced by farmers .
In order to achieve this , it is important for us to facilitate European farmers ' access to bank loans on favourable terms , as well as provide subsidies for farmers .
I ask you , Commissioner , to support us , just as during the review of the energy taxation directive , in obtaining a reduced VAT rate for electricity used for irrigation .
( PL ) Madam President , in the Commission communication on the future of the common agricultural policy , administrative simplifications are one of the proposals for reforming European agriculture .
This proposal , in a certain sense , acts upon the recommendations presented by the European Parliament in the resolution of May this year .
A reduction in the administrative and bureaucratic burden will make it easier for farmers to obtain funds , and it will improve the flow of information and increase the effectiveness of inspections conducted by local authorities .
This , in turn , will ensure the supply of suitable amounts of safer food , and will also increase the competitiveness of our sector .
We must , however , be sure that the process of simplification will really be carried out , both at European and at national level , that the proposed simplifications are not another somewhat worthless attempt at ignoring the truth and that these same simplifications lead to a reduction and not an increase in expenditure on administration .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Cioloş , ladies and gentlemen , it is extremely dangerous to talk about an increase in bureaucracy , because this sort of discussion often backfires .
I hope that this will not be the case here .
I am very pleased , Mr Cioloş , that you have proposed simplified rules , in particular , for small farms , in your communication on the reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
That is highly commendable .
There are a lot of things that can be done .
For example , in the case of multiannual commitments in the agricultural environment programme , farmers have to submit new applications every year for the same areas of land .
This is simply ridiculous .
We must go much further and make the system much simpler , for small farms in particular , without losing sight of the fact that we need to achieve our objective of preventing fraud .
Ultimately , we want a CAP which increases the number of flowers in the meadows and not the number of pieces of paper on the desks .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , communication of the general principles that will govern the new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) has given new hope to small and medium-sized farmers throughout Europe by stressing their irreplaceable role in the future of European farming ; this hope must be realised .
This is another thing which renders the simplification of the CAP particularly necessary .
Freeing farmers from their most complex bureaucratic chores , for which they have little time , is a goal that we must achieve , so that they can devote themselves to farm work , wasting less time and incurring fewer costs .
Beyond this , we will also be giving the many small producers who currently do not actually apply because of the bureaucracy involved a more user-friendly system , thereby preventing these losses .
Efforts towards this are undoubtedly worthwhile , Commissioner .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for what I thought was a very forceful and genuine expression of his desire to implement this policy of simplification , although I have never met a farmer who asks me to simplify the common agricultural policy .
They ask for fewer checks and controls and easier ways of doing business .
I want to repeat my comments of last Thursday .
We are fooling ourselves in this House .
If we go down the route of greening the first pillar of the common agricultural policy , we will unfortunately increase cross-compliance , we will be counting nature , we will be sending people out to farms and we will not achieve simplification .
I described it as ' green tape ' .
It is just as difficult as red tape but we are going to have both .
I know that you appreciate the point and I think we need to be aware of it .
I think there is also a credibility issue for the European Union .
Farmers see bankers getting away with blue murder in terms of no checks and balances , while they are caught for EUR 100 .
My last point is that there are multiple checks on farmers : retailers do it , processors do it , the European Union does it and competent authorities do it .
There is a climate of fear .
Commissioner , you are afraid of the big , bad wolf - budgetary control - and farmers are afraid of inspections and Member States are fearful too .
We have to break that climate of fear .
( PL ) Madam President , a fundamental element of the system of management of the common agricultural policy is supervision .
The costs of building and maintaining the systems of management and supervision , as well as the costs of the administration of these systems , place a significant burden on the budgets of Member States .
On the basis of experience to date , it can be seen that the complicated criteria of access to help , and their constant changes , give rise to many kinds of problem at the implementation stage , not only for farmers , but also for the administration itself .
The future CAP must be understandable to farmers , but also to taxpayers .
Without further simplification of the CAP , this will not be possible .
It seems that every time we try to reform the CAP , we create increasing amounts of bureaucracy .
I also appeal to Member States not to add further and often unnecessary regulations to EU guidelines .
I propose that in future , a claim for payment should cover the entire budgetary period .
It should be submitted for a two-year period , but , of course , it should be possible to submit amendments .
( SK ) Madam President , over the years , a complex mechanism of regulations , subsidies and checks has grown out of European agricultural policy , transferring the evaluation of the efficiency of agricultural production from the field to the offices of Brussels bureaucrats .
Operating farms in an efficient and meaningful way is becoming more dependent on mechanisms of support and the regulations providing such support , which are drawn up in the European Commission .
The deformation of the agricultural market has been further exacerbated by the subsidy mechanism for the new Member States , which , in many cases , do not even receive half the support of the original Member States .
It is therefore right and proper to look closely at the system of regulations and mechanisms currently in use in the European Union , and to try and introduce simpler , more modern and fairer regulations for our farmers .
I firmly believe , Commissioner , that the European Parliament will be happy to help you in this task .
( GA ) Madam President , I agree completely with this idea of simplifying the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
In particular , I commend the Commissioner for what he has done .
He said that he received 39 recommendations , and the sooner these recommendations are implemented , the better .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the European Court of Auditors report regretfully reveals each year that the resources allocated to the common agricultural policy are not always used in a correct and transparent way .
We are therefore forced to reconcile two different needs : on the one hand , a need for control , to ensure that European taxpayers ' resources are used in the best and most proper way and , on the other , a need to simplify as far as possible the lives of our farmers who want to spend their time tilling their fields and tending their stock , and it is right that they should spend their time in this way .
I wanted to offer just one suggestion to the Commissioner , as he said he was willing to listen to suggestions from this Chamber .
All the measures for rural development implemented by Member States and the regions are not always aimed at simplification but instead add layer upon layer of red tape .
The Commissioner should transfer the best practices implemented in the regions and European countries to all other countries and regions .
( BG ) Madam President , Commissioner , what has been done so far is obviously not enough , as otherwise we would have been debating something else this evening .
I would like to draw your attention to the social element of what we are discussing , because when producers prepare their projects , they take out loans , stake their land and then , when their project is turned down because of some formality , they are ruined .
For six months now , I have been waging a Punic War with the Bulgarian Agriculture Fund which has turned down the individual projects of over one hundred Bulgarian farmers because of unclear text in the regulation .
Bulgarian administration ( because you know that Bulgaria is a country under special observation ) also prefers to play safe and to reject projects on the slightest excuse .
I am deeply convinced that most of the farmers are conscientious and honest .
And I understand the need for controls , but these should not destroy those who are conscientious , just because of the fraudsters .
Madam President , I am very happy to see that despite the time being quite late , there are so many people present to talk about simplifying the common agricultural policy .
I think simplicity comes when we are clear with ourselves and when we know exactly what we want , and this is also reflected in the normative acts we draft .
Of course , the proposals come from the Commission and they are adopted by the Council and by Parliament .
Therefore , I am fully confident that when it comes to preparing the legislative package together , we will know just as well , in a clear and simple way , what we want and that we will avoid the specific exceptions and add-ons which mean that subsequently , the Commission will have to check them on the ground , since the same Commission is also accountable to you - Parliament - for how public money is spent .
Of course , I do not think that the CAP is preventing farmers from working , on the contrary .
In many cases , the CAP is helping farmers to work .
It is just that , whenever public money is involved , everyone needs to be able to account for how that public money was used .
There is European legislation that results in standards for the farming sector , and I must say that the farming sector is maybe one of the only economic sectors for which legislation at European level is , in fact , checked on the ground .
I do not know if this is the case for other sectors , but together we decided it would be that way .
The standards that receive a lot of attention are only the application of European legislation on the ground .
What is perceived as being complex is precisely this legislation on the environment and on animal wellbeing .
There are also the procedures of specific measures , such as agri-environmental measures , for which there is special financial assistance , as well as investment measures that are often found in investment programmes like the rural development programme .
I totally agree that with regard to legislation such as it is applied in practice , more could be done to clarify what farmers need to do .
Yet as far as the procedures for the specific measures are concerned , we also need to be clear : as long as we require specific measures that take into consideration regional particularities , we also need to exercise a specific control , otherwise we would have no credibility .
I totally agree , Mr Capoulas Santos , that we need to simplify as much as possible .
However , I would not want to go so far as to reach a stage where we are no longer credible , no longer able to properly manage the money that is allocated to the CAP , and I would like this budget to be just as consistent in the future too .
This consistency will also depend on our ability to justify and account for how the money is used .
As regards transparency , there is a decision by the Court of Justice .
What I can tell you is that I am still in favour of this transparency .
The regulation that is currently in force will be amended so that this judgment can be taken into account .
I will leave it at that , but I can assure you that I will continue to take decisions aimed at simplification , or at least ensure that the CAP does not become more complicated .
As I have already said , we will have to do this work together and with Member States , since I talked to you about measures taken to cut red tape with reference to what the Commission is asking Member States .
Now , CAP management is shared with Member States and what happens on the ground for the beneficiary , i.e. the farmer , depends on the way in which Member States and regions put this European legislation into practice .
Since good practice guides are useful , we are also going to work on these guides , but first of all , let us try and make the CAP simple and clear for the 27 Member States .
Henceforth , with codecision , you , too , have the same responsibility as the Council in this area , and I am convinced that we will be able to work very well together .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
A resolution adopted by Parliament earlier this year refers to the importance of reducing red tape for farmers .
A major point made is that there should be simplification of the implementation of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) as well as simplification of the CAP itself .
In relation to this , both the Commission and the Member States have an important role to play .
A review of the CAP should focus on methods that would allow farmers to spend most of their time engaged in the most important thing : farming .
The Commission communication - published last week - referred to the importance of simplification and of reducing red tape .
To improve the competitiveness of the agricultural sector , it must be ensured that the measures now in place be reformed and simplified in the CAP in its future form , and that no additional burden be placed on farmers .
I welcome what the Commissioner said last week about impact assessments being required before a new proposal is put forward .
The principle of proportionality and the administrative burdens carried by farmers already must be taken into account in any new legislation .
in writing . - Let me pose a simple question .
Why is there a common agricultural policy at all ?
Europe has an abundance of fertile agricultural land .
We still have farmers willing and able to produce food .
Europe and the World has an abundance of people who need to buy food .
The mechanism of the market , if left to itself , would meet the needs of supply and demand at competitive prices .
The CAP is an artificial , expensive and unnecessary burden on farmers and consumers .
Let me suggest the easiest simplification of all : abolish the CAP !
The Commission 's communication , ' The CAP towards 2020 ' , contains few concrete details as regards the practice of reducing administrative burdens .
Even the word ' simplification ' occurs only in a few places in the text , with reference to cross-compliance rules .
The CAP system is too complex in other areas as well , and it is often opaque and incomprehensible to farmers .
One of the most important tasks would be to put an end to ' double regulation ' .
Several Member States impose stricter national requirements than those laid down in European Union legislation .
This , in itself , distorts competition on the internal market .
It would be useful if the various national authorities monitoring cross-compliance and their various sections would harmonise their efforts to ensure that farmers are not subjected in short succession to several different kinds of inspection .
Given the current advances in telecommunications and IT , setting up a shared database would make this possible .
The Commission 's proposed reform maintains support for environmental protection under the second pillar while , at the same time , a green allowance has been built into the criteria for direct payments under the first pillar .
It is not yet known how these payments will be made .
It would be good if this positive step did not entail new administrative burdens .
The situation in the beekeeping sector ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the situation in the beekeeping sector by Paolo De Castro , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - B7-0564 / 2010 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution we are about to vote on represents the view of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the European beekeeping support policy .
As is normal practice for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , this important paper has benefited from the participation of all the parliamentary groups , who have added their valuable contribution to the end result .
Despite the recent increase in the annual budget for measures to improve the general conditions for production and marketing of bee products , a widespread concern persists with regard to the numerous challenges and problems that beekeeping will have to face in the near future .
Difficult production and marketing conditions , strong and prolonged price volatility and difficulties emerging from the increasingly widespread mortality of bee stocks are some of the critical factors that afflict one of the most important sectors of European agriculture .
Like all other primary sector operators , European beekeepers must be put in a position where they can plan their own affairs .
Since the current support depends on European agricultural policy implementation procedures in force at present , the future of this policy after 2013 is uncertain .
This is the background to today 's resolution , whereby we intend to call on the Commission to make an active commitment to defend beekeeping .
The main demands to the Commission contained in the motion for a resolution include the following : a specific undertaking after the expiry of national programmes , also in view of new challenges and problems in the sector , namely bee mortality , price volatility etc . ; a commitment to the necessary improvement in statistical measurements , for more effective control of non-EU honey imports and research development ; a strengthening of the role of European veterinary policy ; an action plan to tackle the phenomenon of widespread bee mortality , partly through specific undertakings in the field of research ; greater financial support in the field of operator training and education and , lastly , a revitalised role as a leading player for the beekeeping sector within the common agricultural policy after 2013 .
In thanking Mrs Lulling and all my fellow MEPs for the common work carried out , I would like to remind you , Madam President , Commissioner , that the International Year of Biodiversity is about to end .
This is why we hope that approval of the resolution will definitely mark the start of the road to relaunch a sector that is particularly strategic from the viewpoint of environmental sustainability and maintenance of biodiversity , as well as in terms of economic and social impact .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , indeed , bees play an important role in pollination and in producing honey and related products .
This sector is characterised by a great diversity of beekeeping conditions and by the dispersion and variety of stakeholders from production to the marketing stage .
Some harmonised rules have been established at European Union level concerning honey marketing standards and the preservation of bee health .
The regulation on the single common market organisation provides for a series of measures aimed at improving conditions for producing and marketing apiculture products .
These measures can be included in three-year apiculture programmes that are prepared by Member States and cofinanced by the European Union budget .
The budget for these programmes has risen from EUR 26 million to EUR 32 million for the 2011-2013 period .
These measures seem to be giving positive results in the beekeeping sector , both for Member States and for beekeepers .
It is also important to note that all Member States have devised a programme , which shows their interest both in beekeeping and in the needs of this sector .
The sector is certainly facing a number of challenges .
First , the fall in the number of beekeepers , making it crucial to encourage and train newcomers .
Second , competition from third-country imports and issues related to the quality of the honey coming from these countries .
Then there is the increase in bee mortality due to many different factors , including varroasis and other diseases .
The issue of bee health is particularly worrying within but also outside the European Union .
Beekeeping organisations are asking the European Union to concentrate more on bees in this regard .
In November 2008 , the European Parliament also adopted a resolution on the situation in the beekeeping sector which called on the Commission to put in place specific actions and to make sure these actions were coordinated .
It is obvious that bee health is an important matter and that it must be protected by the most suitable actions , while taking into account the sector 's particularities and the different players involved .
In this context , the Commission has already launched a number of initiatives that seek to address the concerns of the beekeeping industry , and other actions are also planned for the future .
The Commission intends to present a communication soon that will seek to clarify the issues in connection with bee health and the key actions that the Commission intends to take in order to address them .
This communication will serve as a basis for discussion with the European Parliament and the Council , as well as with authorities in the Member States and stakeholders .
I hope this debate will help identify possible new actions that are necessary at European Union level on the question of preserving beekeeping and the production of honey and related products , but also to help preserve bee health and prevent any problems that could arise because of disease or pollution .
Madam President , when I took over responsibility for the situation in the beekeeping sector in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development from my German fellow Member , Reimer Böge , 16 years ago , another German MEP said to me rather disparagingly : ' Oh , I see , the little creatures for the little countries ' .
Since then , I have tried hard to make it clear within the constantly growing EU how important these little creatures are , not only for our quality of life , but also for our survival .
In the meantime , we have made continuous progress in raising awareness at all levels within the EU of the need for a comprehensive common policy to ensure that there are enough bees in the EU and enough beekeepers of all ages to look after them .
This has become all the more important as a result of the high levels of bee mortality in many regions , which have given rise to justified concerns about whether there are enough bees and beekeepers to meet our needs .
This is why I have launched this initiative in the form of an oral question to the Commission with a debate and a resolution .
I am very grateful for the fact that this resolution has been supported by all the groups in the House .
The objective warrants the joint action by all the political groups on behalf of our resolution .
It is brief , clearly structured and easy to understand , which is not always the case in this House .
We make it clear where the problems lie .
The specific solutions that we are proposing have been worked out in very close cooperation with the beekeeping sector .
Beekeepers from many Member States have come to Strasbourg today with their products , but also with their concerns and expectations , to highlight the fact that they need our help in solving their problems .
When you consider that , from a budget of more than EUR 140 billion , only EUR 32 million has been spent on safeguarding three quarters of the food production and four fifths of the plants which are dependent on pollination , it should be clear to everyone here that the important task today is to ensure the continuation and the development of this policy beyond 2013 .
That is our message .
I believe that it will be heard , not only in Parliament , but also in the Commission , in the Council and in the Member States .
In any event , we will make sure that this happens .
I am making an urgent call to all the Members of this House to be present for the vote and to vote in favour of this resolution .
We owe this to the bees .
It is true that they are hibernating while we are having this discussion .
Incidentally , I believe that the discussion ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I just wanted to say that the Conference of Presidents , which thinks it is a good idea to put this discussion at the end of a night sitting , needs to do its homework in order to understand the importance of bees in Europe .
Madam President , unfortunately , the problems affecting European beekeeping are more serious and deeper rooted than the cyclical crises that recurrently affect other , apparently more important , sectors .
The problem with beekeeping is , above all , environmental and has consequences that could become catastrophic if we are unable to respond adequately in time .
Two statistics from the Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations - cited in the motion for a resolution and already mentioned by Mrs Lulling - are illuminating : 84 % of plant species and 76 % of food production depend on pollination .
However , agriculture is also an important economic activity in rural areas , with great potential for growth , since European production is a long way from guaranteeing our needs .
No other ' livestock activity ' - and livestock is in inverted commas here , obviously - is so closely linked to nature and sustainability or plays such an important and irreplaceable ecological role as beekeeping .
These are more than enough reasons for us not to stint on our efforts and funding for investigating the principle causes of the bees ' frightening and increasing death rate , and for supporting health programmes .
This debate should also provide an opportunity to find imaginative and effective ways of including aid for this particular type of landless livestock in the aid mechanisms of the new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , at the very moment when the use of units of area as the basic criterion for allocating new aid is being planned .
I should therefore like the Commission to clarify what its immediate responses to this problem will be , and whether it is thinking of including this activity in the new CAP architecture that we are about to start debating .

Madam President , Mr Cioloş , ladies and gentlemen , providing protection for bees is in the best interests of the agricultural sector and many farmers are also beekeepers .
We have seen a decline in the bee population in many regions of Europe .
We must identify the causes of this problem and take the necessary countermeasures .
It is a good thing that the budget funding for the national bee programmes up to 2013 has been increased from EUR 26 million to EUR 32 million .
However , that is not enough .
We must ensure that these programmes are continued after 2013 .
In order to achieve this , it is also particularly important for us to improve and simplify the process which allows researchers , beekeepers and farmers to share specialist knowledge .
We should focus as soon as possible on combating the diseases and parasites to which bees are subject .
We must not leave the beekeepers to fight this battle on their own .
We urgently need better and more standardised statistics from all the Member States throughout the EU . This is because we need to work with facts and not just with speculation .
As the number of beekeepers is constantly falling , we also need to invest more in education and training .
We should provide more support for young beekeepers and also for full-time beekeepers , to ensure that the profession has a future and does not die out .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe supports this resolution .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I will be brief , although I do think Mrs Lulling 's idea of cross-pollinating speaking time across the groups is certainly one to be further considered .
I will echo comments about the beekeeping sector , but I would remind colleagues that the wild bumble bee population across Europe is also in a similar - and very grave - situation .
They are just as important for biodiversity and the pollination benefits that we have heard of - very correctly - about the honey bee sector .
I would pay tribute to the work of the Bumblebee Conservation Trust in Scotland , covering the bumble bee population across the UK .
Commissioner , I would pick up on question 4 - an excellent question - suggesting that the Commission bring bee diseases into the veterinary policy .
This has been a long-standing call of this Parliament , and it strikes me that this is not just about doling out money but about sharing best practice and knowledge across the Union .
A lot of scientists in a lot of places are working on this , and the Commission could play a very powerful role in pooling that information and working out how much we know about this connected and very serious problem .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , we are all aware of the importance of bees in pollination .
They are absolutely crucial to agriculture and food production .
Indeed , without them , there is no food production .
It is therefore very worrying that the beekeeping sector continues to report that the mortality rates are astonishingly high .
Although I feel that we have been successful in raising the awareness and communicating the severity of the situation over the years , we must maintain pressure to ensure that research into the cause of these mortality rates continues and remains well funded .
Only then can concrete steps be taken to address the problem .
Firstly , I wish to see that funding for research projects is maintained after 2012 , and I would support the initiatives which encourage young beekeepers into the apiculture sector .
We are , of course , entering a period of intense debate on the future of the CAP , and I believe that this is a fundamental problem that should continue to be addressed in the context of a revised EU agricultural policy after 2013 .
In essence , support for the agriculture sector should be strengthened after 2013 .
I think we have an opportunity to do something positive .
Let us support the bees .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , the problem with this report on the diminishing bee population is that there is a real tragedy here .
However , having examined this document , I find that the proposals being put to this House are a classic example of what is known in this building as a ' beneficial crisis ' .
Beneficial , that is , for the EU , with proposals constructed on the basis of extending EU control over a wider and wider area .
No change there then .
The CAP features in passing in this report , but there is no mention of the destructive effect of the imposition of that policy in my country .
I am thinking here of the nature of hedgerows and the working of fields and orchards , the management of which has been seriously interfered with by EU legislation , to the detriment of bees in Britain .
The report admits that it cannot identify the prime cause for the drop in bee numbers , and so cites a large number of possibilities .
It lists bee disease , bees ' weakened immunity to pathogens and parasites , climate change - you could bet that one would be in here - and the disappearance of mellifluous flora .
The possible deleterious effect of genetically modified plants is grudgingly admitted , but dismissed as insignificant - you could have bet on that being here , too .
In truth , these are all guesses .
The one constant in all this is the presence of the Varroa mite which attacks the bees ' immune system and is probably the root cause of this whole problem .
But no , the plight of bees is used as an excuse to introduce a whole host of regulations calling , amongst other things , for cooperation between beekeepers ' associations from Member States , tighter controls on the importation of honey , increased labelling requirements - hardly designed to stop the bees dying , surely - product authorisation , whatever that is , and a move to recruit young beekeepers .
Amazing .
Whilst all this is taking place , the Varroa mite continues its pernicious work and bees die .
No doubt well intentioned , this report needs to be reduced to identifying and eliminating whatever it is that is killing our bees , and to allow the international community to deal with it , not to serve as an excuse for more and more and more EU regulation .
on behalf of the NI Group . - Madam President , this has been an important , and indeed passionate , discussion on this particular subject .
I am glad to see it and to be able to take part in it .
I believe that the importance of bees within agriculture , in broad terms , is generally undervalued , even within the sector itself .
Without bees , many crops would fail .
Of course , orchards are particularly reliant on bees for pollination .
I recently visited a number of orchard owners in Northern Ireland who have suffered from the declining bee population and indeed voiced their concern over it .
I agree that bee diseases should be highlighted in EU veterinary policy , both to highlight the importance of bees and also to have a policy and to monitor the population across Europe .
Money must be invested in research and development into the diminishing bee population and funding must be made available to schemes which can help .
I believe that a balanced view of the decline of the bee population must be taken into consideration , not just blaming farming practices but investing in investigation into diseases and ways of minimising their impact .
( HU ) Madam President , Mrs Lulling asked us to support the motion for a resolution .
We can do so wholeheartedly as a truly excellent document is in the making .
The most important statement of this document is the one which calls on the European Commission to ensure that the current support programmes in the apiculture sector today are continued and strengthened after 2013 .
There is an immense need for this support , as the market does not recognise apicultural products in a manner that ensures the survival of the apiculture sector , even though apiculturists provide a great many services to agriculture and the preservation of biodiversity through pollination .
Another very important statement within this document is the call on the European Commission to change labelling rules for honey products within the framework of quality policy .
This is because the current rules allow the possibility for abuse , namely , to mark as honey of European origin honey which contains only a very minimal amount of European honey , and , in fact , contains mostly honey imported from a third country , which may even be of poorer quality .
Yet another very important statement within this document is the call on the European Commission to table a legislative proposal which excludes the possibility of labelling products with a less than 50 % honey-based sugar content as products made from honey .
I have been fighting for these issues for years here in the European Parliament .
I have not managed to have them included in any document as perfectly as they are now stated in this motion for a resolution .
I hope that the European Commission will accept Parliament 's recommendations and will find a way within the scope of quality policy in the next semester to resolve these long-standing issues .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reason I decided to table several amendments to Mr Paolo De Castro 's excellent proposal is because beekeeping is an essential economic sector .
I am sure our excellent fellow Member , Mrs Lulling , will agree , since she has been working on this problem since 1994 .
I think we can pay tribute to her this evening .
We need to realise that the disappearance of bees would amount to an unprecedented upheaval in the history of mankind .
Such a change in biodiversity would put vital food diversity at risk .
This profound disturbance of ecosystems would destroy all prospects for future generations .
The disappearance of pollinating bees is to be taken seriously , for the collapse in numbers of both the wild bee and the honey bee can now be measured on a global scale .
Cocoa , vanilla , melon , passion fruit , all these tropical crops are entirely dependent on pollinating bees for their production of fruit and seeds .
On all continents and increasingly often , honey bees are dying in large numbers at the end of the winter .
In Europe , many beekeepers have had to shut up shop .
Currently , over 80 % of species of flowering plants in the world and 80 % of species grown in Europe rely directly on pollination by insects , bees for the most part .
Without foraging bees , most crops would not produce a satisfactory yield .
This is the case for many wild species , but also for fruit trees , protein crops and vegetable crops .
So it would be difficult to think of a meal in which bees did not play an important role .
The causes of their decline are known : destruction of their nesting sites , increasing scarcity of the plants that provide them with nectar and pollen , but also diseases , parasites , and especially the use of pesticides , more specifically neurotoxic pesticides , which are particularly harmful for bees .
Farmers and gardeners must recognise that bees are totally defenceless when faced with toxic products and that they are precious contributors to their crops and need to be protected as a matter of priority .
I will close by saying that we must react , for we cannot accept honey coming from elsewhere - the quality is lower and it does not meet our strict production criteria - as being inevitable , as the only alternative to the dearth of honey that is slowly taking hold in Europe .
I therefore call on Mr Cioloş and the Commission to include beekeeping in the CAP with specific measures .
Madam President , Commissioner : thank you for your comments .
You yourself outlined the challenges that we face : a reduction in the numbers of beekeepers and the need to attract new and professional apiarists , and - crucially - the increase in bee mortality caused by a number of factors but , in particular , by the presence of the Varroa mite , which compromises the immune system of bees .
All of us agree that bee health is important , and I am pleased to hear that the Commission will put forward key measures to deal with the current , very serious situation .
I would emphasise the need to ensure consultation of beekeepers when drawing up any programmes , in order to ensure , first of all , their effectiveness , and secondly , their implementation .
As well as beekeepers , we need to ensure sustainable , pollinator-friendly farming practices .
I think this is very important and should be an element in the CAP .
I would also say that , while citizens are aware of the role of bees in producing honey , not everybody knows of the crucial role of bees in pollination and their contribution to EU agriculture and , ultimately , food production .
So I would see value in an information campaign , because we need the support of citizens in this matter to justify the money we spend on a bee protection programme .
Finally , we need independent and timely research into bee mortality so that , whatever actions we take to deal with the situation , we can expect that they will yield positive outcomes .
( EL ) Madam President , the EU Alarm programme identified unviable practices in land use and the use of agrochemicals as the main causes of the worrying loss of pollinating insects in Europe .
However , I received a very disappointing answer to a written question which I submitted in January from the Commissioner at the time , Mr Boel .
We know that 84 % of European crops depend , to a degree , on pollinating insects for fertilisation and that , in order to protect them , we need to create compulsory ecological recovery zones and further strengthen agro-environmental measures by restructuring the CAP .
The Commissioner stated that she is satisfied .
However , the measures have failed to address the problem of the loss of bees .
Given that agro-environmental measures only account for 8 % of the total CAP budget up to 2013 , and each Member State applies them differently , we insist that agro-environmental measures need greater support and uniform application and checks as to whether they are right .
We also need greater emphasis on organic and ecological methods .
These measures and small-scale production need to be supported and the creation of beekeeping cooperatives and ecological recovery zones needs to be encouraged .
Madam President , we have heard a lot this evening about the wonder of bees - indeed , they are truly wonderful creatures .
I would just like to concentrate on one issue .
Is the Commissioner aware of the interest and involvement that bees have sparked and inspired across Europe ?
In the UK alone , we have many prominent UK organisations with campaigns - from the Women 's Institute to the Cooperative Society .
The information campaign is there .
It just needs to be picked up on .
Please take a look at the Women 's Institute campaign , which I have sent you details of .
It is full of practical information for anybody who wants to help bees thrive .
The Women 's Institute represents millions of ordinary people in the UK .
The plight of the bee offers a possibly unique opportunity to work with citizens .
It covers the common agricultural policy , biodiversity , food security , pesticide use , veterinary regulations , and even the labyrinthine way of funding through the EU .
It is a very unique opportunity to engage with organisations that are already inspired to work .
I would ask the Commissioner to take that opportunity and run with it .
( PL ) Madam President , in view of the exceptional significance of the beekeeping sector for agricultural production , the need to preserve biodiversity and the nutritional values of honey , existing support for the beekeeping sector should be maintained and increased after 2013 .
Such measures contribute to an improvement in the health of bees , an increase in the numbers of swarms and a growth in the production of honey .
As in other sectors , the effectiveness of beekeeping depends , in large measure , on the knowledge , qualifications and experience of beekeepers .
In Poland , we have the only vocational secondary school of beekeeping in Europe , and it has students from several countries .
This school and its facilities , together with the nearby University of Life Sciences in Lublin and also the agricultural research institutes in Puławy , could be used as the basis for the establishment of a European School of Beekeeping .
Beekeepers ' organisations are of great significance in terms of development of the sector .
Many efforts concerning programmes for the support of training and for tackling problems involving quality and standards should be carried out in conjunction with them .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the current situation in the beekeeping sector , with mortality among bees putting the pollination of fruit , vegetables and so on - and hence our food itself - at risk , illustrates the dead-end nature of actions by modern man which ignore the interactions between economic sectors and nature or are indifferent to them .
Our development interventions and changes in land use , the crops we choose to farm and the farming methods we apply , even the way in which we create demand and habits in our daily life , have helped to tip the balance in nature .
Sometimes , this results in the unexplained mortality of bees and the emergence of new diseases and sometimes , in an increase in production costs .
We therefore need to adopt medium-term and short-term measures to address all the symptoms of the problem , together with a more permanent solution to the root cause of this problem .
Therefore , the new common agricultural policy needs to take an integrated approach to beekeeping , by strengthening support programmes and veterinary cover for the sector , by highlighting its good points , by defending biodiversity and by mitigating the problem of climate change and the deterioration in natural resources .
Madam President , I speak not only as a concerned MEP representing an area of England where beekeeping has economic significance , but specifically as the Vice-President of the Cambridge Beekeepers ' Association .
We have heard from all our speakers tonight about the significance and importance of this sector .
Honey bees are of great economic significance and ecological importance - we all appreciate that .
Existing diseases are not fully understood , and problems such as colony collapse disorder are as yet unexplained and unresolved .
The UK is losing its bee population at around 30 % a year , and this is clearly unsustainable and potentially devastating .
Like many other speakers , I really want to focus on the most pressing aspect of this issue , the urgent need for more research : both to shed light on disease issues in bee colonies and to provide us with some more concrete ideas on the way forward .
We need to find long-term effective solutions to this pressing issue .
Could I call on the Commission to sponsor , through the framework programmes perhaps , some additional and specific research , not only on the causes of hive collapse but also on possible remedies ?
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , for many years , a growing death rate has been observed among bees .
This has an adverse effect on the production of fruit , vegetables and other crops which are pollinated by bees , and is a threat to biodiversity in general .
The role of bees in plant pollination is indispensable .
For thousands of years , beekeeping has been an important part of Europe 's cultural heritage .
In my country , where we have specialist fruit production , farmers noticed a very long time ago the beneficial effect of the work of bees on the size and quality of harvests .
Unfortunately , bees are being attacked , today , by a variety of diseases and pests , and the beekeepers themselves are not coping with this .
This is why financial support is necessary for research into the causes of bee diseases and the factors which are bringing about a reduction in the resistance of bees and the death of swarms .
New and more effective programmes are needed to prevent and eliminate diseases of bee colonies .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is perfectly obvious that the problem of the sudden death of bees poses a threat to our food supply and has huge financial costs .
One of the most probable causes of the problem is both modified products and nicotinoid pesticides .
We need , in the face of this major threat , to take direct action right now .
We have to stop experimenting with what we grow and what we eat .
We need an immediate moratorium on modified products until we can establish that they are not to blame for the death of bees , for this threat to our diet .
We need to take action now , before the financial cost and the cost of survival become insuperable .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with some 600 000 beekeepers and just under 14 million hives throughout the EU , beekeeping represents an area of considerable importance within the Union farming sector .
This importance is emphasised by the bee 's role as a defender of biodiversity as well as a producer of honey .
This is a complete food , full of nutrients , and acknowledged to be of the highest quality .
By virtue of this role , it is planned to increase annual aid to the sector in Europe from EUR 26 million for 2008-2010 to EUR 32 million for 2011-2013 .
The European Parliament intends to guarantee these funds even after 2013 because beekeeping is one of the activities fully compatible with the sustainability and diversification objectives that the new CAP aims to achieve .
The very aim of this funding is to support beekeeping , partly through national research projects into new methods to combat the high mortality rate of bees , which has reached alarming levels in recent years .
On the other hand , however , it is important to ensure fair transparency in aid distribution and guarantee more resources to states that actually need them .
When the paper was examined by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the Committee voted on an amendment proposed by myself , calling for aid to be distributed on the basis of the results of a survey of hives present in the various Member States and not on the basis of estimated data .
I believe this is extremely important for the purposes of guaranteeing transparency for public expenditure and protection for those who actually practise beekeeping activities .
A system is already active in many countries for surveying hive numbers , but we are aware of the difficulty of implementing this in other states and we propose that a programme for beekeeping that is transparent and bound to have a certain impact on the profits of many beekeepers can be introduced throughout the European Union .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Cioloş , ladies and gentlemen , a great deal has been said , for bees are indeed a symbolic species , guardians of our environment .
Currently , there are many research programmes dedicated to bees , with sometimes contradictory findings .
A few days ago , a scientist came to see me and explained that the numerous planes that we can see in the sky have an effect on the diffraction of sun rays , leading to exhaustion and therefore to the excessive mortality of bees , for instance .
Contrary to what one of our fellow Members on the right of this Chamber just said , I believe that here we have an example of a sector where pooling our knowledge and coordinating research programmes can provide a solution to the problems faced by each of our countries .
Yes , Europe can be useful .
This example of bees is maybe representative of European integration .
Madam President , I bow to the expertise of others in this area , particularly Geoffrey Van Orden 's comments .
I would support what he says because this is an area where there are few experts , but many opinions .
I think it is acceptable to raise the opinion on GM , but there are no GM crops grown in Ireland - and I think the same is true of the UK - yet we have problems with bee populations , so I think we need to be very careful about comments we make in relation to the causes of the problem .
We have a problem and we do not know the reason for it .
I support the call for research but with some caution .
We throw money at research but let us look for better quality research - and coordinated research across Member States - to get the results that beekeepers want and absolutely need .
We need to look at the statistics , because I gather that if Member States count bees at all , they count them in very different ways .
We need to look at what we are comparing across the European Union .
I will just make a suggestion in relation to unkept bees - the wild bees and the bumble bees as referred to by another colleague .
I would support measures in our reformed common agricultural policy around a sustainable agriculture with habitats that support wild bee populations .
I have put my money where my mouth is on this , and have allocated a few hectares of land to see what would happen .
It does work , but if you are going to ask farmers who farm for a living to do this , you need to support it .
I think the European Union needs to look at that , because we do have problems in both beekeeping and the wild bee population .
We do need to look at enhancing biodiversity , so you would have my support on that , Commissioner .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to begin , just as other fellow Members have done , by welcoming the decision adopted by the Commission in September on approving the national beekeeping programmes of the 27 Member States for the 2011-2013 period , and especially the fact that the European Union 's contribution to funding these programmes has risen by 25 % , compared with the previous period .
Romania , the Member State which I come from , is among the main beneficiaries of these funds , to the tune of approximately EUR 3.4 million .
The Commission 's decision is therefore of paramount importance to Romanian beekeepers .
I also welcome the initiative of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to launch this debate about such an important topic .
I fully support the suggestions included in the proposal for a resolution which we are going to vote on , on Thursday .
Beekeeping provides jobs for a large number of families in Europe , especially in areas where the conditions are not conducive to other activities .
Beekeeping also promotes economic development in rural areas .
On this point , I would like to stress that it is important for European support programmes to focus not only on honey producers , but also on small processors , especially as part of the current second pillar of the common agricultural policy .
The honey processing and packing lines offer competitive advantages in terms of market access , quality and attractiveness of the products to consumers .
Last but not least , apiculture products are used not only for food consumption , but also become ingredients in products .
This is why we must encourage solutions which will help achieve products with high added value at local level .
I regret that support for small processors does not feature in the proposal for a resolution because encouraging these people basically means encouraging those directly involved in keeping bees .
Madam President , I think firstly it is appropriate that in our group , Ms Lulling , is the expert on bees , because she herself has many of the qualities of the bee .
She buzzes around Parliament like a bee .
She is as sweet as honey most of the time , and she can sting like a bee when people stand on her corns .
So you could say that she is the queen bee of Parliament .
On a more serious note , Einstein said that if the bee population died out , man himself would die out within four years .
Perhaps an exaggeration , yet Einstein was a genius and he knew what he was talking about - because no more bees , no more pollination and no more fruit , no more plants , no more man and , God forbid , no more Lullings .
So we have a serious problem , because the population globally has declined rapidly over the last 10 years .
There are a number of issues which have been raised .
The first problem is that of the parasites - the Varroa mite - that has to be addressed and dealt with .
Insecticides have a knock-on effect on bees as a result of being sprayed on plants .
Then we have the harsh winters : in 2008 , three million bees died during that harsh winter .
Then , of course , we have what we have in other areas , such as beef and fish : too many imports coming in too easily from third countries and undermining our own production .
These things need to be addressed with research and also with targets .
I think young people , because they are now very pro-nature , could be encouraged to go into beekeeping - as Ms McGuinness said , maybe as a hobby first , and some could go into it on a full-time basis if it proved productive .
Finally , I think we should include in the CAP a 2020 target for bees : that is , to increase the population by 20 % so that our bees can be as durable as Madam Lulling .

Madam President , as Mr Kelly has said , we have the queen bee here , who has had lots of suitors , as the queen bee plays a crucial role in relation to all the activities that go on in the hive .
When we think of the common agricultural policy , we think of mega-scale farming .
We think about cattle , beef , dairying , sheep , vegetables , wine and so on .
Here we have a Cinderella area that is absolutely au naturel if it is properly managed .
I look at the background to this , and it is quite clear that , as has been said , bees have a wonderfully diverse role as pollinators and suppliers .
The increase in bee-related diseases is endangering the species , which would be a tragedy .
Member States have their own various initiatives , but there is very little or no coordination .
What we need to do is to guarantee financial support for this particular sector .
Beekeeping is dependent on the modalities of the common agricultural policy , so we need to have a special line in relation to beekeeping .
Quite apart from the economic reality , if you look at , for example , the situation in relation to the health properties of honey - as we have more and more honey-based health supplements - it is quite obvious that the benefits from the point of view of the health of the ordinary human being are huge for those who decide to consume honey on a daily basis .
What we are doing here today is launching what Mrs Lulling did back in 1997 , and that is putting a specific emphasis onto something that is out there , that is natural and that we can do on a daily basis .
But we have got to ensure that it is protected , because there is too much contamination and a lack of regulation and documentation in terms of the actual statistics .
Last , but by no means least , we have a capacity to determine the number of hives that are out there .
It is not the number of hives , it is the number of bees and the number of swarms that is important at the end of the day : the actual numbers of bees which are actively promoting the whole honey product which we depend on as a human race and which is so hugely beneficial to all - each and every one of us .
So I commend my colleague , Mrs Lulling , for a wonderful initiative and I wish it well .
( DE ) Madam President , we do not have enough bees and we also do not have enough beekeepers .
The constant decline in the bee population over a number of years sends out a clear alarm signal .
The high levels of bee mortality caused by the Varroa mite and the unresolved problem of colony collapse disorder will unfortunately not go away .
Therefore , we must make sure that the beekeeping sector receives support beyond 2013 .
Two points are particularly important to me in this respect .
Firstly , without wide-ranging scientific research , it will not be possible to provide an effective explanation of bee mortality or to do anything useful to combat it .
My second point is about the product of beekeeping , the honey .
The same quality standards must apply to imported honey as to the honey produced in Europe .
Anything else would be seen as an attempt to deceive consumers and to put European producers at a competitive disadvantage .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , have presented some good proposals .
I would like to ask the Commission to take action on this basis .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , over the last decade , beekeeping has made great advances from a financial and entrepreneurial viewpoint .
Operations have graduated from being mainly hobbies to genuine profitable businesses , in addition to being shining examples of eco-friendly production .
This has been made possible by public , national and European aid .
Various factors have , unfortunately , led to a growing mortality rate among bees that causes risk not only to beekeepers in planning their activities but also to agriculture and the environment .
Bees are responsible for the welfare of many plants important to agriculture and , more generally , the balance of the ecosystem and the maintenance of biodiversity .
I call on the Commission to draw up an action plan without delay to deal with the widespread bee mortality .
Above all , though , with a view to the CAP after 2013 , I would ask that the true role of beekeeping be acknowledged and that EU cofinance be increased from 50 to 75 % .
( HU ) Madam President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur and Mrs Lulling for their role in this report on the situation of apiculture and , if you will allow me , I wish to express my gratitude to the deservedly world-famous Hungarian beekeepers for sharing their experiences and knowledge with me so that I could pass on all the information I received from them to the committee .
When the Hungarian beekeepers look at the completed document , they will see their invisible initials on it .
What I feel is very much lacking , however , and was not adopted from my amendments , is the financial recognition of apiculture 's effect of creating common good .
The beekeepers ' production of honey , beeswax , propolis and pollen is only the smaller part of their activity , is it not .
The larger part is that they multiply the qualitative and quantitative value of other agricultural produce as well through pollination .
This is a form of common good that ought to be recompensed in some way .
We suggested the introduction of the concept of community beekeeping , and even if we have not managed to achieve this now , we strongly recommend that at Member State level , beekeepers are given financial reward for their activity in the interest of the common good .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Cioloş , ladies and gentlemen , bees play a decisive role in our ecosystem .
On the one hand , they are important for the preservation of biodiversity and , on the other , biodiversity is important for the preservation of the bees , not only because this is the International Year of Biodiversity , but also because they contribute to our own survival .
As part of the reform of the common agricultural policy , we should focus , among other things , on preventing monocultures and increasing the use of wide crop rotation .
I do not want to talk about plant protection products and pesticides today .
I think that it is important to promote and develop research in this area and to improve the coordination between different research projects in the individual Member States in order to ensure that we have healthy bees .
Whatever happens , we should continue to support the beekeeping sector beyond 2013 and also make sure that in future , we have both enough bees and enough beekeepers to care for them .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the death rate amongst bees is increasing and the number of beekeepers is decreasing .
This situation is problematic for agriculture and , as fellow Members have been saying , for biodiversity , because of the enormous implications for food production and plant species that depend on pollination .
The life of a worker bee is very short - around six weeks - and very sensitive to environmental changes .
This means that honey production has also been affected , not just because of the increasingly uncertain length and stability of the seasons , but also because of growing threats from outside sources , such as pesticide use and mites , amongst other things .
Increased research into these could help produce better applied solutions , as well as more suitably enhanced measures to aid biodiversity and reduce the effects of climate instability .
Commissioner , there is no doubt that the current programmes must be reinforced within the framework of the new common agricultural policy , so that we can find more effective responses at that level too .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , from this we conclude that beekeeping is indeed an important sector in itself , because of what it produces directly , but also because of the indirect effects it can have on other crops .
In addition , I think we can conclude that bees are a good indicator of our ability to have an environmentally friendly farming industry .
On that , we can also say that nature is sometimes much more severe with our mistakes then we are , when we do not respect certain rules .
Regarding aid for the sector , I would say that with the support Mrs Lulling has in Parliament and all the other supporters , it would be difficult to say no .
As for now , more seriously , for reasons that I also highlighted in my introduction , it is clear that I do not intend to stop this support programme .
We will just have to consider how we can ensure we get added value from using the European budget for this type of programme , whilst ensuring that Member States have the flexibility to use it well .
I think that we can indeed have added value in research on bee health , but also in developing production and the quality of products as well as in promoting the consumption of honey and related products .
In that regard , we already have programmes that are being promoted .
This is perhaps something that could be developed .
So I think we have got targets ahead of us .
They will no doubt also be included in the CAP after 2013 .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday ( 25 November 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( LV ) I have been in touch with beekeeping organisations in Latvia .
On the whole , they welcome the fact that the problems besetting this sector are now under discussion , but they have questions concerning some points of the resolution which have not been adequately explained .
Unfortunately , our work and the text of the resolution have come under criticism in the Latvian media .
Having read the text of the resolution , several beekeepers ' representatives were under the impression that honey consisting of 50 % real honey only , the rest being made up of various sweeteners , could be labelled ' honey ' .
Naturally , representatives of Latvia 's beekeeping sector , who produce honey of very high quality , consider this proposition absurd .
I therefore consider that the resolution must make it clearer that this concerns processed honey products , so that there can be no misunderstanding on this question and so that our work does not cause the public to take a negative view of the work of Members of the European Parliament .
In the same vein , I should like to stress that we must discuss again and again the fact that people active not only in the beekeeping sector but in agriculture as a whole are noticeably ageing .
Only 7 % of Europe 's farmers are younger than 35 and no fewer than 4.5 million farmers will be retiring in the next 10 years .
We must develop support mechanisms for young farmers working in beekeeping and in other sectors of agriculture .
Generational change in agriculture is a strategic issue that is important for the future of the European Union and affects all European Union citizens .
Beekeeping is one of the key activities supporting agricultural production .
Its explicit features demand a specific approach to those who are involved in it .
In recent times , we have seen , on the one hand , a massive onset of some serious diseases among bees ( varroasis ) and , on the other , an ageing population of beekeepers in many states , with a number of national governments undervaluing support for their work in a time of economic crisis .
There are also other factors which threaten the continuing existence of beekeeping and thereby , indirectly , also the yields of many important agricultural crops .
These include , among other things , the use of chemicals in agriculture and forestry management .
In this situation , it is high time to adopt strong measures in support of beekeeping and in support of research aimed at treatments for bee diseases , and to provide training for those interested in taking up beekeeping .
Whether we are talking about a transitional period up to 2013 or a new seven-year period , it is vital to draw up sufficiently motivating programmes for developing beekeeping , supported by the relevant instruments , including both legal instruments at the EU level , as well as the allocation of financial resources and establishment of control mechanisms helping to monitor fulfilment of the objectives of the beekeeping support and development programme .
Without the appropriate measures , there will be a threat both to fruit growing and to the developing cultivation of many field crops .
I believe that the Commission 's response will be followed by specific measures and deadlines .
The text submitted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on support for the beekeeping sector is particularly relevant in the context of the common agricultural policy post-2013 reform .
At a time when bee deaths are rising and the number of beekeepers in Europe is falling , we must waste no time in assessing the difficulties faced by this sector and implementing the appropriate measures .
This is crucial in order to prevent the negative impact that is very likely to be had on our food production , since we know that 84 % of plant species depend on pollination by bees .
Therefore , as a first step in combating bee population collapses , we must gain a better insight into this phenomenon by carrying out more research into bee mortality .
Secondly , and in addition , we urge the Commission to increase its support for the beekeeping sector and to renew the existing support programmes before they come to an end , as planned , in 2012 .
Documents received : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23 : 40 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 05 )
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Conclusions of the European Council meeting ( 28-29 October ) and economic governance ( debate )
The next item is the key debate on the conclusions of the European Council meeting ( 28-29 October ) and economic governance .
I would like to welcome to the Chamber the President of the Council , Mr Van Rompuy , and the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso .
Also present with us are representatives of the Belgian Presidency and the Commission .
We will begin with the information which will be given to us by the President of the Council , Mr Van Rompuy .
President of the European Council . - Mr President , the European Council meeting of 28 / 29 October focused on the economic governance of our Union , in particular with the report of the Task force on economic governance .
The report which it endorsed and the events since then , and I refer in particular to Ireland , have illustrated the importance of the subject in general and of the need for the rapidly deployable financial mechanism we decided on in May , in particular .
I pay tribute to the speed of the action of the Finance Ministers over the last week and I underline that this illustrates the level of determination of our concern to safeguard the stability of the euro .
' EU and euro-area financial support will be provided under a strong policy programme which will be negotiated with the Irish authorities by the Commission and the IMF , in liaison with the European Central Bank . [ ... ]
Given the strong fundamentals of the Irish economy , decisive implementation of the programme should allow a return to a robust and sustainable growth , safeguarding the economic and social cohesion . '
I am here quoting the Eurogroup and ECOFIN Ministers .
The task force was not an intergovernmental conference , but it was a review of our working methods , priorities and procedures in this field .
We sought to get the right balance between , on the one hand , laying down an overall European framework regarding the need to avoid excessive fiscal deficits and economic imbalances inside the Union and , on the other hand , allowing national governments freely to choose what they want to tax and how they want to spend , in accordance with their national political procedures and European law .
We want to ensure that each Member State fully takes into account the impact of economic and fiscal decisions on its partners and on the stability of the European Union as a whole .
At the same time , we want to strengthen the capacity of the Union level to react when policies in a Member State present a risk to the rest of the Union .
These recommendations , like the others by the task force , are also extremely close to the Commission proposals .
I also discussed these issues twice with the group leaders in the European Parliament and with the chairs of the competent committees , in accordance with the format you requested .
One clarification .
Some people claim to be disappointed that there is not more automaticity in the decision making .
Well , more automaticity is exactly what we propose .
The Council - and it was the Council under the treaty - will decide on sanctions on the basis of a so-called ' reversed majority ' .
This means a Commission proposal for sanctions stands unless a qualified majority vote against , whereas until now a majority had to approve the sanctions .
Only a few weeks ago , some Member States were very reluctant about the reversed majority .
It really is a breakthrough ; and furthermore the task force proposed a whole series of other measures aimed at strengthening the Stability Pact , such as more policy coordination - the European semester - sound statistics and independent fiscal councils .
Member States should feel that their policy decisions affect all their partners and the Union as a whole .
This is the big lesson from the crisis .
A general remark : the task force was a political framework aimed at rapidly generating consensus .
All the breakthroughs we achieved now need to be translated into legislative texts .
The work needs to be done by the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
I trust all the institutions will keep up the momentum .
It is a vital responsibility .
Regarding the third and final main element of the task force , this also brings me to the follow-up of the task force .
We recommend a robust and credible permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area as a whole .
All the Heads of State or Government agreed on that need and on the fact that it requires a limited treaty change .
Before concluding on this point , I would like to underline that the work on the Stability Pact is not simply about being punitive to Member States or about rectifying past mistakes .
It is important to look at it in a wider context .
We must not lose sight of the wider challenge of improving Europe 's structure and sustainable growth rates and a general economic performance .
This was the focus of the EU 2020 strategy agreed by the European Council earlier this year .
The answer to those who fear that fiscal retrenchment will cut economic growth rates is to focus better on the underlying structural factors that hinder our economic performance and to remedy them .
That will be the main objective of the European Council meetings of February and March next year .
The European Council also had a brief discussion on EU budgetary matters , stimulated , among other things , by the speech of your President at the opening of our meeting .
We agreed to return to this in December .
In the meantime , our conclusions simply said , and I quote , ' It is essential that the European Union budget and the forthcoming Multiannual Financial Framework reflect the consolidation efforts being made by Member States to bring deficit and debt into a more sustainable path .
Respecting ' - and I stress this - ' respecting the role of the different institutions and the need to meet Europe 's objectives , the European Council will discuss at its next meeting how to ensure that spending at the European level can make an appropriate contribution to this work ' .
Let me reassure you that we acknowledge the new role of Parliament in line with the Treaty of Lisbon .
We did not , of course , take a position as the European Council on the 2011 budgetary procedure , as this is a matter for the Council of Ministers and Parliament .
As President of the European Council , I appeal to all parties concerned to continue their consultations in order to reach a compromise on the 2011 budget with the shortest delay possible .
In a compromise the various concerns have to be taken on board , while of course respecting the treaties .
This European Council also served - as will be the case for all European Councils - to prepare common positions for the European Union ahead of major international events .
In this case , our attention focused on the preparation of the G20 , the Cancún climate change conference and a number of bilateral summits .
On the G20 , which has , of course , now taken place , we agreed on the priorities , which were then promoted by the representatives of the Union and by the EU Member States that are members of the G20 .
These included securing approval of the Basel III Accords on capital requirements and on the reform of the IMF .
Concerning the latter , I would like to emphasise that this landmark reform was made possible by the open and constructive approach by the Europeans .
We gave up two seats in order to reach the final agreement , thus bearing a large part of the adjustment effort .
Concerning the question of imbalances in the global economy and exchange rate policy , discussions were tense in the run-up to the G20 meeting .
The summit made a right analysis and agreed on a process .
We welcome the decisions to establish a set of indicators on imbalances and the assessment that will made in 2011 .
What is now crucial is to agree on policy conclusions and , if need be , corrective action on the basis of this assessment .
On Cancún , the European Council also prepared the EU position for the negotiations starting at the end of this month .
Since Copenhagen last year , numerous talks have taken place - formal or informal - but they are slow and remain very difficult .
Cancún will probably only be an intermediate step towards a global framework on tackling climate change .
The European Union regrets this of course .
Finally , regarding our bilateral summits , the European Council discussed our priorities and strategies for the forthcoming summits , namely those with the United States , Russia , Ukraine , India and Africa .
This is extremely useful for President Barroso and myself and ensures that on such occasions we are speaking not just for the Brussels institutions , but for the 27 as a whole .
I intend to make this a regular feature of the European Council meetings .
Colleagues , that concludes my summary of the most recent meeting of the European Council , which took place nearly a month ago .
I will , in any case , continue my practice of briefing the leaders of your political groups immediately , within a couple of hours after the end of each European Council meeting .
I am looking forward to hearing your views .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , if a week is a long time in politics , a month can seem an eternity .
A lot has happened since the last European Council , not least the recent events in Ireland .
The action intended is a further , crucial step to safeguard the financial stability of Ireland , the euro area , and the European Union as a whole .
The two instruments we set up in May are effective tools that can do the job they are designed to do .
Ireland has very specific issues to address , and these instruments are able to respond to that .
This intervention should now allow the Irish economy to get back on the path to sustainable growth , drawing on its fundamental strengths .
The past few months have been a challenge .
We have come a very long way , but the work is not yet complete .
Our economic governance is being transformed .
The Task Force chaired by President Van Rompuy has presented its results , which are very positive .
Benefiting from significant inputs from the Commission , it has managed to achieve broad convergence on the Commission 's legislative proposals , and also covered some other very important aspects of economic governance .
Crucially , stricter fiscal rules and broader economic surveillance - both cornerstones of the Commission package - have been preserved .
I have stressed many times before the importance of having the new framework operational as soon as possible , so I was pleased that the European Council backed our idea for a ' fast track ' approach , and set itself the objective of agreement on the Commission 's legislative proposals by summer 2011 .
It is notable that the questions voiced last September about the Commission putting legislative proposals on the table have now turned into a desire to fast-track those proposals .
Now the normal legislative procedure must run its course over the coming months .
I count on the Community method to work as well as it has always done , and help us strengthen economic governance in the euro area and in Europe .
It is my belief that we will end up with tough rules , based on adequate incentives for compliance , semi-automatic implementation and an effective framework to deal with broader macro-economic imbalances .
We need reinforced and rigorous economic governance to achieve stable and sustainable growth , which is critical for the employment and welfare of our citizens .
A permanent crisis resolution mechanism for the euro area is an essential piece of this jigsaw .
The temporary mechanism currently in force will expire in 2013 , so it is vital that something credible , robust , lasting , and grounded in the essential technical realities is put in place by then .
That is why the Commission has already started its preparatory work on the general features of a future new mechanism for the euro area .
This mechanism , which we are preparing in close consultation with the President of the European Council , should be seen in the context of the overall effort to reinforce economic governance in the European Union and euro area .
I would like to make clear that even if the mechanism is funded from national budgets , it will remain a ' European ' initiative , and will of course be able to draw on the expertise , independence and impartiality of the Commission to make it function .
The mechanism will have three main components : a macro-economic adjustment programme , a financing arrangement , and private sector involvement .
The latter can take many forms , but first and foremost I want to make clear that , whatever is decided on private sector involvement , it will only apply after 2013 .
The Heads of State or Government decided unanimously that treaty change is required to establish this mechanism .
When we concluded the Treaty of Lisbon last year , nobody imagined someone would be proposing new changes so soon .
We all know that this is never an easy process , and we all understand the risks .
That is one of the reasons why I explained - during the European Council and even before - that we should not accept a revision of the treaty that calls into question the voting rights of Member States .
I am happy that this argument was accepted , and that any revision will be a limited - indeed a surgical - one .
It also makes sense for us to have as straightforward a process as possible .
That is why I would caution against the temptation to start linking this to other , unconnected subjects .
All this action is not taking place in a vacuum .
The European Council , the G20 summit , the EU / US Summit in Lisbon last weekend : all are staging posts , part of our larger plan to restore Europe to stability and growth .
We will speak about the G20 summit in the next debate in this House , so let me for now concentrate very briefly on the very important EU / US Summit in Lisbon .
The atmosphere at the summit was intimate , friendly , and focused .
Together with President Van Rompuy , we agreed with President Obama on the need for a transatlantic agenda for growth and jobs , including regulatory convergence and early consultations on issues like competitiveness and global reform .
We have tasked the Ministers and Commissioners with moving this concrete work forward , notably through the Transatlantic Economic Forum .
The global economy , the G20 and emerging economies were also very much on the agenda .
My point is this : the European Union will only be able to achieve its objectives if we activate all policy areas ; if we capitalise on the relationship we have with all our key partners ; if we use the leverage available to us in an integrated way at all levels - at national , European and global level .
One thing is clear : we will have more influence on the outside if we are capable of reaching agreement among ourselves , within the European Union .
In this respect , I am concerned that some of the more recent positioning has not contributed to the focus and coherence of our joint action .
I think that the progress that we have achieved so far on economic governance is an indication that we can , with sufficient political will on all sides , make Europe a stronger force in the world for the benefit of our citizens , but for this let us be clear that we need political will and we need a sense of common purpose , not only from the European institutions , but from all our Member States .
That is an appeal I want to make today : more coherence , more convergence , more common purpose .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , an opinion poll I read yesterday in a newspaper states that 70 % of French people believe that they are still in the midst of a crisis and that it has not yet been resolved .
I am sure that a broader survey in Europe would generate the same results .
We must therefore address our citizens ' valid concerns .
They are living in difficult times and cannot tolerate the slow and complex decision-making process at European and global level .
Many of these people have also asked me what we are doing and what Europe is doing for them and their family .
People are scared .
At the same time , I see that more and more politicians and more and more countries , even in this House , are using , manipulating and exploiting this fear and this anxiety and do not have any proposals .
This populist approach , which is corrupting our policy , is serious , and I should like to mention here that this is not the way to resolve the real and serious problems facing our countries and Europe in the world .
I believe that it is up to the political parties and the parliamentary groups that are against such populism and demagogy to speak out more .
No , the answer to the crisis is not to shy away from it or resort to protectionism .
No , there is no fast or easy solution to the crisis we are facing .
No , it is not possible to turn our back on solidarity or on efforts to strengthen all our countries in the face of globalisation and then realise , in the end , that we need partners when times are tough .
We must learn some lessons from what is happening in Ireland , and this is not a criticism of Ireland , President of the Council , President of the Commission .
We must learn lessons , because the difficulties that that country is facing are due not only to the banks but also to the current government 's fiscal and economic policy over the years .
The Celtic Tiger , which was solely responsible for its own growth , with an atypical tax system , minimal banking regulation and an investment code unlike that of any other country in the European Union , is today witnessing a collapse of its property bubble , household debt , record unemployment and a crippled banking sector .
The Irish Government has guaranteed the whole banking system , committing EUR 480 billion , or three times its GDP , which increases its public deficit to 32 % .
Today , the Irish Government has called for and rightly obtained European solidarity .
I welcome this and , as Commissioner Rehn said in this very Parliament on Monday , the aid Ireland should soon receive will safeguard the stability of the whole euro area .
Yet has this European solidarity , which Dublin is rightly receiving today , as it did when it joined the EU , been shown over the years by the Irish Government itself ?
How many times have Member States tried to align taxation - a prerequisite , as is all too evident today , for good governance of the euro ?
And every time the same few countries oppose it .
I am not pointing the finger at anyone , but I believe that it is time for us to learn from such behaviour for the future .
As I have said several times in this House , a crisis signifies an opportunity for change , and we must not be afraid to change some of our customs , which have not had the positive effect we were counting on .
Ladies and gentlemen , the measures adopted by the European Council a few weeks ago and the guidelines agreed at the G20 in Seoul represent a step in the right direction , but they do not go far enough .
In other words , there needs to be an awareness of the need for cooperation in Europe and among major regional blocs in order to address the instability of financial markets and trade imbalances and also to avoid a currency war .
We all know that , on all these issues , our countries alone will be unable to find a viable long-term solution to meet the expectations of the 500 million Europeans , who , as I said at the beginning , are expecting their politicians - that is to say all of us here and back home in our capitals - to make forward-looking decisions .
President of the Council , if the crisis has taught us anything , it is that yesterday 's solutions are not necessarily those of tomorrow .
We are paying a high price realising this in a time of crisis , but we will pay an even higher price if we continue to ignore it .
I call on the European institutions and the governments of our Member States to change , to learn political lessons from the crisis , and to stop seeking solidarity only when it is too late .
Mr President , I would like to add one last thing .
This is not a question of the Council and Parliament fighting against one another ; it is a question of implementing the treaties , of showing solidarity , and of working hand in hand .
This is the message I should like to get across to you so that we might overcome the crisis for the sake of our fellow citizens .
Mr President , as I listened to the President of the European Council , I heard a different tone to that of the President of the Commission .
The President of the Council has given us a report , and Mr Van Rompuy , if I allow myself to succumb to its spell then I can really only come to the conclusion that everything is hunky dory .
If I listen to Mr Barroso , however , I get more of an impression that - and I quote - ' some of the more recent positioning has not contributed to coherence ' .
That is what the President of the Commission said about the Council , which you are telling us is in complete harmony .
No , the reality in Europe is somewhat different .
The reality in Europe is that the EU is divided into three parts : the German-French decision makers , the rest of the euro area and the remainder that does not belong to the euro area , with a special position for the United Kingdom .
That is the reality in Europe .
The United Kingdom 's special position also needs to be looked at in particular .
The German-French Merkel-Sarkozy decision-making partnership has done a deal with Mr Cameron .
Everyone knows that and it also needs to be said openly .
The deal goes like this : ' I need a revision of the treaty for the Stability Pact ' .
' OK ' , says Mr Cameron , ' that is not easy for me because I have backbenchers in the House of Commons who do not want this , but then I will get a different budget ' .
Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy then say ' good , let us do that ' .
That is the reality in Europe .
Not only does that have nothing to do with Community spirit , it is an approach that will destroy the coherence of the European Union , and in the long term it will also destroy the European Union .
I fear that there are some people who want that to happen .
They applaud this enthusiastically .
These Members are sitting over there .
( Applause )
If we do not want these people to call the shots on this continent in future , we must take Europe in a different direction .
( Heckling )
I will attempt to continue .
Mr Langen is always very excitable .
The reform of the Stability Pact in the EU is being made dependent on the agreement of a country that does not even belong to the euro area .
Mrs Merkel is consenting to a revision of the treaty at a time when no one in this House can predict what will happen in Ireland .
Moreover , I do not know whether the revision of the EU Treaty will be accepted in Ireland as smoothly as it would seem from your report on the European Council .
Mrs Merkel says that the private sector must be included .
I would just like to put a question to you , Mr Rehn , regarding the private sector in Ireland .
How was it actually possible for the Irish banks to pass the stress tests ?
Could you explain that to us ?
What Mrs Merkel is doing constitutes a stress test for the euro .
I will tell you what is going on : the involvement of the private sector is a good thing , and it is right for it to be involved .
In the European Parliament - and I stand by this - we decided , with broad consensus , on a way of involving the private sector , namely the introduction of a Europe-wide financial transaction tax .
( Applause )
This was briefly discussed at the G8 summit , and then they said : ' no , we do not want a financial transaction tax ' .
We then said ' OK , we will forget about it then ' .
In the afternoon over coffee , the financial transaction tax was buried .
If there was a way of involving the private sector that would actually have an effect on this private sector then this would be it .
People are now saying that the United Kingdom does not want it .
Does the United Kingdom actually decide everything in Europe ?
What if we started with a financial transaction tax in the euro area first , for example , and said that we would collect dues from the private financial sector within the euro area in this way .
( Heckling )
I will just repeat what he said so that the interpreter can say it : ' one people , one empire , one leader ' .
That was what this man said .
I am almost finished .
It is just that when this Member walks through the Chamber and shouts ' one people , one empire , one leader ' , I have only one thing to say : the people who said that in Germany are people whose way of thinking is one that I am fighting to combat , but I believe that this gentleman 's views are closer to this way of thinking than mine are .
( FR ) ( addressing Mr Bloom ) I cannot accept what you said .
We live in a democratic age and under a democratic system .
I would ask you to make an official apology , or else we are going to make a formal complaint .
There are people who have said less than that - it is not right .
( Applause )
He very nearly added that concentration camps were being set up to resolve the issue .
Dear colleagues , we must go ahead .
I will take it into account .
Let me read you Rule 152 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure : ' The President shall call to order any Member who disrupts the smooth conduct of the proceedings or whose conduct fails to comply with the relevant provisions of Rule 9 ' .
I will ask you , colleague , to apologise to the Chamber .
The views expressed by Herr Schulz meet the case .
He is an undemocratic fascist .
Colleagues , we expected something quite different .
We do not want our discussion to be disturbed in such a way .
I will call you , colleague , to a meeting with me and we must take a decision on the next steps .
It is impossible to hold our discussions in such an atmosphere .
Colleague , as you see , the Chamber is protesting very deeply against your behaviour .
I shall read Article 152 ( 3 ) in my mother tongue .
Mr President , firstly I believe that what has happened is very serious .
I also believe that the political groups must respond today with a common position on this issue and I hope that all the political groups , excluding , of course , the group of the Member concerned , are very clear in supporting the steps that you have taken to prevent this from ever happening again .
( Applause )
I believe that what Mr Daul said about Ireland - because he has fully analysed Ireland 's situation - is completely true , but I should nonetheless like to say to him that , if at the beginning of the financial crisis we had established a European rescue plan for the banks in October 2008 , as was tabled by the Commission but rejected by the Member States , Ireland would never have faced the problems it is facing today .
That proposal was rejected in October 2008 with the words , ' No , it is unnecessary .
We in Germany have enough money to resolve our problems ourselves . '
Well , we saw what the outcome of that was .
Secondly , I should like to address the current issue , because there is still tension surrounding it .
As far as I am concerned , I hope that the euro will stabilise again tomorrow or the day after tomorrow , because it has yet to do so .
I therefore believe that what the President of the European Central Bank and Mr Rehn said yesterday must be taken very seriously .
I believe that what Mr Trichet said during yesterday 's debate - there were not many people present during the debate - is very significant .
He said that the package was not enough to restore stability in the euro area .
We in Parliament therefore have a special responsibility because we are joint decision makers in all these areas .
This must be taken seriously .
In fact , what exactly is the problem ?
Nowhere in the world is there a currency that is not supported by a government , a single economic policy , a strategy , and a single bond market .
We believe , in the euro area , that it is possible to act with 16 governments , 16 bond markets , and 16 different economic policies ; I believe that this is the basis on which we must act and the conclusion that we must reach .
We must go beyond the Council 's decisions .
Mr Rehn , I even believe that we must go beyond the Commission 's proposals , and we must support Mr Trichet .
If Mr Trichet , who is , after all , responsible for the stability of the euro , calls on Parliament and the other European authorities to strengthen the package , the only decision we can make for the financial markets is to strengthen the package , communitise , introduce fully automatic sanctions - which are not in place at the moment - and create a bond market in euros .
The differences between Greece and Germany and between Ireland and Germany are not going to disappear if there is no single bond market .
A truly effective additional sanction could also be introduced for countries failing to adhere to the stability pact .
Finally , I should like to say that we need the kind of real economic governance that stimulates investment , and if the German Government calls for Article 136 of the treaty to be changed for this purpose , then let us change it , but let us also do what is necessary and include real economic governance and fully automatic sanctions in Article 136 in the future .
Let us turn these changes to the treaty before us into a real opportunity to prepare the euro for the future , that is to say by establishing economic governance in the euro area and in the European Union .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


Mr President , in the event that the Commission gets the economic governance which it is seeking and which you are seeking for it , is it then your contention , Mr Verhofstadt , that the Commission would always make the right decisions ?
Mr President , I think I have more confidence in the intention of the European Commission to take measures against countries that do not apply the Stability Pact than in the Council itself where the Heads of Governments are .
I spent nine years in the Council , and I have never seen a country pointing the finger at another country and saying ' you are not applying the Stability Pact ' .
We saw it in 2004 and 2005 with France and Germany .
They did not apply the Stability Pact , and there was no sanction against either country .
That is the reason why the European Commission , which is the communitarian institution and really follows the method of Monnet and Schuman , has to take the lead in this .
( NL ) Mr President , that is right .
I was unable to intervene when you excluded from the Chamber our fellow Member from the UK Independence Party ( UKIP ) , but I should nevertheless like to object to the biased implementation of the rules .
Mr Schulz called my colleague , Mr van der Stoep , a fascist here in this Chamber and you did nothing ; no apologies were forthcoming .
No action was taken against Mr Schulz .
What Mr Schulz is doing now is exactly the same ...
( The speaker continued but his microphone was switched off )
I must bring this conversation to an end .
If you have any doubts about what has taken place , you can come to me about it .
I am willing to talk with you .
We will talk about it together .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is rather difficult to speak in this highly-charged atmosphere .
It is also to some extent a demonstration of the situation in which the European Union could find itself if we do not once again formulate European policy in a more careful and more resolute way .
My view , Mr Schulz , is that the problem is not the small changes to the treaty that Germany wants and needs - because the financial crisis is not a natural disaster .
Rather , the problem is that , in this crisis , the European Council , and in particular the representatives of the large countries in the European Council , are no longer in a position to ensure that a positive spark from the Brussels meeting spreads out into society within the Member States of the European Union .
I find it truly bizarre how quickly this pro-European spirit has been lost .
I also find it bizarre that Germany of all countries , which benefited so much from solidarity in our distant and more recent common past , is no longer able to lead us away from a debate that is today characterised by egotism and small-mindedness and towards a discussion of why it is right that the Member States in Europe have linked their fate so closely with one another and why the Council and you too , Mr Van Rompuy , no longer succeed in explaining to citizens , whose uncertainty Mr Daul described so well , why it will only be possible to overcome this crisis if we work together rather than competing against one another .
The complete absence of this spirit is one of our problems .
The second is that there has been no honest political statement about the fact that we are not rescuing all the Greeks or all the Irish people , we are rescuing the banks in each case , and that Ireland is not only an Irish crisis , it is also a German crisis and a British crisis , even if this is a message you may not necessarily want to hear .
I believe that this honesty will provide the basis for persuading citizens to actually support what is decided in Brussels during these times of crisis .
My third point is that I think Mr Verhofstadt is absolutely right .
Economic governance is what needs to take shape now .
We all know that .
No matter how often the Council or the Commission declare that they want to take the necessary steps as soon as possible , alarm bells ring with me , because it is precisely this lack of a pro-European spirit of solidarity that will mean that these necessary and logical steps for integration will not be taken .
It is one thing to talk now about tax dumping in Ireland .
Something needs to change here .
How this is to be done is another question .
When , and within what timeframe , is yet another one .
Overall , however , the Member States need to coordinate their tax policies , otherwise things will not continue to go well in the European Union .
There is one discussion that we should take seriously because it has also been given prominence : the involvement of creditors , the restructuring of debt , including among those who were the direct cause of the crisis .
I have to tell you , it is extremely difficult for me to judge what is right and what is wrong in this regard .
We know that the countdown has begun for Spain and Portugal .
We know that it is only a matter of time until they will also be looking for solidarity and crisis management .
I do not know whether we would be doing ourselves a favour if we now involve the creditors or whether it would not now be better in fact to say that we want this economic governance , we want strict regulation of the banking sector , we want the financial transaction tax or capital levies for those who are profiting from the crisis .
This is something that we need to weigh up together .
There is absolutely no point in acting as if no decision needs to be made here . Thank you for your attention .
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , for once the two main topics being discussed by the European Council and the media back in my Welsh constituency are one and the same .
Firstly , how will the EU cope with the situation in Ireland and secondly , how to resolve the impasse of the EU budget .
In Wales we fully appreciate the EU funds received and all my constituents appreciate the need for a stable eurozone .
However , the differences between the way the two topics are discussed in Cardiff and in Brussels are pronounced .
In Brussels within the European Parliament , we take the two issues and discuss them separately .
The European Parliament 's response and that of the Council to save the euro is that we need improved economic governance , more rules for national governments and enforcement via fines and sanctions .
In Cardiff , my capital city - and I am sure in Dublin - while for the budget we conclude that there is a need for Member States to stop being selfish and put more Europe over the needs of their own countries , it all comes back to how and where taxpayers ' money should be spent .
People know that austerity packages are necessary .
They are told just how indebted their countries are every day .
They know tough decisions have to be made , but they also want to decide how their hard earned money gets spent .
Being asked to give up even more money to funding EU projects through an increased EU budget at a time when they are being asked to give up a slice of their public sector pensions , or even in some cases basic welfare provisions that they have come to depend on , is for many constituents a step too far .
When the EU itself recognises that it has not done a good enough job at enforcing its own rules and standards within the eurozone , it hardly gives citizens much incentive to give it even more money .
During these times of strict public spending , and as we review rules on economic governance for Member States , we within the European Parliament need to respect the pressures that Member States are under and accept that all non-urgent projects of EU institutions should be deferred to allow the setting of an EU budget that reflects our troubled economic times .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , does the speaker appreciate that the so-called EU funds which she referred to as having been received by her constituents are simply the UK 's own money being returned , but being returned only in part and after the European Union has skimmed off its croupier 's share ?
Does the lady appreciate or understand that ?
Mr President , as the gentleman knows , I fully appreciate where the money comes from and who the net payers are to the EU budget .
However , my constituents in Wales just see that they get investment in crucial projects when they actually have a GDP lower than any other region in the UK .
So I will defend the EU 's spend in my constituency every day .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , if the Heads of State or Government have agreed to create a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area , I can only welcome that .
The results of the work , lasting several months , of Mr Van Rompuy 's Task Force on economic governance leave a great deal to be desired - although my views on them vary .
The attempt is being made to carry out as stringent a control on the budgets as possible in order to avoid long-term deficits , but the cautious recovery from the crisis will immediately be put at risk again by the radical cutting of public expenditure .
That is not only completely counterproductive , I also think it is absurd .
It seems that we have learnt nothing from our past experience with the Stability and Growth Pact .
You cannot impose additional monetary penalties on a country that is already heavily in debt .
The bail-out ban and the Stability and Growth Pact destroy the solidarity between the States in the monetary union .
Does the economy dictate our policies ?
Once again , the consequences of the crisis will be borne by the people .
We can expect wage dumping and social dumping , cuts in the education sector and a rise in unemployment .
This will further increase the burden of the countries affected and make their recovery more difficult .
It makes absolutely no sense to increase the pressure on countries like Ireland , Greece or Portugal .
Rather , the large economic disparities in Europe should be reduced , in other words we need economic governance .
We want a social and fair Europe , built on the principle of solidarity .
The precedence of policy over economy must be retained or restored .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy has been in office for one year , and in that time the whole edifice is beginning to crumble .
There is chaos .
The money is running out .
I should thank Mr Van Rompuy .
He should perhaps be the pin-up boy of the Eurosceptic movement .
But just look around this Chamber this morning , Mr Van Rompuy .
Just look at these faces .
Look at the fear .
Look at the anger .
Poor old Barroso here looks like he has seen a ghost .
You know , they are beginning to understand that the game is up and yet , in their desperation to preserve their dream , they want to remove any remaining traces of democracy from the system .
It is pretty clear that none of you have learned anything .
When you yourself , Mr Van Rompuy , say that the euro has brought us stability , I suppose I could applaud you for having a sense of humour .
But is this not really just the bunker mentality ?
Your fanaticism is out in the open .
You talked about the fact that it was a lie to believe that the nation state could exist in the 21st-century globalised world .
Well , that may be true in the case of Belgium - which has not had a government for six months - but for the rest of us , right across every Member State in this Union ( and perhaps this is why we see the fear in the faces ) , people are increasingly saying : ' We don 't want that flag , we don 't want the anthem , we don 't want this political class , we want the whole thing consigned to the dustbin of history ' .
We had the Greek tragedy earlier on this year , and now we have the situation in Ireland .
I know that the stupidity and greed of Irish politicians has a lot to do with this .
They should never have joined the euro .
They suffered with low interest rates , a false boom and a massive bust .
But look at your response to them .
What they are being told , as their government is collapsing , is that it would be inappropriate for them to have a general election .
In fact , Commissioner Rehn here said they had to agree their budget first before they would be allowed to have a general election .
Just who the hell do you people think you are ?
You are very dangerous people indeed .
Your obsession with creating this euro-state means that you are happy to destroy democracy .
You appear to be happy for millions of people to be unemployed and to be poor .
Untold millions must suffer so that your euro-dream can continue .
Well it will not work , because it is Portugal next .
With their debt levels of 325 % of GDP , they are the next ones on the list .
After that , I suspect it will be Spain .
The bailout for Spain would be seven times the size of Ireland 's , and at that moment , all the bailout money will have gone .
There will not be any more .
But it is even more serious than economics , because if you rob people of their identity , if you rob them of their democracy , then all they are left with is nationalism and violence .
I can only hope and pray that the euro project is destroyed by the markets before that really happens .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in order to overcome the present financial crisis we need fundamental changes to economic responsibility in Europe : an increase in financial discipline , monitoring of economic policy and an improvement in the coordination of crisis management .
Strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact would inevitably lead to an increase in economic responsibility .
Successive sanctions could come into play at an early stage in the budgetary surveillance process and account would be taken of the deficit criterion and public debt .
Finally , a new crisis mechanism means , among other things , that banks and insurance providers , for example , can be held accountable .
I call on these institutions to be more responsible towards taxpayers .
I would just like to say one more thing regarding Cancún .
The EU wants to speak with one voice .
These difficult times in particular provide an opportunity to invest in renewable energies and energy efficiency , for example , and in so doing improve the environment as well as our growth policy .


( NL ) Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , what with the banking crisis , the economic crisis and the crisis situations in public finances , we have really learned , and experienced more than ever , what crises are in the last two-and-a-half years .
To date , the reactions by the authorities , especially at European level , have been good .
The existence and resistance of the euro and also the precise action of the European Central Bank have prevented the situation escalating .
' Strength in unity ' , we have learned in Europe , and solidarity works .
However , the current state of affairs proves that we must continue to make structural adjustments and that we really need to move towards economic governance .
Even if the euro lulled us to sleep quite a bit , President of the European Council , let us see the seriousness of this crisis as a wake-up call to make full use of our European strength in future .
Strict rules and sufficient enforcement mechanisms are needed for the financial sector , the public budgets and the debt , and also for the correction of macro-economic imbalances .
They are needed in order to restore confidence , boost competitiveness , promote economic growth and increase opportunities for jobs and prosperity .
I hope that no one is deterred by stringent measures for fear of the European Union being depicted as the bogeyman by the Member States , as the truth is that Member States need external pressure , possibly even a bogeyman , because they cannot cope with the task alone in the age of globalisation .
President of the European Council , the conclusions we have read , which are the work of your task force to a very great extent , will put the Union on the path towards the necessary structural adjustments , and in that respect we welcome them .
I have two questions , however .
The first is that more than half of the governance package must be decided on using codecision , yet you are asking for fast-track procedures to be used in the decision making .
I wonder , then , whether you are leaving the Economic and Financial Affairs Council ( Ecofin ) sufficient scope to negotiate with Parliament and to allow Parliament to play its role to the full , as that is what we want .
Secondly , and finally , the European Council opposes automatism in the system of sanctions : no treaty amendment , no opening of Pandora 's box .
On the other hand , however , you yourself are proposing to amend the treaty to enable the creation of the permanent crisis mechanism , a mechanism we need .
Where does that leave Pandora , I ask myself .
Thank you in advance for your answers .
Mr President , I am sure one thing we can all agree on is that Heads of State or Government are extremely busy men and women .
I find it extremely puzzling , therefore , that they come together every three months or so and waste a tremendous amount of time and money to decide very little in the face of a crisis which is doubly underlined by what has just happened in Ireland .
Just look at the idea of a financial transaction tax .
It was on the agenda of the March summit , the June Summit and the October Summit , with each Council batting it on to the next Council .
It has now been batted on to the December Council and presumably beyond that , way on into the future .
We urgently need a leap forward in economic governance ; we need vision and action , mutual solidarity and close coordination .
But instead , all we are getting is confusion , hesitation and mutual mistrust , which leads to permanent instability instead of stability .
Some things are clear .
First , a further tightening of the Stability and Growth Pact will not be enough .
Worse still , there is a considerable danger that the new system as proposed will end up being procyclical and therefore counterproductive for growth and jobs .
Second , economic and monetary union needs to be made far more effective through truly balanced and effective economic policy coordination , not just surveillance and sanctioning .
Third , in one way or another , there needs to be a system of common debt management for at least a share of public debt - maybe up to 60 % of GDP .
The economic benefits of such a system of eurobonds are huge and clear .
President van Rompuy , you are on record as having said that you are not fond of politicians with a vision .
I think you prefer practical action : I understand that .
But I think you can now begin to move to bring the two together .
I hope the path is clear and that the FTT and a balanced system of economic policy coordination are beyond mere surveillance and common debt management .
I think it is time , President van Rompuy , for vision and action .
( DE ) Mr President , there is one thing that it is important for citizens , too , to understand : the European Union is not in debt .
We are talking here about a debt crisis in our Member States .
The European Union is the only political level in Europe that is debt free .
I would also like it to remain that way .
However , we are joined together in a shared destiny by the euro .
In this regard , Mrs Harms and Mr Schulz rightly lamented the lack of European spirit .
Deauville was a mistake .
Germany and France have been blackmailed by the United Kingdom .
The Commission must impose the sanctions , not the finance ministers .
Mr Van Rompuy , the automatic nature of the sanctions during the preventive phase was sacrificed in Deauville .
The finance ministers must take the decision again here .
These are the ones who were previously responsible for triggering the financial crisis and the debt crisis in the Member States .
What is economic governance ?
Everyone is talking about economic governance , but what does it actually mean in specific terms ?
Do we really want the European Union to interfere in the details of our labour market and social policy ?
There is a big question mark here .
Setting the legal framework for entrepreneurship , stimulating growth , they are all well and good , but above all putting public finances in order once again in the Member States - that is the challenge .
That is why the European Semester is so important , and that is why it must be implemented .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr Graf Lambsdorff , you are , of course , a member of the Federal Executive Committee of the Free Democratic Party .
Is your assertion that Deauville was a mistake also the opinion of the leader of your party and the Vice-Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany , or is it your personal opinion ?
May we take that as the opinion of the FDP or just as the opinion of Mr Graf Lambsdorff ?
( DE ) Mr President , of course I am happy to answer that .
Mr Schulz is , of course , also a member of the Bureau of the Social Democratic Party of Germany and will also occasionally make statements here which are probably not entirely congruent .
There is , however , one thing I would like to say , and it is that , if Mr Schulz can show me who from the FDP was present in Deauville , I would be grateful to him .
We made a relatively clear statement on this at the end of the summit .
I believe that the key point , namely actually relinquishing the automatic nature of the sanctions in the preventive phase , was criticised by us in no uncertain terms .
If we get the change to the treaty , this will be rectified retrospectively .
However , the decision made in Deauville was clearly a mistake .
( FR ) Mr President , for the past 25 years , too many Member States have been living with an economic growth model that is essentially based on debt - both public and private debt .
The problem is that this debt primarily funded financial speculation and consumption rather than investment , at the very time when the rest of the world , such as China , Brazil and India , was beginning to invest .
Perhaps history books will describe this as the moment when Europe really lost its way .
It does not have to be like this , however .
Of course , we need strong European economic governance , but first we need to deal with the havoc caused by this debt .
If we believe that we can resolve the problem by simply cutting back on public spending , then we are not facing up to reality .
We will not overcome this crisis without restructuring and rescheduling the debt where it has exceeded sustainable levels and the debtors cannot realistically pay it back .
We need to be clear here .
The debtors and the creditors are both responsible for the accumulation of debt .
Indeed , the debtors borrowed beyond their means , but the creditors loaned irresponsibly in the hope of making substantial , risk-free profits , since the taxpayer would , of course , always be there to see them through .
Thus , the debtors and creditors alike will have to participate in these efforts , and if we do not ensure that this happens , we will condemn ourselves to a Japanese-type scenario , that is to say a slump in the European Union .
I believe that the citizens of this continent deserve much better than that .
Mr President , this is a debate about economic governance .
Across Europe many countries , including my own , face difficult economic times .
This weekend , the EU and the UK extended support to our friends across the Irish Sea .
This is not a time for the European Parliament to indulge in name-calling or finger-pointing , but it is a time for learning from our mistakes and making better decisions in the future .
Last week , in the middle of November , Greece amended its December year-end accounts for the third time .
I hope we have finally drawn a line under those accounts .
If there was ever a good reason for countries to ensure better accounting and forecasting , that was it .
The European Council has gone a long way in their detailed plans for sharing of information during the European Semester .
It needs to be put into practice .
Yes , we should share good practice between different countries , but also recognise that not all countries are the same and good economic governance can be achieved in different ways but for the benefit of all .
( GA ) Mr President , with the IMF , the European Central Bank and the Commission introducing onerous conditions , it is clear that billions of euros of cutbacks are being introduced in Ireland .
Jobs will be lost , public services will be significantly curtailed , and income tax will be raised for people on low wages .
The banks will keep their profits while the poor , the sick , pensioners and other vulnerable groups will be the losers in all of this .
Aid from Europe this is not , and therefore we strongly oppose it .
Instead of seeking a mandate to introduce these cuts , after the IMF and the EU had examined the account books , the Irish Government decided that there would be no election until this budget had been enacted .
There was another way to go , and the Irish Government chose not to go that way .
They decided to act for the benefit of their friends in the banks and not for that of the plain people of Ireland .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ears of the President of the European Central Bank , Mr Trichet , must really be burning as this debate continues .
If we were in the ancient Roman senate , a senator would surely stand up in his toga and say to Mr Trichet : ' Quousque tandem abutere , Trichete , patientia nostra ? ' - how long are you going to try our patience , Mr Trichet ?

In effect , we must ask ourselves whether the right road is to avoid the dissolution of the euro - a very difficult task - or instead prevent the rescue of the euro from ruining the economies of our Member States after the europhile policies of Mr Prodi and so on have destroyed our industries , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , in Padania for example , bringing only redundancies and unemployment benefit .

Why should the countries which are surviving the crisis be bled dry to the tune of almost EUR 100 billion to save Ireland which , with its policy of 12.5 % business tax , , has until now been competing unfairly with the other countries ?
Where was European governance if , one month after passing its stress tests , the Anglo Irish Bank plunged to a deficit of EUR 8 billion ?
Where was Mr Trichet ?
Are we sure that the Irish bailout does not violate the Treaty of Maastricht ?
Fortunately there is a constitutional court in Germany that will declare that the absorption of another country 's deficit onto Germany 's books is unconstitutional .
So it is time to say bye-bye euro , bye-bye euro .

( DE ) Mr President , I have heard a lot of criticism of the Deauville decision here , but everyone knows that , at the start of the last meeting of your Task Force , Mr Van Rompuy there were still 20 items outstanding .
As they are subject to the principle of unanimity , a solution had to be found .
Everyone knows that .
Everyone also knows that the two largest Member States , Germany and France , are the ones who sinned against the Stability and Growth Pact in 2004 , although at that time , as we also know , there was a Social Democrat / Green federal government in Germany .
Mr Schulz 's scolding is therefore completely uncalled for .
If we are saying today that the Stability and Growth Pact should have more bite , the first prerequisite for this is that the Member States finally abide by this Pact .
What is the point of it having more bite if no one sticks to it ?
There has been a lack of compliance here .
We have six legislative proposals , two of which are Council regulations and four are joint regulations of the Council and the European Parliament .
I just do not understand some of this complaining .
We will have our say in the codecision procedure .
On behalf of my group , I can say that we will support the Commission 's proposals in this area .
Then we will negotiate on this matter again with the Council .
This is the reality .
Why are we so unassuming and insult third parties who are part of this legislative process instead of exercising our own rights .
Allow me to say something about the necessity of amendments to the treaty .
In my opinion , the treaty was stretched to its limits on 9 May .
A justification of the rescue package in accordance with Article 122 is required .
The fact that the Member States do not want this because the Commission and Parliament could then possibly get involved is , in my opinion , a mistake .
It will not be sufficient to amend Article 136 ; rather we need a solid legal basis for the rescue package and then all the other issues will resolve themselves .
( PT ) Mr President , let us be frank .
The solidarity mechanism for sovereign debt has not worked and does not work , the price of Greek debt has not fallen , Ireland is in economic turmoil and contagion has not been contained .
When a process was set up it was done too late .
It is intergovernmental and should have existed in another format from the time that the euro was initially created .
The President of the Commission is now proposing a consolidation of this system .
However , the involvement of the private sector is suggested for a third of the instruments that are proposed .
We had already heard that proposal made to Chancellor Merkel , and the markets soared as a result of that premature and untimely announcement .
Parliament will use all its powers and the greatest responsibility and spirit of cooperation in the codecision process accompanying the legislative package on economic governance , but it will not do so by sacrificing urgency and speed , putting quality in second place .
To be clear , therefore , Parliament will actively participate , but a matter as serious as resolving sovereign debt cannot be decided as a marginal issue or without the involvement of the European public and its representatives ; the two elements go hand in hand .
Lastly , we Europeans need a clear European vision in this time of crisis .
There needs to be a European mechanism for consolidating sovereign debt .
Eurobonds need to be issued and the euro area must be protected in a sustainable way through European , not intergovernmental , systems .
The European budget needs to be strengthened , as we cannot continue with 1 % of the level of the European budget , and growth and real convergence should be at the heart of Europe 's political priorities .
The Commission and the new President must uphold this agenda .
The President of the Commission cannot be beholden to the Ecofin Council .
This is what we need to show the European public .
( PL ) Mr President , the crisis in the euro area is a fact .
Testimony to the seriousness of the situation are the efforts which are even being made to change the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , which was adopted amid such great opposition .
On the one hand , it is easy to understand the position of Germany and France , which do not want to pay for the crisis in Greece or Ireland and perhaps other countries .
On the other hand , attention should be drawn to the precedent related to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In principle , it was supposed to improve the operation of the European Union .
Quite clearly , the exact opposite has happened .
Since , however , we are forced to amend the Treaty of Lisbon , this should concern not only issues related to the euro area , but also issues related to other institutional mechanisms which are experiencing difficulties .
Many economists are saying that the Greek crisis would not exist on a European scale if Greece had retained its own currency , whose exchange rate would then have been reduced significantly .
This shows that national currencies would have given the Union more stability than the euro area has done .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make a political assessment of what has been said during this debate .
Quite rightly , we the members of the main European political families criticise Eurosceptics because they do not believe in Europe .
However , I believe that the real problem is that perhaps we do not believe in Europe ourselves , so we cannot blame the Eurosceptics for what is really our own responsibility .
We are the main European political families and we have always held strong , ambitious European ideals .
It is a fact , however , that all the governments that are an expression of our political families put spanners in the works every day , so that these grand political projects can be realised .
In many cases , then , what they say they want to do in the daytime is undone overnight .
This places further responsibility upon us , because if we are incapable of steering the implementation of particular projects through debate , from Eurobonds - to be specific - to issuing European Union bonds , it will be very difficult to explain to our citizens that we are the same parties that back at home blame Europe for everything and say that we will only be able to emerge from the crisis when Europe has cut back its expenditure .
I believe that this is a principle of basic responsibility , which , if forgotten , results in the very nature of the European project being lost , and we will lose credibility in exchange for only empty chambers and deserted ballot boxes until only 40 % of our citizens take part .
( EL ) Mr President , if there is one basic conclusion to be drawn from the decisions taken by the last European Council , it is that they failed to persuade the markets , they failed to appease the markets .
With the markets nowadays having the first and the last word , we need to ask ourselves why .
Is it perhaps because , over and above the very stringent rules of budgetary discipline , the markets understand that we are widening rather than addressing the economic and political cohesion gap within the euro area ?
Is it perhaps because the treatment which one group of states reserved for what was , all other things being equal , the right idea of creating a permanent crisis management mechanism appeared to cancel out the added value of such a mechanism in practice , thereby sending the wrong message to the markets and putting us at risk of ending up with a mechanism that was a self-fulfilling prophecy of controlled bankruptcy ?
If we really are determined to involve the private sector , to apportion the burden , why do we doggedly refuse to go ahead and adopt a transaction tax at European level ?
Finally , why can we not understand that there is an important gap between tightening up the rules of budgetary discipline and a permanent crisis management mechanism ?
A gap that we could plug if we were to decide to seriously consider the creation of a joint mechanism to manage part of the Member States ' debt by issuing Eurobonds .
Mr President , to start , let me say that long-term conditions of competitiveness in individual Member States will differ for years to come .
Structural causes of imbalances will therefore continue while economic governance will still be rather weak as a process in the making .
In this context , it is of the utmost importance that the Commission urgently tests , with the first annual growth survey at the launch of the European semester 2011 , as many elements of new economic governance as possible , in particular the relevance of the scoreboard and its operational ability .
Second , I understand that a system of fully automatic sanctions would require a treaty change and the proposed system can take us only as far as we can go within the confines of the treaty .
That is why I trust that the Commission and the Council will do their utmost to avoid additional stages in the treatment that would unnecessarily delay the procedure .
Third , the EU 's economic health is not a simple sum of national situations .
Additionally , as the system is based on identifying individual Member States who do not behave , fixing their poor behaviour can have negative externalities .
In particular , the treatment of imbalances can have an impact on other Member States of the eurozone and the rest of the Union .
These potential effects should be accounted for in individual treatments so that the economic health of the Union as a whole improves .
Last , I understand that a complete and in-depth impact assessment of the economic governance blueprint would require time we do not have .
What helps here is that over the last two years the Commission has acquired substantial and in-depth knowledge and understanding of the 27 economies , so I would like to ask for two actions now . Ensure comparability of all elements and relations between internal and external imbalances .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Welcome
Colleagues , I welcome the delegation from the EEA-EFTA Parliaments , that is our colleagues from Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway , as well as the observers from the Swiss Federal Assembly , who are in the official gallery .
It is a pleasure for me to welcome this delegation to the European Parliament in Strasbourg , where they will participate in the 35th EEA JPC meeting today and tomorrow .
I hope that the well-established work of the EEA JPC this week will be productive and will contribute to enhanced parliamentary cooperation , as well as to ensuring democratic parliamentary supervision within the EEA . Welcome , colleagues .
Conclusions of the European Council meeting ( 28-29 October ) and economic governance ( continuation of debate )
We now continue with the debate on the Conclusions of the European Council meeting ( 28-29 October ) and economic governance .
( NL ) Mr President , listening to today 's debate one thing stands out , and that is the big issue - important to almost all the political groups - of economic governance .
The consensus is only superficial , as there is a huge difference in interpretation regarding this economic governance .
Looking at the Council 's interpretation , which can also be seen from its conclusions , one sees a one-sided focus on what the Council considers necessary , namely savings , savings and more savings .
It is almost an ideology that has been made into an economic law : one only need save enough and everything will be all right again .
That is not our interpretation of economic governance .
On the contrary , something completely different will be needed , and our group is not the only one saying this .
Look at the economists , look at yesterday 's De Tijd - not exactly a socialist propaganda newspaper - which says , and I paraphrase , ' saving on its own undermines already ailing economies and makes it increasingly difficult to repay debts ' .
Investment is also needed .
A very nice , obvious , example of what is needed is an increase in the employment rate . This would enable the repayment of debts , in all our Member States .
Yet this requires the courage to invest in education and training , the courage to invest in the balance between work and family life .
Looking at the savings in the various Member States , we see that it is precisely this kind of investment that is suffering cutbacks .
A vision is needed - a perspective on economic policy - as a basis for mobilising the resources to do this .
Only then should we take a look at how best to give shape to the Stability and Growth Pact .
I believe that that is the major difference between our perspective on economic governance and the Council 's .


( PT ) Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , obviously I would like to say that the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is clear : it takes the view that the resolution of the serious crisis that Europe is experiencing is only possible through expanding economic governance and the Community method .
We have no doubt that the only way to confront and tackle this crisis is through more Community method , through more economic governance and through the instruments appropriate to a true single currency in the euro area .
However , this means that every single one of the institutions - the Council , the Commission and Parliament - must show the public that they are committed to their responsibilities .
It must be said that it is clear that the largest groups in Parliament , at least , are willing to openly cooperate by increasing the Community method , by introducing economic governance , and by giving the single currency the necessary conditions for it to overcome the crisis in Europe .
It is also clear today that the same applies to the Commission and its President , who has demonstrated that he is not beholden to the Council or Parliament , but is working for European interests , contrary to the claims of the socialists and Mrs Ferreira .
It remains for the Council to take on its responsibilities this December .
We are counting on this , and on their unequivocal commitment to European dialogue , Mr Van Rompuy .
( EL ) Mr President , obviously , the permanent support mechanism adopted is , without doubt , a positive step .
However , there is still a lack of strategic planning , which needs to include economic union and , obviously , economic governance .
The European Union was created thanks to the strong governments at the time .
The economic crisis was able to take hold thanks to weak governments , which allowed the economic automatisms of economic globalization to replace the political decisions which the Community needs if it is to continue to function .
Europe has safeguarded 50 years of prosperity and we have a duty today to continue to safeguard this prosperity for our citizens .
It is obvious , therefore , that growth needs to continue .
The question is , what sort of growth do we mean , in an age in which the entire global system is changing ?
What is Europe now ?
What will it be in the future ?
An area of industry , small and medium-sized enterprises and services , an export catalyst ?
We therefore need a stronger Europe , instead of the suspicions and intergovernmentalism that have recently been the order of the day .
Certain countries have blatantly failed to adhere to the Stability Pact but , as Mr Reinfeldt told me in answer to a question last December , only one country adhered to the Stability Pact to the letter ; all the others failed to honour their obligations .

Consequently , we must all pull together and support the countries which are currently weathering the storm of the crisis because , in the final analysis , where does the strength of the large countries lie ?
I think that it lies in the joint presence of the small countries via a European system .
Besides , the cost of not having Europe would be unbearable for all of us .
Mr President , the key to overcoming the economic crisis is to draw binding conclusions from it , because this is , first of all , a crisis of trust and responsibility .
Trust is based on a reasonable balance of incomes and expenditures .
For more than 20 years , most of Europe has been used to living and consuming today , at the expense of tomorrow , and even the day after tomorrow - at the expense of the next generations , whose numbers are dramatically dwindling .
Secondly , we have been used to treating stability-backed rules in a very liberal way .
If the large states can do it in case of domestic need , it is easier for the others to follow suit .
Therefore , to enforce the principle of fiscal discipline and restore it in all seriousness , the policies of a balanced budget will be the test case of Europe 's credibility .
Thirdly , there is an obvious need for check and balance mechanisms .
I can only welcome the Council 's approval of the conclusions about European economic governance , the activation of the debt criteria and the chance of an early intervention mechanism .
But what we really need - and I can only support the conclusions of my colleague Mr Verhofstadt - is real economic governance and real automatic sanctions - sanctions that bite .
We look forward to the Commission 's framework proposals on the future crisis mechanisms next month .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to welcome the new package of measures on increasing budgetary discipline and broadening economic surveillance .
I feel that the measures proposed were necessary due to the disparities noted between Member States with regard to compliance with fiscal and budgetary policies .
As a result , the economic crisis has produced a worrying perception of several countries , including Romania .
I think that the key innovation is the creation of a new macro-economic surveillance framework . It will facilitate the detection of emerging imbalances and risks .
The adoption of the report on economic governance produced by the Task Force headed by Mr Van Rompuy marked an important step .
Its implementation will therefore create a new robust crisis management framework .
I would also like to mention the importance of the regulation on ensuring national budgets ' compliance with EU fiscal standards .
In practice , this means that national budgets will no longer be able to avoid EU fiscal regulations .
( HU ) Mr President , the forthcoming Hungarian Presidency will have to face the considerable challenge of implementing the amendment of the Treaty of Lisbon and introducing economic governance as soon as possible .
Member States outside the euro area watch in astonishment as the euro area cracks on all fronts .
We are bound by the Accession Treaty , and our ability to further catch up hinges on whether Europe 's richer half stabilises , and whether Community solidarity is able to supersede national self-interest .
We watch the Irish crisis and the problems of Greece , Portugal and Spain with concern and sympathy , and wait to see whether the euro area crumbles .
The Council 's decision , while late , as usual , was in the end the correct one .
The introduction of economic governance may well signal a new era in the history of European integration , but its implementation could also be treacherous and full of complications .
I am confident that the Hungarian Presidency will do everything in its power to guarantee success .
( PT ) Mr President , Portugal is experiencing the biggest general strike of the last 20 years .
This protest follows equally significant ones in several EU countries , including Greece and France .
What is the response of the leaders of the Council and the Commission ?
They are ignoring the protests against their antisocial policies and are insisting on the very policies that contributed to the current situation .
They are glossing over the fact that the vulnerability of the euro is the direct result of the policies they are practising : liberalisation of capital markets , unlimited financial speculation and the requirement of nominal convergence through the Stability and Growth Pact .
All the while , real divergence between economies is worsening , unemployment and poverty are reaching unbearable levels and social tensions are increasing .
How long are they going to insist on going down this route ?
What needs to be done in order to break with these policies and make a greater commitment to production , to jobs and to valuing labour ?
( SK ) Mr President , the European Council negotiations at the end of October took place under difficult circumstances .
All countries are currently amending their economic policies with the aim of getting out of the unfavourable economic situation as quickly as possible , and into at least some level of economic growth .
After Greece and Ireland , other euro area countries , too , face the risk of insolvency .
We should therefore be clear that in such a difficult situation , Heads of Government find it very hard to adopt decisions through which they would surrender their ability to shape and regulate the economic governance of their states , and hand over some powers of economic governance at the level of European institutions .
We must therefore discuss very sensitively our common ideas on how to get Europe as safely and as quickly as possible out of the current difficult situation , while not undervaluing the effort of individual government representatives to solve the problems of their countries through their own powers and their own abilities , in order to avoid coming into conflict with European interests .
Mr President , the European Council repeated the tired old slogan of the need to avoid all forms of protectionism and to avoid exchange rate moves aimed at competitive advantage .
The embrace by the European Union of globalism has made European countries prey to competition from emerging economies , especially China , with which we cannot compete .
These economies show contempt for international patents and copyrights , they employ workers at subsistence , and sometimes slave labour , rates .
China has set its currency at an artificially low level to make its goods cheaper still .
European countries must individually - my preference - or collectively protect their employers and employees from this unfair competition .
While exchange rates should not be pegged at an artificially low level for competitive advantage , nor should they be kept at an artificially common level - the euro - to the collective disadvantage of eurozone countries .
If currencies of failing countries had been allowed to fall in value , recovery would have followed .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , I should like to begin by addressing the issue of public spending at European level .
I wonder if the time has not come , given the significant challenges that lie ahead of us , to have a major debate with our national colleagues and the European Parliament on the communitisation and pooling of our public spending .
I shall use Mr Lamassoure 's example : we have 27 armies , and no enemies ; one Customs Union , and 27 administrations ; research programmes that have been funded 15 to 20 times without any coordination ; trans-European networks , which should be interlinked ; energy networks ; and the list goes on .
I suggest that we entrust an independent auditor with the public spending audit at the following three levels : European , national and local executive .
This audit would be issued to MPs and MEPs to allow for a major debate on public spending and could be entrusted to the European Court of Auditors and to the 27 national courts of auditors .
This is an idea I should like to propose in order to ensure that our public spending is scrutinised and managed better at European level .
( SK ) Mr President , the European Council meeting was marked by expectations of how Europe 's leaders would deal with the problems presented to them by the economic recession .
As I have said many times now , it is not enough to focus only on budgets .
The structural imbalances which the crisis has only exacerbated go beyond debts .
Unless a mechanism is adopted which will be capable of affecting the other aspects as well , there must be serious doubts as to its success .
Another topic was the debate over whether the budget fallout caused by pension reforms would lead to a deficit .
On the one hand we are talking about tightening up the rules and making them more systematic , but then we immediately make exemptions .
Also , if pension reforms are as essential as they are made out to be , which I personally do not believe they are , other examples of successful programmes could also be found .
Who will then assess which is more and which is less important , and why ?
I firmly believe that we must not launch a debate on exemptions at the same time as talking about system changes .
Mr President , I would just like to make a few comments regarding what was said this morning by both President Van Rompuy and President Barroso .
It would appear that they are both in denial - denial of the fact that the eurozone is in crisis and we are now on the brink of collapse .
There are many people over there also in denial .
For goodness sake , wake up .
People are watching this from their homelands and they realise that there are not many people in this Chamber anyway .
This is the biggest crisis that you have ever had , and I am telling you now that this is serious .
I will ask Mr Barroso and Mr Van Rompuy to tell me please - you are speaking in a couple of minutes - what is your plan B ?
There must be a plan B , or are you just going to let this go until it goes into ruin ?
I believe this is the biggest crisis that we have had .
Member States have been affected across the spectrum .
You owe it to the people to have a plan B. Please tell us if you have got one .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my delight with the fact that the importance of system-wide pension reforms was acknowledged in the course of the consultation .
However , the reforms within the scope of the Stability and Growth Pact do not provide equal opportunities to every player .
Hungary also speaks out against discrimination , and calls upon the EU to consider the cost of pension reforms when calculating national deficits .
I believe that unless you want to discriminate against countries that exercise their freedom of choice , payments made into private pension funds must be taken into consideration when determining the budget deficit .
Solving this issue is a matter of urgency .
It is good news that the opportunity for finding a satisfactory solution will already be presented at the December Council meeting .
I ask you to make a non-discriminatory political decision and forward it to the Commission as soon as possible , so that the legislative process can start as soon as possible , and eventually conclude with a satisfactory outcome for every affected party .
( EL ) Mr President , Greece , Ireland , Portugal and Spain are suffering the consequences of the economic crisis .
The horse has already bolted .
There is no going back , measures must be taken .
Suspicion and euro-scepticism will not help us to recover from the international economic crisis .
On the contrary , what we need are Community solidarity , political will , vision , trust in the dynamism of Europe and , above all , coordinated actions , actions to bring about structural change at both national level and in the European Union .
We need more employment , more growth , fast-tracking , more jobs , the implementation of the EU strategy , rationalisation and restructuring in corporate governance , transparency in economic governance , verification of national statistics and a permanent joint crisis management mechanism in the European Union , but solely for the benefit of European citizens .
The crisis concerns everyone , not just the countries which are suffering from it .
We need both community solidarity and coordinated action .

( NL ) Mr President , the euro area is now collapsing , and President Barroso has to oversee this collapse .
After all , the billions in aid provided to countries such as Greece , Spain , Portugal and Ireland for years have not resulted in those weak economies being able to compete with the strong economies of Germany and the Netherlands ; instead , those billions in aid have resulted in unacceptable behaviour on the part of socialists .
For example , one in three Greek workers is a civil servant ; the tsunami of non-Western immigrants to Europe has also cost each country billions , and those immigrants are now at home without jobs .
This is the behaviour of what are mainly socialists .
Do you remember ?
Spain , which legalised one million illegal immigrants a couple of years ago , is now left with a 20 % unemployment rate .
Now we , the stronger economies , must once more offer these countries billions in aid , but this will be a mere sticking plaster for the short term .
In the long term , the question will be whether we are prepared to continue to support the weak countries structurally with billions in taxpayers ' money .
The answer to this is ' no ' .
Thus , I should like to ask President Barroso the following : is the reintroduction of Greece 's own currency , the drachma , and also Ireland 's , not the only long-term solution that will get us out of these problems ?
Is this solution under serious discussion with these countries ?
Mr President , as an Irish MEP , it gives me no great pleasure to come in here this morning and hear almost every speaker refer to Ireland because of our economic situation , particularly when a few years ago we were seen as almost the pin-up boys of economic success in the European Union .
Nevertheless , I think there is a determination in Ireland to put things right , and I think the vast majority of people would welcome the support of our European friends and colleagues .
There are a few lessons to be learned .
I think Mr Farage was not far wrong when he said that it was due to the stupidity and greed of Irish politicians , who were part of the crony capitalism with the banks and regulators that brought a lot of this about .
We have to learn lessons .
But another thing that is going to be very important is that the supervisory architecture being put in place from 1 January must work , so that the stress tests and so forth are sufficient to recognise what is happening in the future and people are brought to heel if they are getting out of hand .
( LT ) Mr President , it is really very good that we are now beginning to talk about very important matters , that is , the joint management of the future economy .
I believe that soon we will also be discussing a possible common fiscal system .
Furthermore , today we can see the significant negative impact the strengthened euro exchange rate is having together with many other factors .
Today I was disappointed by the fact that a bank test was carried out six months ago and its results have not been confirmed .
This demonstrates that once again in the European Union we lack reliable information .
If we do not have it we cannot find ways of exiting a rather complicated situation .
In conclusion I would therefore like to call on the European Commission to offer its proposals much more actively in future , because the situation is complex and it will require huge efforts , huge financial resources and perhaps a completely different understanding of economic , financial and other types of monitoring .
( SL ) Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , allow me to join this debate briefly .
For me , the situation is relatively clear : who is to blame for the major crisis we are facing ?
That part of the banking sector which did business without real cover and took on too many risks .
But others too - some European governments which encouraged excessive consumption and a sort of distributive mentality amongst people .
We have heard two lines of reasoning here today : we have members who are calling for greater solidarity , as if to say ' Please help us ! ' , and we have those who are trying to appeal above all for greater responsibility now that we are emerging from the crisis .
It would not be right if those who caused this major crisis were now looking for formulas for its resolution , the way out of this crisis .
Those who are critical of significant economising are certainly on the wrong path .
Under these circumstances , it is only right that taxpayers from those countries that are dealing with the current situation are not silenced .
( RO ) Mr President , I welcome the fact that the report on economic governance provides a new basis for setting up a viable system for how we function in this respect .
I think that the recommendations made in the report on more robust institutions for much more effective economic governance , such as the creation at national level of a public institution which will provide independent analyses , assessments and forecasts for internal fiscal policy issues , form the basis for creating a transparent European system .
I consider it vital to offer each Member State the opportunity to prove the basis used for analysing and assessing each domestic fiscal measure proposed so that an approach evolves based on trust and mutual awareness .
I reaffirm the need to adopt specific measures which will facilitate economic governance , based on in-depth , transparent knowledge , and open debate about any domestic measures adopted in Member States which may produce an impact at EU level .

Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor , but I asked to speak under the blue card rule because I was directly challenged by Mr Rangel and I would therefore have liked to have been given the floor earlier .
I would like to take this opportunity to ask Mr Rangel to explain to all of us what he sees as the concrete differences , with respect to sovereign debt management , between Chancellor Merkel 's proposals and those of the Commission , and to tell us why the Commission 's first proposal , which was actually European , on sovereign debt management , was discarded without any discussion or public debate when it was realised that it did not tally with the interests of Germany .
I would like to say very quickly that there is no doubt whatsoever that in the European process there is , of course , constant negotiation between the institutions , but that the Commission 's position has consistently been to uphold the Community method and advocate going further with the single currency .
Of course , there are Members who like to come and conduct national politics in Parliament , as is the case with Mrs Ferreira .
( PT ) Mr President , the European Union is facing a time of major reforms .
It therefore needs to provide a response to the crisis and to uphold a single currency which needs rules of its own , applied to all Member States .
Parliament has already taken a leading position in relation to economic governance , whereby it is advocating greater cooperation on growth between the 27 Member States , a firm stance on the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact and solidarity between the Member States , having been the first institution , as such , to draw attention to the need for a fund for the debt of the different countries that make up the EU .
We will therefore continue to cooperate with the Commission , extending a welcome to its President , and we hope also to continue to cooperate with the Council .
Six reports are being discussed at this very moment , and we will take a very clear position on them .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I will answer two concrete questions and also make a general remark after the debate that took place this morning .
First of all , a question raised by Mr Schulz : an important one about the Irish stress tests .
Let me say the following .
The common methodology of the stress tests was agreed at European level ; it was very rigorous , with adverse macro-economic scenarios .
However , the implementation of the tests was carried out under the responsibility of the national supervisory authorities .
It was coordinated at European Union level by the CEBS , but there were no European Union competences for that .
I want to underline that , until recently , the European Union as such did not have this kind of responsibility .
This is going to change next January .
We will have the new architecture of financial regulation and supervision in place by then , following Commission proposals and agreement with the Council and in Parliament .
We will have the three European micro-prudential supervisors for banking , securities and insurance , and the European Systemic Risk Board for macro-financial stability and the risks associated with it .
And that will provide much stronger tools and infrastructure to carry out the tests next time in a more unified , rigorous and coherent manner .
So I want to underline this point .
Before the crisis we did not have the instruments that we are creating now .
Then I come to the second issue concerning the way we are now dealing with some sensitive issues like the permanent crisis mechanism .
I want to make it clear that it was not my intention to raise the point but , since there was a concrete question , I have to reply .
Unanimously - and I repeat unanimously - the Heads of State or Government decided to ask for a permanent crisis mechanism with the intervention of the private sector .
I was one of those who warned the European Council about the risks of raising this issue without proper preparation and communication .
But the issue was raised and decided and now we have to deal with it in the most responsible way .
That is why I believe some of the comments made here today were really not helpful .
We are still living in very difficult conditions .
I think what we need now is action and not more comments .
We are dealing with very sensitive global financial markets .
Some of the comments sometimes have a self-fulfilling prophecy effect .
So it is not helpful to start speculating about countries that may be at risk .
What we have to ask those countries is to implement all the measures that are necessary for achieving financial and budgetary stability .
That is why I am not going to speculate about Plan B. We , together with President Van Rompuy , are doing our work , discussing the issues with responsibility with our Member States .
Regarding the role of the Commission , I want to be extremely clear once again .
The Commission - and this was acknowledged by most of you - has always been putting forward ambitious proposals .
We are for ambitious economic governance for Europe .
But in the end , we have to be realistic .
Together we cannot go beyond what is established by common agreement with our Member States .
When there is an agreement - an agreement that anyhow represents progress compared to the previous situation - it is not helpful to speak about ideal solutions that you very well know will not come into effect .
So the Commission is fulfilling its role , and will fulfil its role , asking for more ambition in terms of common purpose , economic governance , stability of the euro area - and not only of the euro area .
I want to make that point very clearly because I think it was not made during this debate today .
Some of you said the problems are in the euro area .
I am sorry to say they are not only in the euro area .
The euro has not been the problem .
I am absolutely convinced that the situation would be much worse if we did not have the euro .
( Applause )
Some of you tend to forget that some countries that are not in the euro area have exactly the same problems , in some cases even worse problems of sovereign debt , and that a country that is not even in the European Union and that is now asking to join the European Union - Iceland - went bankrupt , and they do not have the euro .
The reality is that the euro was not the cause of the problem .
It is intellectually and politically dishonest to suggest that the problem is with the euro .
( Applause )
What we have to do now is recognise the specificities of the situation in the euro area , to address the problems and ask all the Member States to give a commitment to work collectively : those who are in the euro area and those who are not .
I think they have all understood that there is a common interest in a common approach to resolve this crisis .
That is what the Commission will do , in a responsible way , pushing of course for the highest level of ambition , but in the end working in good , loyal cooperation with all the institutions , with this Parliament , as we have done , and with the Council and European Council .
That is the responsible method that we have to follow .
In a period where markets are extremely nervous , we should keep cool heads and we should keep a strong sense of responsibility , also of course with a strong sense of common European purpose .
( Applause )

President of the European Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , honourable Members , earlier on we said that the analysis made by the President of the Commission differed from mine , but this is the first time , Mr Schulz , that I have been accused of pretending everything is fine when it is not .
It is the very first time in my career .
I can assure you that I do not underestimate the crisis in any way , and that we are experiencing difficult times .
Unless some of my comments are taken out of context , I am usually a very prudent man , and I believe that far too many statements , inflammatory or otherwise , are made in the European context - not in Parliament .
We must now calm things down , and not keep mentioning the seriousness of the crisis .
We already know about that .
It is time to take action .
Some of you have said that we should learn lessons .
There is a French proverb that says ' our acts follow us ' .
Honourable Members , when I took office there was the Stability and Growth Pact , which was made a little more flexible a few years ago and was not applied .
When I took office , I inherited the Treaty of Lisbon , which provides for certain procedures relating to , among others , sanctions and the decision to be taken when a country is subject to the excessive deficit procedure .
The Council makes these decisions , according to the Treaty of Lisbon .
When I took office , there was no crisis mechanism , and we had to rectify that .
We are therefore going to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact and introduce a system of macro-economic supervision for the first time .
I can assure you that if we had had that mechanism a few years ago , the problems some countries have experienced would never have surfaced .
We would have discovered the property bubbles .
We would have discovered the problems of competitiveness in certain countries .
So we are going to introduce it now .
It is new and innovative . It fully takes into account the lessons learned from the crisis .
As far as the Treaty of Lisbon is concerned , we intend to change it in order to give it a legal basis in some constitutional courts - a legal basis for a permanent crisis mechanism .
That is the only reason .
I hope we are not going to run the risk of starting another major debate on the institutions , for that , in my opinion , would lead us nowhere in the current climate , and would divert our attention even further away from resolving the crisis .
We had no crisis mechanism before .
When we faced the problem of Greece , we had to invent a mechanism , because there was none .
When we brought in another measure , the EUR 750 billion rescue package , we had to be creative in our interpretation of the Treaty of Lisbon so as to be able to apply it .
We are therefore learning lessons from the crisis , and I repeat , our acts follow us .
We had a stability pact that was weak and had not been applied ; we had nothing in the area of macro-economic supervision ; and there was no crisis mechanism .
Have Member States assumed their responsibilities ?
Many of them have .
They are implementing reforms that have often gone against the major tides of public opinion .
They have taken steps that have often shown great courage , not only in those countries with problems but also in others .
We are assuming our responsibilities .
Honourable Members , let us not always target the wrong enemy .
I often have the impression that we focus too much on governments and Member States ' own parliaments .
Let us not get our enemy wrong .
Today , some people are talking not just about Ireland but also about Portugal .
Allow me to give you the figures .
Portugal 's public deficit was 9.3 % in 2009 ; in 2010 it will be 7.3 % and in 2011 it will be 4.6 % .
The interest rate on the Portuguese public debt is 3.6 % on average . That is extremely low .
Portugal is not experiencing a property crisis or a property bubble .
Its financial sector is not too high for the country .
Its banks are well capitalised .
Let us not target the wrong enemy .
Some people are saying that the crisis situation is contagious , but they do not have the economic justification or a rational basis to do so .
I insist on this point : let us not target the wrong enemy .
I can assure those who have called for greater cooperation between institutions that the Presidencies are doing all they can to work together .
The report issued by the Task Force has been adopted by its members , including the European Commission representative , Commissioner Rehn .
We are also working side by side in other areas , such as the permanent crisis mechanism .
I hope we will see the same spirit of cooperation when we draw up the 2011 budget .
I regret the fact that we have not managed to reach an agreement .
On the subject of cooperation , however , allow me to make a comment .
You are all Members of the European Parliament and belong to particular political groups .
I should like to mention that there are sometimes major differences between what I hear in the European Council , from prime ministers and different individuals , and what I hear in this Chamber from the same members of the same political group .
I am not making a criticism .
One does not have to be in complete agreement with one 's political party .
During my career , I have often seen conflicts within my party .
However , I do everything within my power to achieve consistency and cooperation between the institutions .
I would therefore say that we need to cooperate at all political levels in order to achieve a more consistent position than we have at the moment .
I agree with those who say we have a strict policy in place , but that we cannot emerge from the crisis with that alone .
They are right , but we must go through that stage first .
If we had been more cautious both in terms of the macro-economy and budget planning , we would not be in this situation today .
However , we do need a positive policy for growth and employment .
Despite all the negative aspects to consider , I am pleased that economic growth in Europe has returned after eleven months of recession .
I have said as much on other occasions in Parliament : the crisis of the 1930s , which also started with a financial crisis , was never fully resolved .
We re-established positive growth eleven months after the financial crisis erupted .
This year , the average growth figure will stand at around 1.5 % .
In some countries - not those facing the problems already mentioned - growth will stand at around 2 % , and in other countries it will be as high as 3 % or 3.5 % .
On average , employment levels within the EU will rise once again from 2011 .
Of course , the unemployment rate is too high , but I am very pleased that , compared with six months ago , our growth predictions are much better than anticipated and that growth is more stable than we thought .
This is not only growth based on restocking , recovery programmes and exports .
It is also growth that is also fed by internal demand .
Finally , I would like to say that despite all the problems we are indeed experiencing in some countries , I am convinced that , once again , we will overcome the crisis we are facing today .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Council meeting of 28-29 October 2010 took a new step towards subjugating countries and stripping them of their sovereignty .
First of all , through pseudo-economic governance , which really means taking control of their economies : forcing Member States to have their budget pre-approved by Brussels officials ; supervising all of their economic policies ; establishing automatic preventive sanctions , even before the authorised limits for debts and deficits have been exceeded ; being able to suspend the guilty Member State 's voting rights .
All of this is granted as compensation to Germany for perpetuating the financial stabilisation fund .
However , that mechanism merely constitutes the right of Member States and the EU Commission to get into debt , or to provide borrowing guarantees on the markets , in favour of Member States in difficulty , because they are victims of market speculation against their national debt .
And what is more , because they belong to the euro area .
It is beyond belief .
Furthermore , the European Council has also decided on a reform of the treaties in order to implement the crisis management mechanism .
The simplified revision procedure is going to be used for the first time : that anti-democratic method which makes no provision for parliamentary debate .
This is not governance ; it is totalitarianism .
Until 2007 , the rest of Europe was amazed at the economic development of Ireland , the ' Celtic Tiger ' , which achieved dream economic data with low corporation taxes and little regulation .
But now reality has hit .
The Celtic Tiger has shown itself to be a lame duck that the rest of Europe has to lend a helping hand and take by its limp wings .
EUR 90 billion from the euro rescue package - that is EUR 300 per Austrian citizen - is now to go to Ireland .
This is not only theoretical state guarantees that , after the black sheep Greece , are now going to Ireland and then perhaps to Spain and Portugal , too ; it is genuine taxpayers ' money .
It is also taking the European monetary union a step further towards a transfer union in which euro states which manage their economies well have to keep their purses open to pay for the mismanagement of others .
The EU has addressed this issue far too late and it remains to be seen whether the decisions taken by the European Council will actually be followed by action .
We must stop wasting billions in taxpayers ' money on speculative banks and on states which manage their economies poorly .
There must be an end to the transfer union .
We need a mechanism that enables bankrupt states to have genuine insolvency and then also removes these states from the euro area .
We cannot keep patching up a sickly monetary union .
Instead we need a strong , core European monetary union .
Both Greece and Ireland have had to turn to the European Union for assistance .
However , there are some distinctions to be drawn between the two cases : The Irish deficit exploded because the country had to stem the problems in the banking sector , which was in crisis due to the repercussions of the global financial crisis , exacerbated by the bursting of the property bubble .
This intervention , at a time of structural crisis , meant that the public finances could no longer sustain such a situation .
In Greece , on the other hand , the reason for the intervention is the somewhat reckless management of public expenditure , which made a cash infusion from the sale of government bonds necessary .
In the light of the reform of economic governance , the following observation needs to be made .
We must certainly implement rigorous budgetary policies to monitor and ensure that similar situations do not arise in the future .
Anyway , these two cases demonstrate how essential it is to be mindful of all the factors relating to the finances and solidity of a country , and not only structured public debt .
Indeed , this can only represent the final figure , but we need to check the elements and the causes behind it and find out how the situation came to be .
The Stability and Growth Pact has thus far included sanctions , but imposing them requires the consent of 2 / 3 of ministers and there has never been the political will for this .
I am sceptical about the anti-crisis mechanism .
Council President Rompuy should not amend Article 125 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which states that every country shall be liable for its own obligations .
On the other hand , he should consider expanding Article 122 , which talks about solidarity - establishing mutual assistance in natural disasters or energy crises .
An amendment of this article might negate a fundamental principle of the functioning of the EU , in other words solidarity , and this might lead to a loss of solidarity .
If the anti-crisis mechanism operated under Article 122 on the provision of funding to individual states , the Council would decide on the basis of a Commission proposal , and they would only inform the European Parliament .
There is a risk of a situation where responsible states will pay for the irresponsibility of particular states .
Results of the G20 summit ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the results of the G20 summit .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , honourable Members , the Presidency of the Council and the European Parliament already had the opportunity to discuss the G20 on 20 October 2010 ; at the time we were on the eve of the ministerial meeting of the G20 and were waiting to see how things would develop in Seoul .
As Europeans , we were well prepared for these meetings , both at ministerial level and at the level of Heads of State or Government .
We realised that the lack of cohesion among Europeans would rapidly lead us to exhaust the European Union 's credibility on the international stage .
It has to be said that the Seoul Summit received mixed reactions from around the world .
For my part , I believe that we should continue to be optimistic despite everything , even if the results were not as impressive as we would have hoped .
Before the Seoul Summit , we were convinced that the toughest and most important test was going to be maintaining our momentum .
We should not make the mistake of thinking that we no longer need global cooperation , with the excuse that we are no longer in the critical situation we were in 18 months ago , or even six months ago .
We still believe that political leaders are responsible for making decisions . They are , and that is indeed the essence of politics .
However , I think they also have another , even more important responsibility : making sure that decisions do not remain on paper , but have concrete results and are fully implemented .
The Seoul Summit showed that the real challenge for the G20 , and therefore for all of us , is understanding how we should continue with and indeed accelerate implementation .
We have to turn good intentions into practical results , and all of that is important for at least two reasons .
First of all , the markets are not satisfied with statements alone .
They are observing the developments that take place two days , ten days and thirty days after the summit , once the media have gone home .
The state of the European economy needs to be understood as a whole ; it is not merely the result of progress made during the two-day summit .
The progress we are aiming for can only be made through continuous , daily work and , as Members of the European Parliament , you know this better than anyone .
The second reason is just as important as the first , and concerns you all directly .
I think that Parliament and the national parliaments can carry out the task of scrutinising , but also of providing political incentives for the European and international economic agenda , making sure that we have proper implementation between one summit and the next and that the G20 increasingly becomes a process rather than merely a series of meetings .
In terms of substance , the Union 's contribution to strong , lasting , balanced growth is now clear , and is based on a certain number of principles : fiscal consolidation plans aimed at sustainable , differentiated growth ; the Europe 2020 strategy for the structural reforms needed in order to sustain job creation in particular ; the programme of reforms to the financial sector and markets , and , finally , the strengthening of economic governance in the EU .
I would add that the Union is very interested in the peer review process in the context of the G20 .
As Europeans , we are used to this and we know how useful that type of exercise can be .
Clearly , everyone has to pull their weight and show renewed will to make a contribution to action for growth .
Once again , and in the spirit of my earlier comments , I would like to say that the battle against protectionism cannot be won outright , but only by maintaining the necessary level of global alert on a daily basis .
Otherwise , I should like to highlight three important developments in the past month .
The first one is the reform of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , for the EU clearly showed that it was prepared to do its share so that the new IMF could be more representative of the new international economic reality and , therefore , so that the emerging economies could make their voice heard and play a greater role .
We agreed to reduce our presence in the IMF 's executive committee and we made considerable concessions in terms of shares .
I think we have kept what was dearest to our heart and that the international community as a whole has benefited .
The second development concerns the Basel III agreement .
I think that , with regard to banks ' capital requirements , we are going in the right direction and it is , of course , vital that all Member States concerned should maintain their commitment to implement Basel III .
Obviously this question of implementation will remain on the political agenda of both the EU and the G20 .
Taking note of what has happened in recent weeks regarding the so-called currency war , I think the European Union has done a good job and has been able to defend a balanced position , which means that exchange rates should reflect the economic fundamentals and that we do not need to have recourse to competitive devaluation .
Finally , since Seoul , France has assumed responsibility for the Presidency of the G20 and I think this is a unique opportunity for Europeans and the European Union as such .
It will be very important for us to work together in a coordinated way so as to make sure that throughout the coming year - and with a view to the Cannes G20 summit in November 2011 and beyond that - the G20 will be commensurate with the expectations it has created .
The real challenge that lies before us is to show that a forum created in order to deal with the crisis is also able to provide the contribution and incentive needed to achieve medium-term objectives , such as stronger , more sustained and more balanced global growth ; clear , fair rules for the international financial market ; and international organisations that are more representative of the world today and which are more capable of helping national governments and European institutions to deal with globalisation .
Mr President , I believe it is up to the G20 to show in the coming years that the globalisation process is not only economic but also , indeed primarily , political .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , before this month 's Seoul Summit there was concern that once the pressure of the crisis which brought G20 countries together was receding , the G20 would find it impossible to fulfil its role as the primary forum for global economic coordination .
After this month 's Seoul Summit I can reassure you that that negative scenario was not confirmed .
We have seen the G20 move from crisis mode to a more stable approach to global governance .
Despite difficult issues under discussion and the fact that some other issues like the taxation of the financial sector were not agreed , the G20 once again delivered an important message of global determination ; it made real and steady progress on addressing global economic challenges .
I know the results were received with some scepticism because there was no spectacular , last-minute breakthrough perfectly timed for the evening news .
But what the sceptics fail to understand is that the G20 process itself is spectacular news ; it is not like our European , more integrated process where everyone round the table shares a common culture of negotiation and compromise .
Apart from the European Union and some of its Member States , the G20 includes countries as diverse as the US and China , Russia , Brazil and Japan , Argentina , Saudi Arabia , Korea , South Africa .
The very fact that they are engaged in a joint process of addressing global imbalance and agreeing , for example , on financial regulation , should be recognised for what it is : enormous progress that would simply have not been possible some years ago , and the Seoul Summit was an important further step in that process and the launching of a new agenda , not a one-off spectacular event .
So , yes , it was a success and I think the European Union , represented by myself and the President of the European Council , can be satisfied with the Summit conclusions .
In fact , we made a very important contribution also at finance minister level where the European Union was represented by Olli Rehn , the Commissioner responsible for that area .
On the whole , the conclusions reflect the priorities the European Union set out ahead of Seoul and the European Union should be proud of the very important contribution it is making to this process .
Let me highlight some of the key achievements : first and foremost , the European Union wanted this Summit to make progress on joint action to boost global growth and jobs and to give answers on how to address global imbalances and currency tensions .
We all knew it would be an uphill struggle to find a commonly agreed way to tackle global imbalances , but the G20 after long , hard negotiations opted for a cooperative solution setting in place a mechanism and a timeline which brings our economies together to address this issue .
The G20 partners committed to reducing excessive imbalances and to maintaining current account imbalances at sustainable levels .
Do not underestimate the significance of this .
The G20 discussion on how to address imbalances showed that the EU is ahead of the curve .
The results of our own thinking on European Union internal imbalances inspired G20 leaders as the best way to tackle global imbalances .
Our method of using indicators to trigger an assessment of macro-economic imbalances and their root causes is at the basis of the new G20 mechanism .
It will be set up by mid-2011 , with the first assessment before the next Summit in November 2011 .
Our focus now will be on strengthening this mechanism as much as possible and ensuring it is properly applied during the French G20 Presidency in 2011 .
So , the conclusions were important but I agree that now we have to see how they will be implemented .
The second achievement relates to currency rates .
There will be no success in rebalancing growth without addressing currency tensions .
Once again the European Union helped to build a G20 consensus on cooperative solutions .
We have agreed to move towards more market-determined exchange rate systems that reflect underlying economic fundamentals .
We also agreed to refrain from comparing the evaluations and to be vigilant against excess volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates .
This resolve provides political momentum for the French G20 Presidency that will take up a comprehensive reform of the international monetary system .
I am also happy to see that the G20 summit endorsed the historic reform of the IMF .
Indeed , we have exceeded the Pittsburgh expectations on the quota shift and on the representation of emerging economies .
Thanks to the open and cooperative approach of EU Member States , our significant concessions and our ability to share responsibility means that the Fund now has the legitimacy it needs to take on the challenging tasks ahead , particularly addressing imbalances and currency tensions .
Emerging economies now have to prove that in return for increased representation , they are willing to shoulder increased responsibility for global economic governance .
A fourth achievement at the Summit was keeping up the momentum for global financial regulatory reform , with a clear focus on implementation .
We welcome the endorsement of the Basel III reform and the fact that the G20 will continue to work on systemically important financial institutions .
The G20 's financial reform efforts will continue in areas like macro-prudential policy frameworks , shadow banking , commodity derivative markets and market integrity and efficiency .
The European Union is in the lead on many of these points and our internal work will feed into the G20 process .
It is now important to ensure strict and consistent implementation of all these commitments according to the agreed timetable , to ensure a global level playing field .
We have received strong assurances from the United States that they share our determination on this .
The Seoul Summit also created new momentum to conclude the Doha Round and reiterated the G20 commitment to fight protectionism in all its forms .
An achievement which gives me personal satisfaction is that with the Seoul Development Consensus interlocking development , trade and investment , we have firmly placed development on the G20 agenda .
This new growth-oriented approach will complement existing donor focus activities and the United Nations system .
It will boost our efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and it is perfectly in line with the Commission 's recent proposals in its Green Paper on the future of development policy .
This Green Paper is now open for consultation and I look forward to input from this House .
Finally , I strongly welcome the G20 's commitment to the G20 Anti-Corruption Action Plan , to future work on energy-related issues and to sparing no effort in reaching a balanced and successful outcome at the climate negotiations in Cancún .
( FR ) Mr President , honourable Members , the growing interest shown by representatives of companies and trade unions is clear proof that the G20 process has now established itself as the major forum for global economic coordination .
I took part in the G20 business summit as well , where I highlighted the importance of companies ' social responsibility .
I also welcomed delegations of trade unionists from Europe , North and South America , and Asia .
I agreed with those delegations , brought by the European Trade Union Confederation ( ETUC ) , that employment must take priority , and I underlined the fact that Europe was indeed proposing that employment and the social dimension should be included in the conclusions .
Since the Seoul Summit , we have begun to focus our attention on the next G20 Presidency and the Cannes Summit in November 2011 .
We should make the most of this opportunity to have one of our Member States in the driving seat .
We should establish our position without delay and actively help to shape the G20 agenda in a coordinated way .
The Commission is ready to lend its full support to all of the French Presidency 's priorities .
One of those is reforming the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , for which we will need to establish a series of consistent proposals , particularly in order to improve stability and reduce the volatility of exchange rates .
Another priority concerns the volatility of the prices of raw materials .
The Commission will be making an assessment of the primary markets of all raw materials in the coming months .
We should see the French Presidency as a unique opportunity for Europe to make its mark on the worldwide G20 agenda .
If we continue to act together at G20 level , Europe will consolidate its position at the centre of the global economic and financial debate and will play a key role in shaping our response to global challenges .
Mr President , I believe that I have one minute if what I have been told is correct .
President-in-Office of the Belgian Presidency , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to say , Minister , how much I appreciated your lucid assessment of the latest G20 and how supportive I am of your proposals for the future .
I think it really must be said that the results have been fairly poor , even though Basel III and the IMF reform were approved .
We can only hope , like the President of the Commission , that the Seoul summit paves the way for the implementation of the French Presidency 's ambitious proposals , which are justified by immediate need and the ongoing difficult circumstances .
The European Union will need to be consistent if it is to carry the weight it deserves .
Concrete results are essential , and I agree with you , President of the Commission , when you say that our fellow citizens are expecting action and not mere words or statements .
The globalisation of the economy and finance require us to make real progress in the international harmonisation of regulations .
Markets react much quicker than politicians .
Europe must not be naive and must ensure that there is reciprocity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in her speech this morning , Mrs Harms posed the question of why the spark is no longer being passed from the summits to the people and why new courage and new confidence is not emanating from the summit discussions .
As I listened to you this morning and also just now , Mr Barroso , and to Mr Van Rompuy or the Council , too , I got an idea of why the spark is not being passed on .
The spark is not even passing into the Chamber here - just look around you .
Of course , it is important for more Members to be here .
Why are they not here ?
It is wrong for them not to be here .
However , they are not really hearing anything new anyway .
You are telling us things that have already been said in the newspapers many times and you are not providing answers to the very pointed questions that have been asked .
What is happening with regard to the financial transaction tax ?
Mr Schulz has asked about this many times .
Where is the answer ?
It is not on the agenda of the G20 summit in Seoul .
I would like an explanation .
I would also like to know why the European Council , the Belgian Presidency , said that it is in favour of this , but why the European Council at its last three summits merely said that it recommended a feasibility study at global level but not at European level .
Why ever not ?
Does the Council not see the dead end into which you are directing this matter ?
I will ask you once again , Mr Barroso : when will Mr Šemeta comply with the demand made by this Parliament at the beginning of this year , namely that we want a feasibility study for Europe , too ?
If you present an opinion on this subject , this Chamber will actually be full and we will listen to you .
However , do not avoid the issue any longer .
For Europe alone we are talking about EUR 200 billion per year .
Ask the Members who belong to the Committee on Budgets what trivial , small amounts they are currently arguing about with the Council .
With an initiative we would make progress .
We need to breathe life into the roles , then the spark will once again be passed on .
That is what we expect from you .
Mr President , we could have any number of summits and meetings , but if Europe does not adopt a common offensive approach , it will carry no weight , and the next G20 will simply be a standoff between China and the United States , from which we shall inevitably emerge the losers .
However , there is no shortage of issues .
While the euro area is experiencing its own difficulties , which require strong responses internally , the international monetary system is going through a very critical period , which is adding to our difficulties and creating competition for Europe that is as destabilising as it is unjust .
That is the first point .
The Europeans should table at the G20 plans for a new world monetary order that is based on a unit of account founded on a basket of currencies including , in particular , the dollar , the euro and the yuan .
Similarly , we shall have to revisit the issue of financial regulation .
The commitments to fight against tax havens have still not been honoured in practice , and the activity of credit rating agencies has still not been controlled .
This is all the more regrettable as there are other challenges , such as the regulation of the commodities markets : in fossils , minerals and agricultural produce .
In this respect , I shall offer you a suggestion .
I think that , on this issue , the Europeans should propose the setting up of a world commodities organisation .
Indeed , there is a real risk to the world economy with the shortages engineered by certain producer countries , and here I am thinking of China .
Moreover , speculation on agricultural commodities is profoundly immoral as it adds to the hazards of climate change an additional risk of famine for developing countries .
On all these major issues , which clearly relate to the global balance , I believe one thing .
I believe that the French Presidency will only be of real use if it is situated , from the outset , within a European framework .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the extent of the world crisis , and social and environmental imperatives call for resolute action from the European Union at the G20 , on the basis of declarations of intent on the regulation of international finance .
Firstly , the World Trade Organisation negotiations must not turn the world into a capitalist jungle but must apply social , environmental and job creation standards to the trading system .
They must tackle the scourge of unemployment , which currently affects more than 250 million people on the planet , by putting an end to the current austerity policies .
From the opposite perspective , tax havens must be closed down and a mechanism invented for taxing capital movements ; an international fund must be created to stabilise commodity prices , starting with the prices of agricultural commodities ; the international monetary system must be overhauled , with a new role for the International Monetary Fund in the areas of employment and sustainable human development , and with the creation of a universal world currency to challenge the rule of the dollar .
Similarly , this scandalous state of affairs that sees credit rating agencies be the judges in their own case , for the sole benefit of the banks , must be stopped .
The people must be able to have their say on all these issues , which affect them .

( EL ) Mr President , the announcements of the results of the G20 summit were important , there can be no doubt of that ; however , a second reading raises important questions on certain points .
To be precise , twenty developed countries sent a strict warning to every country which is applying uncoordinated economic policies , and all this is at a time when one economic policy is being applied by the United States , with quantitative easing , another is being applied by the Member States of the European Union , opting for austerity at the moment , and yet another is being applied by China , which has chosen to keep its currency undervalued .
What I am trying to understand , therefore , is this : what is the point of such a statement and for whom is it ultimately intended ?
I find it very hard to believe that this message is addressed at countries of little importance to the global economy .
If , however , the G20 made such a statement for their own benefit , then we really do need to consider that there is a very serious issue of political conspiracy at a time in the economy when instant reaction is needed .

( FR ) Mr President , my question was initially addressed to Mr Barroso , but as he is not here , I should like to put it to the Belgian Presidency .
Nowadays , it is possible to practise trade dumping without infringing the anti-dumping rules of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
Indeed , with a currency that is chronically undervalued , you arrive at the same result .
Even if we start to tackle , albeit timidly , the subject of competitive currency devaluations , there is still the question of what is acceptable to the European Union .
My question to the Belgian Presidency is this : if the G20 were to fail to put an end to the monetary disorder , do you believe that the WTO negotiations could emerge unscathed ?
( EL ) Mr President , the G20 summit in November did not , in my opinion , have substantial results .
It proved once again that the United States are in a prominent position and that China is attempting to secure a place on the international stage .
As we all know , the global economic crisis which started in 2007 broke out when , one by one , the investment banks in the United States hit liquidity problems .
As we have seen - and as the whole world knows - the US administration was forced to print more money , USD 700 billion in the first stage and a further USD 600 billion in the very recent second stage .

In contrast to this response to monetary issues on the part of the United States , Europe in general and the euro area in particular remained faithful to the principle of budgetary discipline , to a strictly controlled monetary policy , thereby leaving room for the markets to play speculative games at the expense of the less robust economies of Europe in general and the euro area in particular .
I propose that consideration should be given to the question of issuing new money in Europe , either in the form of banknotes or the form of a Eurobond .
( FR ) Mr President , our fellow citizens have expectations of us , they have expectations of Europe on the issue of world governance .
We must be a proactive force , we must be a decisive force .
Several speakers this morning have made the point that the French Presidency of the G20 could represent an opportunity for Europe .
I clearly share this view , and I believe that our Parliament ought to be regularly informed of the progress of the G20 's work by the Presidency itself .
I understand that the President of the French Republic would be willing to come and address us . Mr President , I think that you should invite him to do so .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the G20 is definitely a very particular formation , where all decisions should be taken by consensus .
But , as our President of the Commission and the Belgian President emphasised , the process is moving on and I will just address one of the issues , namely the taxation of the financial sector .
Even if there has not been a breakthrough , it was agreed to undertake further work on innovative financing under the French Presidency .
The European Union stands ready to support work in the G20 to explore and develop a financial transaction tax at global level .
As I said , the G20 works by consensus and many G20 partners do not , at this stage , share our view on the issue , but we will continue to work towards a consensus .
In the meantime , we need to work on other ways of ensuring that the financial sector makes an equitable contribution through measures such as the financial activities tax .
On 7 October 2010 , the Commission outlined its view on this issue and it will pursue the following objectives .
Firstly , we must ensure that the financial sector makes a fair contribution to public finances .
This is particularly important given the support it received during the crisis .
Secondly , we must make sure that any tax we put forward offers real benefits and that it will raise substantial revenues without undermining EU competitiveness .
Thirdly , we must ensure that the patchwork of divergent national financial sector taxes does not create new obstacles to the single market .
On this basis , the Commission has set out a two-pronged approach to financial sector taxation .
A financial activities tax appears the best way to deal with the issue in the EU .
Taxing the profits and wages of the financial sector could ensure that it is taxed fairly , while also generating much-needed revenues .
In addition , a financial activities tax could be less prone to the risks to EU competitiveness that other taxation tools would pose if introduced unilaterally .
A financial transaction tax should be promoted at global level .
An international transaction tax on the globalised financial sector is the best way to fund international objectives in areas such as development aid and climate change .
With the right choice of tax and its proper implementation , we could have an important new source of revenues while still maintaining our competitiveness .
The Commission aims to continue to work on these options in order to bring forward policy initiatives in 2011 .
The first step will be an impact assessment on financial sector taxation covering the ideas we have set out .
In this respect , we will also take account of Member States ' analysis .
The assessment of the cumulative impact on the financial sector institutions of new regulation , possible bank levies and taxes will be important before launching any proposal .
From my side , I would also mention something that is very important : the G20 very clearly took development policy objectives into its agenda .
I believe it is a good sign that the G20 process , with proper determination on the part of the European Union , could deliver benefits in the interest of citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to conclude this debate , I would like to begin , in general terms , by saying once again that , on the eve of the G20 meetings , we were really very clear on the fact that it was important for the Union to reach a satisfactory outcome on a large number of issues , and that we had to work to ensure that the G20 remained , first and foremost , a credible and legitimate forum , capable of producing concrete results , as I was saying just now , and of giving a coordinated political impetus to globalisation , so that the Union , in particular , can make its voice heard in this context .
I think , without glossing over the difficulties - and many of you have referred to those difficulties - that the Union has fulfilled its obligations and that the work of the European institutions and of the countries of the Union , which participate in these G20 discussions , can be judged to have been satisfactory .
Seoul was the fifth summit in two years , and a large number of collective commitments were put on the table .
Many of these have had positive results in terms of economic growth and world financial stability , even though this work is clearly far from complete .
Within the Union and following on from what the Commission has just told us about banking levies and the tax on financial transactions , the conclusions of the European Council of 29 October clearly state that work on these two issues should continue , both within the Union and on international issues .
On the issue of levies , there is a growing consensus on the basis and the spirit of such levies .
There is still no consensus on either the objective or the use of the revenue .
Meanwhile , Member States are in the process of setting up national systems which differ from each other significantly .
Therefore , in the short term , we will have to introduce a minimum level of coordination and , in the medium term , move towards a resolution framework that harmonises to a much greater extent the crisis resolution arrangements , in particular on the basis of the Commission 's legislative proposals .
On this basis , the October European Council concluded that the different systems of levies that exist at present should be coordinated to a greater extent , and the ECOFIN Council was invited to return to the December European Council with conclusions .
Finally , as regards the tax on financial transactions mentioned just now by the Commission , the European Council called on the Council , and consequently ECOFIN , to examine ways in which we could consider today the various options for preventing tax havens and tax evasion , and the ECOFIN Council tasked the Council 's high-level group on fiscal matters with looking into these difficult issues .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - Our international institutional economic and financial architecture - dating from the end of the war - is currently under strong pressure .
A profoundly changing international system and the world crisis are stretching it to the limit , forcing it to adapt itself to the new circumstances .
Moreover , new institutions such as the G20 are being created to respond to these .
However , this is essentially an intergovernmental organism whose decisions , which affect us all , have to be implemented nationally .
This is why it is important that its decisions take into account the interests not only of its members but of us all .
From that perspective , it is encouraging to see that the Seoul Summit stressed cooperation and collaboration between members , thus guaranteeing the implementation of decisions , and that there was an indication of resolution in making fundamental structural alterations and encouragement of growth through job creation , without losing sight of the needs of the developing world .
Let us hope that the EU as such will benefit from the decisions of a body in which only some of its members are participating and that those which are outside the eurozone will benefit too .
1 .
Draft amending budget No 8 / 2010 : Section III - Commission - European Solidarity Fund : floods in Ireland - completion of ESF - Objective 1 ( 2000 to 2006 ) (
2 .
Protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EC and Moldova (
3 .
Information on medicinal products ( Community code relating to medicinal products ) (
4 .
Information on medicinal products ( Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products ) (
Before the vote on Amendment 13 :

rapporteur . - Mr President , I have a small oral amendment as the result of a last-minute compromise among groups and that is to Amendment 13 where the text as it stands right now is ' within 60 days after receipt of the notification ' .
That should be changed to ' within 90 days after receipt of the notification ' .
This has been agreed among all the political groups .
5 .
Hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment (
6 .
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) (
Voting time
First of all , following an incident this morning in the Chamber , Mr Schulz wishes to make a personal statement .
( DE ) Mr President , during the debate on the European Council here this morning there was an incident that I do not wish to go into again , because I was the target of an insult .
However , I will say this : there are levels at which I cannot be insulted and where I do not see it as an insult either , because in order to insult me , someone must have a certain degree of sincerity .
However , I would like to express my sincere thanks for the numerous signs of solidarity that I have since received in this House .
I would very much like to thank my fellow Members from all groups .
That is a sign of the common , democratic and pro-European conviction that the overwhelming majority of this House shares .
I would like to thank you very sincerely for this .
( Sustained applause )
The incident referred to was a protest by Mr Bloom , in which he addressed wartime allusions to Mr Schulz .
The President said this was unacceptable and invited Mr Bloom to apologise .
Mr Bloom did not apologise then .
I call on him now to do so .
If he does not do so , he must leave the Chamber .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , yet again there is one rule for Herr Schulz and one rule for everybody else .
This is a disgrace .
I have been elected - re-elected - to vote in this Chamber by the people of Yorkshire ( your own constituency , I might add ) , with a democratic mandate which you yourself do not enjoy , Mr President , because you switched parties and they voted for the Conservatives .
I have no intention of apologising , I have no intention of leaving this Chamber : you must have me escorted out , Sir !
Mr Bloom , first of all , I was expelled by the Conservative Party for making a stand on a point of principle closely related to the issues you raised this morning .
( Applause )
Secondly , you have not apologised for language which was wholly inappropriate to the European Parliament , and I ask you to leave .
( Loud applause , and also shouts of ' Point of order ' and ' You are wrong ' )
Mr Bloom , I am sorry but I am not taking any points of order on this .
I have a proposal to make .
I can ask the security services to remove Mr Bloom , but I intend to put it to the vote .
Is it the wish of the House that Mr Bloom should leave ?
Those in favour please raise your hands .
( Loud protests and cries of ' No ! ' from the EFD )
Those who wish Mr Bloom to stay please raise your hands .
Those abstaining .
( Further loud protests from the EFD and replies of ' Be quiet ! ' Further prolonged noise and whistles )
I will accept one statement from Mr Farage , the leader of this Group .
Mr President , the reason for the anger and the noise is because we are not actually applying the rules of this place evenly .
Mr Schulz has repeatedly thrown insults not just at me , but at many Members of this House : he said that the Eurosceptics and the no-voters open the door to fascism .
We have had Danny Cohn-Bendit calling us mentally ill .
Mr President , if the rules are that something is deemed to be an insult and a Member is asked to leave , that is fair enough .
But the anger - and I share that anger - is because these rules are not applied evenly .
Mr Schulz regularly calls other people fascists , and when he is called one , the Member in question is asked to leave .
That is not right .
That is not fair .
Mr Farage , I do not want to prolong this , but can I just make the observation that this is incorrect .
Mr Bloom 's two interventions - one from the floor and one from his place - were both heard by many people and were both unacceptable in parliamentary terms .
The House wants Mr Bloom to leave .
That is its expression .
If he does not do so , people will infer from that his attitude towards the democratic process .
Mr Bloom , I am going to invoke Rule 152 . If you will not leave , I will have you removed .
I have discussed this with the President , and I have his support for this .
( Interjection from Mr Bloom : ' Do your damnedest ! ' )

( FR ) Mr President , if I may , what I said this morning is that Mr Bloom has behaved unacceptably .
Secondly , we are in a democratic parliament .
We have decided democratically , Mr Bloom , that you should leave this Parliament .
I hereby ask you , in the name of democracy and of all this Parliament stands for , to leave this Parliament today .
I ask you to do so out of respect for democratic rights .
Mr Gollnisch , you do not need to challenge me .
We know your methods .
They are unacceptable , anti-democratic .
That is all I have to say to you .
( Applause )
Under Rule 152 ( 4 ) I regret that this incident is obstructing the good business of the House .
I therefore intend to suspend the sitting for five minutes .
( The sitting was suspended for five minutes )
Point of order ? ( inaudible off-microphone comments and shouts of ' Point of order ! ) .
Mr President , as the Chair of the Delegation for Relations with the Korean Peninsula , I ask the plenary to strongly condemn yesterday 's artillery attack by the DPRK on a south Korean island .
( Applause )
There have been severe casualties among the South Korean military and especially among the civilian population of that island .
Villages were burning and the population had to be evacuated .
We welcome the announcement by the ROK President Lee Myung-bak that despite this violent act he intends to avoid escalation on the Korean island .
We welcome that Baroness Ashton , the High Representative , has acted in a concerned manner with other international actors , our allies and our strategic partner , the Republic of Korea , in condemning this clear violation of the UN Korean Armistice Agreement .
We also expect China to clearly condemn this act .
We call upon the DPRK to avoid any further escalation and to undertake all necessary efforts to maintain peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula .
We would like to convey our condolences to the families of the victims .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Ehler .
Now just a minute please .
Just quieten down please .
At the risk of being described myself as a fascist dictator , I have taken certain actions this morning .
But Mr Schulz has suggested I take one speaker from those who opposed Mr Bloom 's removal from the Chamber .
The first person to ask for the floor this morning was Mr Madlener .
I have said to Mr Madlener that if he takes the floor I will repeat the remarks that Mr Bloom made directly to Mr Schulz .
Mr Madlener you have the floor .


( NL ) Mr President , many thanks for still allowing me to raise my point of order , as the important thing here , of course , is that the rules be implemented consistently and equally for everyone .



I should like to point out the inconsistency shown by the Presidency of Parliament : you have just ejected Mr Bloom on account of his remarks to Mr Schulz , even though Mr Schulz called my colleague , Mr van der Stoep , a fascist here in this Chamber and the Presidency did nothing about it .
Mr Schulz has not even apologised as yet , and so it would do Mr Schulz honour if , like Mr Bloom , he were to leave the Chamber now .

Now - thank you .

As I said , by agreement with Mr Schulz and Mr Madlener , I will now repeat the remarks made very audibly by Mr Bloom which were directed at Mr Schulz this morning and to which the President objected , and I object , and most of the House objects , when asked .
Mr Bloom said to Mr Schulz : ' Ein Volk , ein Reich , ein Führer ' .
Those are unacceptable terms to use , by one Member to another .
They go far beyond what we would regard as acceptable in this House .
That is an end to the matter .
We will deal with it through the Bureau .
Now I want to move to the vote , because I want to finish by 13 : 00 .
( FR ) Mr President , I shall be very brief .
I shall speak about Rule 152 .
No , sorry .
Please do not give the microphone to Mr Gollnisch .
I have said to Mr Gollnisch that he can have the floor the next time the President is in the Chair .
Thank you very much .
Mr Salatto has asked for the floor .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , aside from this issue , I should like to submit a problem to the Presidency .
I think some people have not yet fully understood the role of the European Parliament after the Treaty of Lisbon .
I feel I must point out an underlying problem here : the Commissioner for Transport , Mr Kallas , has repeatedly refused to meet with the board of the Sky and Space Intergroup to discuss the Cost-Effective Small Aircraft ( CESAR ) project , which affects everyone in terms of the economy , the environment and security .
I would urge the Presidency to call Commissioner Kallas to this Chamber to explain the programme he intends to move ahead with in this sector , which is extremely sensitive and important for the European Parliament .
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , to protect public health effectively , it is essential to ensure patients have extensive access to high quality information about medicines .
Harmonisation of the law in this field will allow us to ensure a high level of awareness among European patients and will help to even out differences in the health situation in all Member States .
In addition , making legislation more detailed , and in particular the obligation to ensure that patients have access to information , will allow us to prevent pharmaceutical companies from unfairly promoting their own products .
Currently , this procedure is not adequately supervised .
It is also necessary to introduce particular legislation concerning pharmaceutical agents and to enforce its implementation effectively in all Member States .
I endorsed the report .
( DA ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Fjellner on a splendid result .
The Danish Liberals have chosen to vote in favour of the directive concerning information on medicinal products subject to medical prescription .
It is important for the EU 's citizens to have access to sound information on these medicinal products , and we therefore think that this is a good report that puts the patient first .
That being said , we felt obliged not to vote on the regulation itself .
That is not because we are not in favour of EU citizens having access to sound information on these medicinal products subject to medical prescription , but because parts of the proposal contravene a number of national constitutions .
Even before the medicinal products package was presented , several countries had already made the Commission aware of the fact that there is a legal problem in relation to their national constitutions .
Prior checking by the authorities of information that is disseminated to the general public contravenes the definition of freedom of expression in several countries .
Therefore , we cannot vote in favour of the European Medicines Agency checking certain kinds of information before it is disseminated to the general public .
However , we expect both the Council and the Commission to seek ways to solve this problem before the second reading , and therefore we hope that we will then be able to vote in favour of the regulation itself .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the legislative proposal voted on today , which I supported , outlines the importance of pharmaceutical industries in their delicate role as sources of non-promotional information on their products .
Making patients better informed must give the pharmaceutical industry a sense of responsibility , and it must carry out this task clearly and rigorously , contributing to avoiding the excessive consumption of medicinal products caused by commercial motives .
Indeed , this vote emphasises the importance of how information on medicinal products must also be available on the Internet or in hard copy , following specific rules which are the same in all Member States .
However , this does not relieve healthcare professionals of their fundamental role as the primary and irreplaceable source of information for citizens on health and treatment .
The agency-style relationship between doctor and patient remains unique and irreplaceable , and verbal communication is affirmed as the basis of any medical treatment .
Furthermore , it allows patients to be better informed about the medicinal products they are taking , and it involves them in the treatments they have to undergo , making them active participants in their own recovery .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reports by Mr Fjellner aim to integrate and complete the existing European Union regulations on the subject , bringing them up to date and making them capable of tackling the challenges that technological development has created and poses for public health .
In our opinion , at its centre is the patient and his or her right to be informed and have access to scientific information , which has now become both qualitatively and quantitatively better and must be monitored , starting with a more precise and accurate distinction between scientific information and advertising .
Indeed , the reports use precise and standardised criteria to establish the types of information to be provided , which data are optional or not , as well as the channels through which they may be made available , thereby setting out the obligations of pharmaceutical companies and Member States .
Based on this understanding , we express our support for this report , recognising its merits not only in terms of health but also in social terms .

( SK ) Mr President , I naturally voted in favour of Mr Fjellner 's report , which , in addition to talking about information for patients on product leaflets and the individual packaging of medicines , mainly focuses on the behaviour of pharmaceutical companies .
Until recently many of them combined information on the medicine with their own advertising .
In my opinion , they were influencing patients in a non-objective way to take note of a particular product .
I am in favour of patients having the best , and most up-to-date information , which is approved at the same time as a new medicine is approved , for example , and I believe we have made a major contribution to this .
High quality information must also be provided , of course , in the mother-tongue on the Internet , which is the modern medium of communication .
I am pleased that , by adopting this report , we have actually reduced the disparity between EU countries that are less developed in this area , and I am pleased that doctor-patient relationships have not been impaired in any way .
That is the main source of information .
( FI ) Mr President , firstly , I wish to thank Mr Fjellner for an excellent report .
It has to be said that it really is important to amend the existing legislation and bring it up to date .
If we are talking specifically about medicines and researched data on what the drugs contain , it is also very important for patient safety .
Now that advertising has assumed an even greater role , it is essential that we determine the criteria that enable consumers and patients to be fully aware of , and certain about , what sort of effects these medicines have .
This information must be based on researched data , and not on fantasy or the ways and means of advertising .
Such legislation , which is uptodate and good for patient safety , is needed more generally in the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of information about prescription-only medicinal products is a sensitive subject because it has an important effect on the protection of the right to health and welfare of all citizens .
The European Commission sent us a proposal on the revision of the directive that risked opening a loophole in the legislation , which would have allowed pharmaceutical companies to exploit an unclear distinction between the definitions of information and advertising to promote their prescription-only medicinal products , to the detriment of the people .
Of course , there is still much to do with regard to a suitable strategy for information on medicinal products , but fortunately this time the European Parliament has reacted as it always should .
Parliament has taken a stand to protect citizens and defend a patient 's right to better information , and it has not given in to pressure from pharmaceutical companies .
Mr President , the restriction and , in some case the prescribing of alternative medicines , herbal remedies , higher-dose vitamin and mineral supplements has been one of great scandals of European regulation .
I have no idea what the efficacy of these cures is .
My wife swears by them , I am a little bit more sceptical but , as King Solomon wisely says , it is better to have a dish of bitter herbs in a house where there is love than a stalled ox and hatred therewith .
Rarely could the proverb about the bitter herbs have applied quite so aptly as in this case .
But whether they are useless or whether they are helpful , they are certainly not deleterious to health .
So why did the European Union criminalise an activity harmlessly pursued by some 20 million Europeans ?
Answer : lobbying by some large pharmaceutical corporations , which saw the opportunity to put small herbalists out of business - something that has now happened all over my constituency .
They could never have got these rules through the national parliaments .
Once again , we see the way in which the Brussels machinery has become a racket open to the big corporations .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to object to your decision to deny Mr Bloom access to the Chamber .
It is true that he used unparliamentary language .
This time it was Mr Schulz himself who was on the receiving end of this kind of term .
He very often uses the word ' fascist ' himself ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Claeys , this is not a point of order on the Fjellner report and I am not going to allow you to carry on .
I have said to Mr Gollnisch that he can make his point of order when the President is next in the chair , and that is what will happen .
( DA ) Mr President , I would actually like to talk about Mr Fjellner 's report on establishing a European Medicines Agency , which contains a number of good and important initiatives .
That is why I voted in favour of it .
I actually found that quite difficult to do , because I am in fact opposed to the setting up of yet more EU agencies .
However , one overall agency for the evaluation of medicinal products and for providing information to the general public concerning medicinal products subject to medical prescription for both humans and animals makes perfect sense to me , particularly as medicines these days are increasingly produced both within and outside the EU 's borders .

Mr President , last year , when some of us held up placards saying ' referendums ' , Mr Watson said that our behaviour reminded him of National Socialists in the German Reichstag .
Mr Schulz himself said that our behaviour put him in mind of Adolf Hitler .
I see you are in a difficult ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Hannan , I can see where you are going with this .
I have said that on these questions Mr Gollnisch has asked for a point of order .
He will make that point of order when the President is present .
That I think is the appropriate way of dealing with this .
If you have nothing to say on the Fjellner report I will move on to Mr Březina .
I heard what you said .
You said Mr Gollnisch does not speak for you .
I shall report that to the House .
Mr Gollnisch is a Member of the Non-Attached Group .
The Non-Attached Group is not a group , but he does speak for a significant component of it .
I accept that , and that is why I have suggested that Mr Gollnisch makes his point of order when the President is present .
I do not propose to allow you to speak , Mr Hannan , because if I allow you then everybody will want to have a say on this sensitive and important question , so I am sorry .
We shall now move on to the explanations of vote on the Evans report .
( CS ) Mr President , this directive undoubtedly represents a step forwards on the path to preventing the creation of waste , and limiting the use of hazardous materials .
However , I consider it somewhat contentious to include PVC within the scope of the directive among the materials designated for a priority review .
Neither PVC , in other words polyvinyl chloride , nor waste from PVC are classified as hazardous under EU law .
Even if we accepted the objection that the legislation on hazardous materials and the studies are now 10 years old , and may therefore be outdated in some aspects , it is clear from the earlier research that PVC can be recycled and that there might be a negative impact on the environment if it was replaced with alternative materials .
It is therefore impossible to agree with the frequently-heard argument that discouraging the use of PVC in electrical and electronic equipment is justified because of dioxin emissions when it is burned outdoors .
This argument totally ignores the fact that the burning of any kind of waste is undesirable .
( LT ) Mr President , sooner or later , electronic equipment becomes waste which , unfortunately , still consists of certain hazardous substances .
The Member States sometimes have difficulty dealing with such waste electronic equipment , so it is essential to gradually move towards the so-called principle that ' prevention is better than cure ' .
By unifying chemicals through the Registration , Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals ( REACH ) Regulation with the Restriction of Hazardous Substances ( RoHS ) Directive at least we are going some way towards unifying other hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment .
Clearly this does not harmonise all systems entirely and leaves the Member States some room for interpretation , but this harmonisation at least stops the significant differences that currently exist among the Member States .
The restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electronic equipment and the measures adopted today must not exceed two limits .
Firstly , they must not cause disproportionate difficulties for small business .
Secondly , the list of forbidden substances must not halt the development of technologies .
We must not be prejudiced against substances that are currently only being tested , and which may in future bring breakthroughs in the world of technology and electronics .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Evans on the recast of the directive because I really regret the fact that in the compromise text , which was adopted due to strong pressure from industrial lobbies , all references to PVC and halogenated fire retardants have disappeared , even though all the studies carried out by the Commission have demonstrated since as far back as 2000 that the disposal of these substances poses serious risks for human health and the environment .
Transferring the costs of industry to the environment and to citizens is an approach that we absolutely cannot support because , in addition to distorting the free market , it represents an unacceptable trade-off between peoples ' quality of life and the profits of business .
I hope the next time the directive is updated , in three years ' time , that citizens ' right to health and environmental protection will be placed right at the forefront .
Mr President , perhaps you would allow me to make the general point that in an open society , the right to free speech trumps the right not to be offended and in a democracy , the only people who should determine whether or not we sit and legislate in a chamber are our constituents .
The removal of a Member can materially affect the outcome .
Now , if we are going to be disinterested in our application of the rules , then we ought to censure obnoxious allusions whichever side they come from , but I think there is something arbitrary and unfair about allowing Eurosceptics to be called Nazis ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
No , Mr Hannan , you strayed from the general to the particular .
Mr Kamall , on the Evans report or else I will cut you off .
Mr President , I have no doubt that you will try to cut me off , as usual when it comes to freedom of speech , but I really want to talk about the hazardous substances and toxicity .
I think we all agree and , as a former electronic engineer , I know about the level of hazardous and toxic substances within this equipment .
It is absolutely right that we are trying to tackle this issue .
But I would also like to talk about the toxicity that has permeated the debate and democracy here in the European Parliament today .
Surely when a German national , a socialist talks ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Mr President , I was happy to vote for the compromise version of the Directive on Hazardous Substances in Electrical and Electronic Equipment .
We are all committed to the protection of nature and public health , but it is also necessary to maintain some sense of balance .
Today , in the middle of an economic crisis , it is not wise to increase the financial burden on small firms and consumers through very stringent provisions .
I therefore appreciated the fact that the inter-institutional team charged the Commission with reviewing the original list of hazardous substances rather than immediately banning them , which would have a negative impact on SMEs and on the social and economic situation of the EU .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because it represents the outcome of extremely difficult negotiations between the European Commission and several third countries , including Canada , Japan , the United States , Australia and Mexico .
The fight against counterfeiting must be one of our priorities and an objective of all national and international policies .
Consequently , cooperation between Member States is essential in order to achieve effective results .
The agreement reached will definitely not be able to resolve the complex situation on international markets , but it represents a step in the right direction .
Our task now is to continue working for the civil and customs protection of our geographical indications , which are damaged by competition which is at the very least unfair , due to the constant use of names and acronyms that reference the best-known European brands .
The most obvious damages are destined to build up for our industries and producers in the agro-food , design , fashion and luxury products sectors .
I believe that the Commission has made an effort to keep the European Parliament fully informed during all the phases of the negotiations on the international agreements .
I should like to reiterate here our request to give the public and the European Parliament access to the texts .
In conclusion , I urge the European Commission to continue to keep Parliament fully and punctually informed regarding all the future initiatives it intends to adopt on this matter .
( SK ) Mr President , in the area of intellectual property rights protection , I believe that special attention should be paid to ensuring the right to health , which is closely connected to the actual right to life .
I find totally unacceptable a situation where , under the pretext of robust protection for intellectual property rights - which in some cases appears almost exaggerated - access to basic medicines is denied to whole swathes of the population , particularly in developing countries .
I therefore call on the Commission to promote the fundamental principles of public health protection and access to medicines when negotiating the technical particulars of the anti-counterfeiting trade agreement .
( DE ) Mr President , anti-counterfeiting is an extremely important issue .
Twenty years ago we could still laugh if someone bought a ' Rolex watch ' for USD 10 .
The market in this premium price bracket was not put at risk by this .
Today the situation is completely different .
In particular , products in the lower and middle price brackets are also counterfeited .
T-shirts , toys and protective clothing are counterfeited , as well as intellectual property .
In this case , it is not only a question of financial interests , but also of safety at work , environmental protection and protection of health , as well as social standards .
Anyone who wants a fair world must fight hard to combat counterfeiting .
( PL ) Mr President , the situation in which unfair competition is flooding the European market with counterfeit goods from around the world is unfair and obviously unacceptable .
I would also like to draw attention to the insufficiently clear wording concerning the imposition of an obligation to monitor Internet service providers .
This contravenes the right to privacy and looks like an attempt at censorship .
It also works against e-commerce , which is a part of the economy which on the one hand we want to develop very dynamically by the use of increasingly innovative methods , while on the other hand we continue to impose restrictions in this area .
The decisions made on this matter , today , slightly improve the situation .
( CS ) Mr President , I supported the joint resolution on ACTA , even though I voted differently to my political group , because I too believe that we must encourage the Commission to draw up studies which will remove the final question marks over the impact of ACTA on European citizens , and confront the information gap from the past caused by an unwillingness to provide the negotiated texts .
This mainly involves the opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor , the impact studies on existing European legislation and assurances that exemptions for providers of Internet connections will not be affected .
However , I find it quite outrageous that the agreement retains the option of examining the computers and other personal items of individual travellers at borders .
I was also pleased to support the PPE resolution , which offered a version that was balanced and of a very high standard , of course without the important pressure on the Commission before the important negotiations on the final form of the agreement .
Mr President , I assume that your finger will be hovering over the button .
Many people ask me what ACTA stands for , and I was one of the shadow rapporteurs on the Anti-Counterfeit Trading Agreement .
I know after today some will wonder about our level of transparency , democracy and freedom of speech , but I want to focus on the five reasons why we disagreed with the resolution .
I was very grateful to get the joint PPE / ECR resolution .
Firstly , it goes no further than the acquis communautaire .
Secondly , the Commission has been transparent .
Thirdly , this is not negotiated at WTO level , because China and India were against the agreement in the first place .
Fourthly , this does not affect generic medicines in transit across the EU , and finally , developing countries are free to join the ACTA agreement if they want to .
They just have not chosen to do so .
It is an open mechanism that countries can join if they want to .
It is only a shame that we do not keep to the same principles of freedom of speech when it comes to this Chamber .
Written explanations of vote
Following the 2002 floods , which caused great human and material damage in Germany , Austria , the Czech Republic and France , the Council of the European Union created an instrument to allow funds to be released rapidly to assist regions affected by natural disasters .
Today it is Ireland , itself affected by floods , that will benefit from these funds .
I voted in favour of this amendment to the EU budget , as it allows this aid to be paid to our Irish friends .
This vote symbolises European solidarity in the face of natural disasters .
This solidarity is being shown today in Ireland and tomorrow in France .
Indeed , our country will soon receive substantial financial aid to deal with the consequences of storm Xynthia in February 2010 .
The floods that took place in November 2009 seriously affected Ireland and caused severe damage estimated at more than EUR 520 million .
The amending budget provides for the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund to cover the losses suffered , to a total of EUR 13 022 500 in commitment and payment appropriations .
As I had the opportunity to say yesterday , I feel that the mobilisation of the fund is fully justified as it helps those who have suffered the most due to this natural disaster , and thus the amendment is in line with the EU budget .
On 24 September 2010 , the European Commission put forward a proposal on a decision by the European Parliament and the Council relating to the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund , on the basis of the provisions of item 26 of the interinstitutional agreement ( IIA ) of 17 May 2006 .
This was the first proposal for mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund within the 2010 financial period .
The IIA allows for mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund up to a maximum annual limit of EUR 1 billion .
It is important to note that the purpose of the Fund is not to provide compensation for private losses , but to repair infrastructure , and the Fund is a re-financing instrument .
The Irish authorities estimate total losses caused directly by the disaster to be EUR 520.9 million .
The Commission proposes the mobilisation of EUR 13 022 500 of the maximum limit of EUR 1 billion in commitment and payment appropriations relating to the effects of the flooding in Ireland .
The legal requirements having been fulfilled , I agree with this amending budget .
We voted in favour of the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund for Ireland , following the floods that hit that country last November .
Once again , however , we would like to criticise the delays in mobilising the fund .
Many long months elapse between the time of the disaster and the point at which the Member State actually receives the aid : in this case it has been more than a year .
This fund , and potentially others , depending on the circumstances of each case , need to be mobilised more rapidly in order to hasten an effective and swift response to emergency situations .
There should be a cohesion dimension to the ability to deal with the consequences of disasters , reducing disparities between the EU 's different regions and Member States .
Once again , we would stress that it is also important to strengthen disaster prevention , putting into practice the recommendations recently adopted by Parliament .
I voted to approve draft amending budget No 8 / 2010 because it is essential if we are to allocate EUR 13 022 500 for the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund in favour of Ireland , with reference to the heavy rainfall that caused serious flooding in November 2009 .
I believe that the Solidarity Fund is a valuable tool for enabling the EU to show solidarity with the populations of regions affected by natural disasters , by providing financial support to help ensure a swift return to living conditions that are as normal as possible .
The overall annual budget available for the Solidarity Fund is EUR 1 billion .
No amount has yet been allocated in 2010 for previous applications , and so the entire sum of EUR 1 billion is still available .
in writing . - I voted for this proposal to transfer EUR 13 022 500 from the ESF to a budget line to give support to Ireland following the severe flooding it suffered in November 2009 .
This draft amending budget makes complete sense , given the purpose of the funds mobilised through the Solidarity Fund .
The floods in Ireland during November 2009 caused severe damage , particularly to the agricultural sector , homes and businesses , the road network and other infrastructure .
However , I would like to point to the delay in the mobilisation of this type of support .
The process needs to be made less bureaucratic and quicker in order to respond to future disaster situations in a timely manner .
I voted in favour , as I consider that every EU nation must feel itself to be part of the system of a united European Union .
Nevertheless , it would be desirable if , next time , the rapporteur were not only to publicise the allocation of resources but also to make it crystal clear on which specific works and measures such vast financial resources ( EUR 13 022 500 ) were being spent .
Otherwise the misuse of resources and other offences are inevitable .
The amount must be made specific and justifiable .
EUR 1 billion per year is available to the European Solidarity Fund .
In the current calendar year , there has as yet been no request for the mobilisation of this Fund .
The rules for the mobilisation of this Fund , which under no circumstances serves to provide compensation for private losses , but rather to restore infrastructures , are laid down precisely .
Ireland has now requested aid that is intended to be used to repair damage caused by floods .
I am voting in favour of the report , as there has not yet been a mobilisation of the Fund this year and the budget really ought to be used in a beneficial way .
Furthermore , Ireland fulfils all of the criteria .
I voted in favour of this report .
As I already stated yesterday during the vote in favour of Mr Böge 's report , I believe it is the European Union 's duty to provide help and support to certain regions affected by natural disasters and catastrophes .
I believe that the concept of solidarity is connected to the idea and values underpinning the European Union .
It is one of the core values that brought the Union into being and ensured that it prospered and enlarged over time .
This is the reason why this allocation is not only justified and well founded but practically a duty .
I therefore hope that such assistance will also be provided to the Italian regions severely affected by the recent floods , which brought local economies to their knees .

Given that draft amending budget No 8 / 2010 to the general budget for 2010 covers mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund in the sum of EUR 13 022 500 in commitment and payment appropriations , following the floods that wreaked havoc in Ireland , and the corresponding reduction in payment appropriations of EUR 13 022 500 from line 04 02 01 - Completion of European Social Fund ( ESF ) - Objective No 1 ( 2000-2006 ) , I voted in favour of agreeing with the Council 's position on draft amending budget No 8 / 2010 .

I would like to thank Mr Surján for his excellent work .
I voted in favour and agree with the approval of draft amending budget No 8 / 2010 , which grants aid amounts to the Solidarity Fund and the European Union Solidarity Fund - Member States , and redeploys EUR 13 022 500 in payment appropriations from policy area 4 ' Employment and Social Affairs ' .
I welcome this draft amending budget , which provides for the mobilisation of the European Solidarity Fund ( ESF ) in the sum of EUR 13 022 500 in commitment and payment appropriations , in order to assist Ireland following the floods that occurred during November 2009 , which caused substantial losses to the agricultural and business sectors and to infrastructure , particularly the road and water supply networks , as well as in residential areas , amounting to a total of over EUR 520 million .
in writing . - According to Article 37 ( 1 ) of the Financial Regulation , the Commission may present draft amending budgets if there are ' unavoidable , exceptional or unforeseen circumstances ' .
Concerning the different points of draft amending budget No 8 / 2010 , the report that we adopted refers to the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund .
The European Commission proposed on 24 September 2010 a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund , which is based on the provisions of point 26 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
The conditions of the eligibility to the Fund are detailed here and as well as in Council Regulation No 2012 / 2002 establishing the EUSF .
It is important to note that the objective of the Fund is not the compensation for private damage but to repair infrastructure and it is a tool of refinancing .
in writing . - ( LT ) The European Commission is initiating discussions on a review of the European Neighbourhood Policy in order to define the future relations of the EU and its southern and eastern neighbours .
The objective of the EU Eastern Partnership initiative being pursued should be the promotion of common European values , with an emphasis on the functioning of democratic institutions and respect for human rights and freedoms .
I supported this report which lays down the general principles for the participation of the Republic of Moldova in Community programmes and agencies .
I feel that the conclusion of the Protocol would permit the gradual opening of or reinforced participation in certain Community programmes for Moldova , offering an opportunity to promote further cultural , educational , environmental , technical and scientific links and to reinforce political relations .
It is essential for Moldova to proceed with the implementation of the ENP Action Plan and reforms in order to achieve the objectives of political stability and democratic development .
I voted for Mr Watson 's recommendation because concluding a protocol provides the Republic of Moldova with new opportunities for getting involved in the Community programmes it is interested in .
The gradual opening up of the EU 's programmes and agencies to the countries belonging to the European Neighbourhood Policy will encourage these countries in their efforts to carry out reform and modernisation .
This will help promote cooperation with the EU in important areas such as customs , transport or competitiveness .
I think that the Republic of Moldova 's involvement in the relevant initiatives will help establish a link between its domestic and European policies .
At the same time , it will give some impetus to the negotiation process for signing the new Association Agreement .
Satisfactory progress has already been made towards this .
I also welcome the Council 's intention to continue to grant macro-financial assistance to the Republic of Moldova and to provide expert advice to the government in Chişinău .
As the progress report compiled by the European Commission has also highlighted , the Republic of Moldova has made significant efforts to implement efficiently the structural reforms , in line with EU recommendations .
Furthermore , the European integration platform of the current administration has contributed to unprecedented dynamic development in relations with the EU .
Therefore , increasing the Republic of Moldova 's involvement in Community programmes and agencies is a natural step in the process of alignment with European standards .
I voted in favour of concluding the protocol which will enable the Republic of Moldova to have greater involvement in certain Community programmes , offering the opportunity to promote cooperation in the fields of culture , education , media , science and technology , as well as consolidate political relations through the Eastern Partnership and speed up negotiations on the new Association Agreement .
Political stability and democratic development are essential to the comprehensive implementation of the protocol and to facilitating the conclusion of all the necessary MoUs .
The current constitutional stalemate in the Republic of Moldova is therefore a concern that must be addressed promptly and efficiently .
It is crucial for the Republic of Moldova to continue with the implementation of the ENP Action Plan and the reforms it has set out in the document ' Rethink Moldova ' .
The holding of elections , as required by the constitution , is vital to the Republic of Moldova 's future stability and prosperity and to the development of its relations with the EU .
The Republic of Moldova 's aspirations for pursuing a path towards Europe as part of the Union and its preparation for this are made possible through the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and the Republic of Moldova , included in the European Neighbourhood Policy .
I welcome the Republic of Moldova 's involvement in certain Community programmes , helping to promote cooperation in the fields of culture , education , media , science and technology , as well as consolidate political relations through the Eastern Partnership and speed up negotiations on the new Association Agreement .
The low turnout for the recent referendum on how to elect the President of the Republic of Moldova and the fact that the country is being led by an interim president demonstrate the difficulties in the country 's governance and the disillusionment among the public .
The Transdniestria situation is getting worse , putting particular strain on the authorities and the Moldovan public .
This country still has a long way to go towards institutional stabilisation and the establishment of the full rule of law .
It is therefore worthy of particular support and attention by the European Union .
Moldovan involvement in EU programmes is an important step along that path .
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of Moldova and the European Communities was signed on 28 November 1994 , and since 2004 Moldova has been covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) .
The subject of the draft recommendation is the participation of the Republic of Moldova in Union programmes .
On 18 June 2007 , the Council issued guidelines to the Commission on negotiating framework agreements relating to the general principles of participation in Union programmes with thirteen neighbouring countries .
Negotiations with the Republic of Moldova began in March 2008 .
The Republic of Moldova will contribute financially to the specific programmes in which it participates .
This financial contribution varies from programme to programme , and is set out within the Memorandum of Understanding .
The signing of the Protocol will enable Moldova to open up gradually or to increase its participation in certain Union programmes , to the extent that it will provide an opportunity to promote greater cultural , educational , environmental , technical and scientific links , as well as strengthening political relations through the Eastern Partnership and supporting negotiations for a new association agreement .
Political stability and democracy are essential for the full application of the Protocol .
The EC-Moldova Partnership and Cooperation Agreement was signed on 28 November 1994 , and since 2004 Moldova has been covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy .
On 18 June 2007 , the Council issued guidelines to the Commission on negotiating framework agreements on the general principles of participation in EU programmes with 13 neighbouring countries , and , in March 2008 , negotiations began with the Republic of Moldova .
The protocol includes a framework agreement on the general principles governing the Republic of Moldova 's participation in EU programmes and agencies .
The Republic of Moldova has contributed financially to the specific programmes in which it participates .
This varies from programme to programme , and is set out in the Memorandum of Understanding .
However , the issue that arises is the demand that the EU makes in the name of ' political stability and democracy ' , seeking to interfere in a country 's internal affairs , openly siding with forces in Moldova that are championing the interests of the EU 's economic groups , and attacking the country 's independence and sovereignty , as well as the wishes of its people .
That is why we disagree with the adopted resolution .
in writing . - I supported Mr Watson 's recommendation and welcome the continuing cooperation between the EU and Moldova .
in writing . - I have always sustained and encouraged the European goals of the Republic of Moldova .
I believe in strong cooperation with a country that proved recently that is ready to follow a European path .
Participation in certain Community programmes for Moldova will encourage this neighbour country to implement its reforms , offering an opportunity to promote further cultural , educational , environmental , technical and scientific links , in addition to the reinforcing of political relations through the Eastern Partnership and the negotiation of the new Association Agreement .
I endorse the recommendation of Graham Watson , because it promotes Moldova 's participation in several European Community programmes and agencies , to support the neighbouring country 's efforts to reform and modernise .
The Republic of Moldova is one of the poorest countries of Europe .
Research has shown that the decided majority of the country 's population lives in extreme poverty .
Internal reforms which could help the economy are usually blocked by political or ethnic conflicts .
Therefore , the European Union should help Moldova and bring about an improvement in the country 's situation in terms of stability , security and prosperity .
A European policy could solve the constitutional problem being faced by the Republic of Moldova , and this could , in turn , result in further beneficial changes .
The Republic of Moldova is expressing a desire to participate in the programmes of the European Neighbourhood Policy , and its financial contributions are proof of this .
The European Union should support such countries with even greater commitment , and so a strengthening of cooperation with the Republic of Moldova is most definitely justified .
in writing . - The conclusion of this Protocol would permit reinforced cooperation on certain programmes with Moldova .
It will lead to closer integration between Moldova and the EU .
Considering the amount of Moldovans who live and work in Ireland and contribute to Ireland 's society , this is a welcome step for the future of Europe .
The main measure for promoting reforms , modernising and facilitating transition in the countries immediately neighbouring the European Union , including the Republic of Moldova , is to open up gradually certain Community programmes , institutions and agencies to participation from European Neighbourhood Policy partner countries .
I voted for this report as I think that the European Union must support the Republic of Moldova and facilitate its access to certain Community programmes .
This will help promote good cooperation between the Union and the Republic of Moldova in different areas such as the economy , science , culture and education .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the Protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EC and Moldova .
Although I have serious concerns about human rights in Moldova , I was encouraged by recent Amnesty International comments , in particular with regard to Moldova 's October ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court , which is a very positive step .
As a member of the delegation to the EU-Moldova Parliamentary Cooperation Committee , I welcome every step that leads or may lead to a consolidation of the political situation in Moldova and to a better standard of living for its inhabitants .
The recommendations which we are voting on today and the implementation of which might be a strengthening of an appropriately integrational European Neighbourhood Policy could be regarded as just such a step .
I agree with the opinion of the rapporteur that the current crisis in Moldova is a problem that must be resolved rapidly and above all by lawful means .
The completely opaque and misleading expression ' a European solution ' must be taken out .
The rapporteur clearly has in mind a solution corresponding to the agreements and document of the Council of Europe and generally accepted democratic rules .
In any case , we must jointly and emphatically reject any form of deliberate external meddling in the internal affairs of the Moldovan Republic .
Any other approach will simply lead to an escalation of tension in Moldova , and not to a positive solution of problems that were partly caused by the EU through its uneven approach in the past .
Moldova 's human development index is one of the lowest in the region .
The fast-track liberalisation policies designed to benefit the financial elites of the European Union are to a large extent responsible for this .
The stranglehold by the European Commission and the International Monetary Fund , promised by the macro-financial assistance to come , will only make the situation worse .
In conditions such as these , to allow the Moldovan Government to force its population to finance such uncertain European programmes and agencies as the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme or the Single European Sky ATM Research Programme ( SESAR ) , when Moldova is not even a Member of the European Union , smacks of cynicism .
I am voting against this report .
Moldova has been making efforts in recent years to move ever closer towards European standards of freedom , democracy and good governance .
The efforts described have been consistent with and have demonstrated Moldova 's concern with continuing on the route towards possible enlargement .
The recent elections did not pass off in the best way possible , and the fact that the country currently has an interim president is not the best sign that the degree of consolidation of its democratic culture is on the right path .
To this must be added the question of Transnistria , which could cause some kind of instability .
The EU should continue making every effort so that the reforms that need to be implemented in Moldova continue along the right path , which is the direction of this partnership and cooperation protocol .
Increasing Moldova 's involvement in Community programmes will offer an opportunity to promote further cultural , educational , environmental , technical and scientific links and , in addition , to reinforce political relations through the Eastern Partnership and the negotiations on the new association agreement .
Political stability and democratic development in Moldova are , however , essential for the implementation of the protocol .
The failure of the constitutional referendum of 5 September 2010 is regrettable .
It is essential for Moldova to proceed with the implementation of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) Action Plan and of the reforms it has set out in the document ' Rethink Moldova ' .
The organisation of legislative elections on 28 November is essential for the future stability and prosperity of Moldova and the development of its relations with the European Union .
These elections must help the country to make progress along these lines and must comply fully with international standards on the holding of free and fair elections .
Unfortunately , Moldova finds itself today in a wholly unstable zone of economic and political change .
The protocol to the European Union-Moldova Partnership and Cooperation Agreement on the participation of the Republic of Moldova in EU programmes gives the people of Moldova the hope of positive change .
The conclusion of the Protocol encourages the strengthening of cooperation in the cultural , educational and other fields .
I voted in favour , since I hope that the partnership will assist Moldova 's integration with the European Union .
I voted , like the majority in Parliament , in favour of the recommendation , which I welcome , as it gives a strong indication of support and encouragement for the Republic of Moldova 's pro-European tendency .
This state , at the European Union 's border , will not be able to get through the current deadlock without such messages which inspire the belief in Moldova 's citizens that Europe is the right option .
It could not be a more appropriate time either at the moment , just a few days before the early parliamentary elections take place in this country .
I support the Protocol which lays down the general principles for the participation of the Republic of Moldova in Community programmes and agencies .
It offers Moldova new opportunities to promote further cultural , educational , environmental , technical and scientific links with EU Member States .
I am convinced that political relations between the EU and Moldova will be reinforced through the Eastern Partnership and the negotiations of the new Association Agreement .
Political stability and democratic development in Moldova are essential for full participation in Community programmes , therefore it is very important for the prolonged period of unrest and instability to end following the parliamentary elections .
There has been a preferential channel for relations with Moldova since 1994 , the date of the signing of the EC-Moldova Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
In 2004 , Moldova was included within the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Institutional cooperation between the EU and neighbouring countries may or may not lead to a procedure for the accession of a country to the EU .
Irrespective of this outcome , the EU , as a supra-national entity , is governed by a collection of values based on peace , freedom and democracy , which it considers fundamental to the prosperity of the European continent .
It is essential that cooperation with neighbouring countries is accompanied by special attention on the part of the Union being paid to the stability of these countries , without interference , supporting institutions on the path towards the effective implementation of the rule of law and complete respect for human rights .
The ratification by Moldova in October of this year of the Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal Court is a very positive step in this direction .
Within this context , I voted in favour of this legislative resolution relating to the signing of an additional protocol to the EU-Moldova Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , and an EU-Moldova Framework Agreement on the general principles governing the participation of Moldova in Union programmes .
I would like to thank Mr Watson for his excellent work .
I voted in favour because I agree it is essential for Moldova to proceed with the implementation of the ENP Action Plan and of the reforms it has set out in the document ' Rethink Moldova ' .
Holding of elections , as required by the constitution , is essential for the future stability and prosperity of Moldova and the development of its relations with the EU .
All parties should unite to find a solution and reflect the confidence of the Moldovan people for a European solution .
The EU and Council of Europe have provided significant assistance and should continue to do so to overcome this impasse in a timely manner .
The adoption of the protocol on the general principles for the participation of the Republic of Moldova in European Union programmes is fundamentally important for continuing down the road of a more structured collaboration , which should reasonably conclude in future with an association agreement .
The current constitutional impasse in Moldova could affect the comprehensive implementation of the protocol and the related memoranda of understanding After the failure of last September 's referendum , it is very important that all political forces act responsibly ahead of the forthcoming elections of 28 November 2010 .
Political stability is a conditio sine qua non for greater involvement in EU programmes .
Equally , a decisively pro-European choice could contribute to smoothing the path of both economic and democratic development in Moldova .
That , Mr President , is why I voted in favour of this resolution of the European Parliament today , in the hope that all the processes activated in Moldova are accompanied by technical and scientific support from Europe .
As part of the European Neighbourhood Policy , the initiative of gradually opening up certain EU programmes and agencies to participation from ENP partner countries is one of the numerous measures intended to promote reform , modernisation and transition in the countries neighbouring the European Union .
The decision was taken in March 2008 to initiate negotiations with the Republic of Moldova , which have now been completed .
This draft protocol contains a Framework Agreement on the general principles for the Republic of Moldova 's participation in a number of Community programmes and agencies in areas such as transport , food security , customs , air safety and others .
I voted for this report as this initiative supports the efforts being made by the Republic of Moldova , a state neighbouring the EU , to carry out reform and modernisation .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the signing of this Protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Moldova because I understand that the assistance that the EU has provided to Moldova is essential for that country to be able to implement necessary reforms and to achieve the desired political stability , with complete respect for the principles of the democratic rule of law .
in writing . - This report refers to the draft Council decision on the conclusion of a Protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement establishing a partnership between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Moldova , of the other part , on a Framework Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Moldova on the general principles for the participation of the Republic of Moldova in Union programmes .
By voting in favour , the EP consents to the conclusion of the Protocol .
in writing . - In my capacity as EPP shadow rapporteur on the EU-Republic of Moldova Agreements , I warmly welcome the vote with an overwhelming majority in favour of the conclusion of the Protocol to the EU-Republic of Moldova Partnership and Cooperation Agreement on the participation of the Republic of Moldova in the Union 's programmes .
Even before the conclusion of an Association Agreement with the Republic of Moldova , the country is already being offered the legal opportunity to participate in EU internal programmes and agencies and thus continue its approximation to EU standards , particularly in such fields as transport , food safety , customs and aviation safety .
On the eve of the parliamentary elections in the Republic of Moldova , the European Parliament is sending a strong signal of support for the pro-European reforms in this neighbouring country and for the need to firmly pursue them .
I am glad to conclude that the European Parliament expressed cross-party unanimity at every stage of the examination of the issue in this House , thus shaping a single position on the need to conclude this Protocol as soon as possible and hence offer the Republic of Moldova all possible opportunities to benefit from the advantages of its relations with the EU .
The European Union , including the new Member States like Lithuania , is responsible for observing the interests of our eastern neighbours .
The strengthening of cooperation between the EU and Moldova and the inclusion of Moldova in Community programmes will help bring this country closer to EU standards and norms .
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement would enable the promotion of new close links between the EU and Moldova in the fields of culture , education and technology .
It is particularly important for the EU to demonstrate to Moldova 's young people the benefits of future EU membership .
Last year , Moldovan emigrants working in other European countries , sometimes illegally , were responsible for 19 % of Moldova 's GDP .
Poverty , corruption and human trafficking are problems that we must solve together .
As it prepares for EU accession , Moldova faces numerous serious structural reforms .
The EU must continue to support the efforts Moldova has made .
It is particularly important to strengthen democracy and the rule of law .
The Transnistria conflict is a problem for Europe , but it is also an opportunity for the EU to cooperate more closely with Moldova , Russia and Ukraine .
We must not ignore that .
I hope that the parliamentary elections on 28 November will enable Moldova to move forward .
in writing . - ( FR ) Parliament today adopted two legislative reports at first reading : a regulation relating to aspects specific to the European Union and a directive on the rules to be applied by Member States at national level .
Member States will be responsible for national legislation to ensure that objective and impartial information is available to the general public .
This includes information on packaging , a product assessment report , and information on disease prevention .
Patients should have better access to good quality information on prescription-only medicines .
This involves information on the characteristics of the medicine and the diseases it treats .
We have a duty to protect consumers and to keep them informed in a transparent manner .
Our work as MEPs is also to make a Europe that protects and informs , and that is why I voted in favour of these two texts .
Directive 2001 / 83 / EC establishes a Community code relating to medicinal products for human use .
It lays down rules on the information to be annexed to medicinal products concerning their characteristics and use .
Nonetheless , it does not provide a harmonised framework on the contents and the quality of non-promotional information for patients .
Furthermore , experience has shown that different interpretations of the texts could lead to situations where the general public is exposed to disguised advertising , especially on the Internet .
The Commission has proposed a directive which amends the current legislation in order to improve the way in which information relating to prescription-only medicines is disseminated to the general public .
It aims to establish a legal framework governing the dissemination of specific information on medicinal products from marketing authorisation holders to the general public .
The European Parliament has drafted a legislative resolution which is more ambitious than the Commission 's proposal .
I voted for this text as it improves the information made available to patients and makes it a little safer still .
I voted for this important resolution which aims to enable patients to be better informed on the medicines they are prescribed .
There are considerable problems with the current legal framework and the situation within Europe when it comes to patients ' access to information on prescription-only medicine .
The differences in interpretations of the directive by the Member States give patients in different parts of Europe different access to high quality and comprehensive information on pharmaceuticals .
In some Member States , patients lack easy access to even the most basic information about the pharmaceuticals they are prescribed .
Given the different interpretation of the directive in the Member States , I feel there needs to be increased clarity in the provisions so that all EU citizens are able to receive the information they require in connection with pharmaceuticals .
The amendments adopted by the European Parliament also ensure that information on prescribed medicine is only given to the public through specific communication channels , including specialised and certified websites safeguarding patients ' interests and aiming to limit advertisement opportunities for the pharmaceutical companies .
Providing patients with better access to quality information about the treatment being administered to them increases the chances of them understanding the decision directly affecting them .
There is therefore a very good intention behind this ; however , it must be part of a more comprehensive health education strategy , which focuses on the patient and not on the pharmaceutical company .
There are many problems with the current legal framework and the situation within Europe when it comes to patients ' access to information about prescription-only medicines .
The differences in interpretations of the directive by Member States give patients in different parts of Europe different access to high quality information on the relevant drugs .
In some Member States it is difficult to access even the most basic information about the drugs which are prescribed .
This creates health inequalities .
Patients have unlimited access via the Internet to uncontrolled and frequently incorrect information about prescription-only medicines in a few seconds .
However , they need to have access to controlled , safe information so as not to complicate matters even more .
Therefore , the provisions regarding information about prescribed drugs need to be updated .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , my colleague Mr Fjellner , on his work on this report .
I voted in favour as I believe it is essential to guarantee patients access to information on prescription-only medicinal products .
Both the European Parliament and patients ' organisations have for some time been asking for an adjustment to the current regulations which , as they stand , do not guarantee the necessary information .
Indeed , technical development and the easy availability on the Internet of information on the use of medicinal products are too often shown to be illusory and untrue .
I agree with the underlying spirit of this report , which aims to put the ' patient 's right to know ' into the centre of the legislation and , consequently , recommends that pharmaceutical companies give patients some basic information .
I therefore hope for greater certainty in the law , which often falls short , partly due to the different degrees to which the Member States have implemented the previous directive .
The provisions relating to information on prescription-only medicinal products therefore need to be updated and new rules need to be adopted , promoting greater health literacy and involving the health industry to a greater extent in carrying out a fundamental role to improve public health .
In the area of health , access to comprehensive , good quality information guarantees better results , insofar as patients are more likely to follow a treatment that they are able to understand .
I join with the rapporteur in emphasising the difficulty in accessing this kind of information in some European countries , due to different interpretations by the Member States of the directive on information relating to medicinal products , as well as the unreliable and unclear nature of that information .
We need to make it more accessible , in accordance with patients ' right to information .
Nonetheless , in order to avoid creating any imbalance between Member States , it is vital to identify the means by which to disseminate this information , and not favour one at the expense of the others .
Finally , it is essential to clearly distinguish between information and advertising and to prevent pharmaceutical companies from exploiting these information campaigns in order to promote their products .
The amendments that the European Parliament put forward to a proposal by the Commission relating to information on medicines warranted my vote in favour , as I believe it to be essential for the general public to have easy access to knowledge concerning medicines , in particular through information being made available on the Internet in all European languages .
I voted against this text , as we cannot allow pharmaceutical companies and the Commission to turn health into a commodity like any other .
The link between the pharmaceutical industry in Europe and pharmacovigilance is yet again at the heart of the debate .
We cannot let pharmaceutical firms inform the public as they please nor authorise direct advertising to the general public for prescription-only drugs .
Indeed , the commercial concerns of these firms are incompatible with the objectives of general interest pursued by our health policies , and it would be dangerous to turn a blind eye .
The European Commission 's initial proposal for a directive on information to the general public on medicinal products subject to medical prescription has thrown the doors open for pharmaceutical companies to advertise their drugs .
Today plenary amended the Commission 's initial proposal , which was tailored to the pharmaceutical industry .
I voted in favour of all the amendments which significantly improved the original text , by shifting the focus of the legislation away from the right of the pharmaceutical industry to advertise their products to the right of patients to have reliable , objective and independent information .
I also voted in favour of the amendments which prohibit the provision of information on drugs both on television and radio and in the press .
However , despite the improvements which we made , the dividing line between information and advertising is still blurred and the text still has a number of weaknesses and loopholes .
I abstained in the final vote , because I consider that the best solution would be for the Commission to review its proposal for a directive on the basis of the guidelines which we have given it today .
Nor is it a coincidence that the Member States took an almost unanimously dismissive stand on this dossier in the Council .
I think that patients must have access to better information about medicinal products subject to medical prescription .
This entails providing objective information about the medicines ' characteristics and the diseases for which they are recommended , as well as preventing the provision of unsolicited information or disguised advertising .
Making a distinction between information and advertising concerning medicines is essential for the protection of the public .
That is why I voted in favour of Mr Fjellner 's report , which requires that an objective description for patients ' use be included on the packaging of medicines .
Furthermore , access to clear and reliable information will be strengthened , by making it available in all the languages of the European Union on approved websites and in official brochures .
I welcome the adoption of this proposal , which marks real progress towards greater transparency in health matters .
I voted against this report , to which I have always expressed my strong opposition .
While I approve of the idea of providing better information to patients , I disapprove of the means used to do so .
The pharmaceutical industry 's goal will never be one of philanthropy .
Moreover , there is a very fine line between information and advertising .
It is true that the text , which was adopted almost unanimously , has nothing to do with the Commission 's initial idea . The latter would have simply opened the door to advertising disguised under the label ' Information ' .
That proposal corresponded , moreover , to the pharmaceutical sector 's clear expectation of being able to get out of the legal ban on advertising of medicines .
The report , as adopted today , includes many more guarantees : that the information provided by pharmaceutical companies for dissemination will , in particular , be checked beforehand , and will not be disseminated by the media .
Nevertheless , the authorisation to publish package leaflet summaries means that there will be items that must be highlighted and others , such as adverse reactions , which may well be regularly excluded from the summaries , as they do not ' sell ' well .
Is that not already a promotional move ?
Was that really the aim ?
Was the game really worth the candle ?
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending , as regards information to the general public on medicinal products subject to medical prescription , Directive 2001 / 83 / EC .
This directive sets out a Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and helps ensure the right of patients to reliable , accessible and independent information , validated by the competent authorities , on the medicinal products available .
Directive 2001 / 83 / EC , which sets out a Community code relating to medicinal products for human use , provides for a harmonised framework for the advertising of medicines at a Community level , the application of which continues to be a responsibility of the Member States .
This legislation prohibits advertising to the general public of medicines subject to medical prescription .
However , provisions relating to information on medicines are not regulated , since it only stipulates that information relating to certain supply activities is exempt from the advertising provisions .
Therefore , Union legislation does not prevent Member States from establishing their own approaches to the provision of information on medicines , provided that the above-mentioned rules on advertising are complied with .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to rule out the possibility of making information from pharmaceutical companies available in newspapers , magazines and similar publications , or on the television or radio .
This proposal for a directive amends the earlier directive as regards information to the general public on medicinal products subject to medical prescription .
In general terms it concentrates , firstly , on the responsibility of the pharmaceutical companies to inform the public , ensuring that this information is not of an advertising nature .
Secondly , the Commission is given the role of monitoring and decision making through delegated acts on the definition of what constitutes information and what constitutes advertising .
We believe that this approach means that too many roles for providing information are concentrated in the hands of pharmaceutical companies and within the Commission , and that these roles should be carried out on a sovereign basis , coordinated and approved by specific national authorities in order to improve the information given to patients and the public , and to safeguard their rights .
Approval of the new legislation on information on medicinal products represents a further step toward guaranteeing patients clearer and more effective information on the drugs they take and are prescribed .
We need a harmonised legal framework at European level that not only maintains the ban on advertising medicinal products subject to medical prescription but also takes into account the patient 's right to information .
This is no small matter , because the sometimes blurred boundary between ' product promotion ' and ' product information ' is liable to confuse patients .
We must remember that patients are playing a more and more active role in the health sector throughout the European Union .
Better access to non-promotional information may therefore help the public to gain a better understanding of the treatments prescribed to them and help their recovery , all naturally in the interests of their health .
To conclude , I would like to underscore the importance of defining in a transparent way the types of information on drugs and the channels through which such information may be disseminated .
We must reduce the risk of disguised advertising and , where necessary , the risk of a surfeit of uncontrolled and misleading information .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a directive as regards information to the general public on medicinal products for human use subject to medical prescription because I believe that harmonising the laws in this sector is a fundamental means of safeguarding the knowledge of European patients .
This is actually a very sensitive issue because it relates to health protection , which is a fundamental human right .
I fully support this House 's call for a clear distinction to be made between therapeutic information and advertising .
Pharmaceutical companies , in fact , must not use patients ' right to information as a vehicle for disguising their promotional aims but instead must use it to guarantee European consumers a real understanding of products , through the scientific indication of their characteristics , labelling and assessment reports .
It should also be noted that greater access to information both in electronic form , available over the Internet , and in printed form can also contribute to the achievement of better medical results , because a patient who is informed about prescribed medicines is one who can play an active and more knowledgeable role in the therapeutic recovery process .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which is part of a package which will amend the current 2001 directive on medicinal products for human use .
It specifically focuses on the provision of information to the public on prescription-only medicines .
The stated aims of the directive are to allow for better access to information for patients and to clarify the rules , which are currently interpreted differently across the EU , leading to health inequalities .
It also deals with information on the Internet , which is not covered at present and is a particularly difficult topic , as it is so hard to regulate .
This proposal , adopted today by a large majority in Parliament , is a great improvement on the initial proposal presented by the Commission , as it better advocates patients ' rights to information .
However , despite the clear improvements in Parliament 's report , I abstained because some of the guarantees that would be necessary in order for people to have access to clear and independent information on medicinal products are still weak .
Not all the amendments made by this House to the proposal by the Commission and the Council are along the right lines .
They adhere strictly to the principle of a single market in medicinal products and still view products available over the counter as goods like any others ; the authors even end up talking of ' consumers ' rather than patients .
The amendments do not propose preventing pharmaceutical companies from producing information about their medicines for the general public .
They do , however , have the virtue of seeking to enable the Member States to regulate as far as possible the dissemination of information published by those companies .
In particular , they grant them the right to publicly condemn companies that publish information which is not in line with official State data or that disseminate it in a misleading fashion .
That is better than nothing .
I cannot , however , vote for such a weak text . I will therefore abstain .
in writing . - ( PT ) Access to quality information relating to medicinal products that are subject to medical prescription will contribute to achieving better results in terms of patient health , in that the better informed they are , the more likely they will be to better understand decisions related to their treatment .
Therefore , the objective of this proposal cannot be limited to harmonising European legislation , but should also promote health , through the improvement of knowledge in the area of health .
The pharmaceutical industry has an important role to play in the promotion of literacy in the area of health , but this role should be clearly defined , and participation by the sector strictly regulated , in order to prevent commercial considerations from leading to an excessive consumption of medicines .
Elderly people and the chronically ill in particular have a multitude of medicines prescribed to them , which could adversely affect each other - because , of course , one doctor does not know what his colleague has prescribed .
Meanwhile ever more products , from aspirin to cold remedies right through to sleeping remedies are sold without a prescription .
Does anyone actually consider the possibility that even natural plant-based products could interact with various medicinal products ?
Patients also contribute to the confusion : nothing is said about prescribed medicinal products that we have taken at the wrong time , or medication that we have taken it upon ourselves to stop taking or to change , and so on .
The economic damages arising as a result of insufficient compliance with treatment instructions run into billions .
Therefore , the clear distinction between advertising and information called for by the rapporteur is important .
This will hopefully result in better clarification of the fact that non-prescription medicines can also interact with prescription medicines .
The prescribing doctor must remain the primary source of information , as only he selects a medicine that is tailored to the patient 's age , gender , weight , known intolerances and so on .
In view of these considerations , I abstained from the vote .
I voted in favour of Mr Fjellner 's report , inasmuch as I believe that the message and guidelines provided are extremely important .
European consumers are often lost when faced with medicinal product package leaflets because they find them complicated and they contain information that is often confusing .
The very aim of the proposal for a directive as regards information to the general public on medicinal products subject to medical prescription is to provide simple information that is easy to understand and use , but that avoids forms of advertising .
It is also important for information to be accessible via other channels , in addition to package leaflets , and I therefore welcome publication on the Internet .
in writing . - ( PT ) I believe the establishment of the distinction between information and advertising that is made with regard to medicines to be fundamental for the protection of citizens .
My vote in favour of the Fjellner Report was a result of the clear improvements that were introduced into Directive 2001 / 83 / EC .
The large majority that approved this document were convinced about the defence of the patient 's right to information .
The work carried out by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in improving the proposal initially presented by the European Commission deserves to be emphasised .
I would like to thank Mr Fjellner for his excellent work .
I voted in favour because I agree that non-promotional information on medicinal products must be made available to patients and the general public by marketing authorisation holders according to the ' pull principle ' whereby patients / the public have access to information if they need it , contrary to the ' push principle ' whereby the marketing authorisation holders disseminate information among patients and the general public .
The information supplied to patients should fulfil the following main characteristics :
Reliability : information to patients should be based on the latest scientific knowledge with clear references made to the sources this knowledge comes from ;
Independence : it has to be clear who provides and who finances the information so that consumers can identify potential conflicts of interest ;
Information should be easily accessible to consumers and patient-oriented : it should be comprehensible and easily available , taking into account the particular needs of consumers such as age , cultural differences and availability in all European languages .
Information supplied to patients about prescription-only medicines should be part of a wider ' information to patients ' strategy and a broader health education strategy .
Patients and anyone interested should be able to find accurate , unbiased information about having a healthy lifestyle , the prevention of illness and specific diseases and on the various treatment options .
This is why I think that this proposal must be supplemented with a code of conduct concerning the information supplied to patients and drafted in cooperation with patients ' organisations .
This will allow the ' patients ' voice ' to be heard .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report since I welcome the fact that the compromise changes introduced into the proposal initially presented by the Commission will have contributed decisively to guaranteeing patient access to reliable and independent information on prescription-only medicines that are available on the market .
Advertising of prescription-only medicines is banned within the European Union , and remains so .
Pharmaceutical companies must comply with clear rules on objectivity in the non-promotional information that they disseminate .
These are the two important messages sent this lunchtime with the adoption of the legislative package on information for patients .
A consensual vote by Parliament ( 558 votes to 48 ) that merely confirms the unanimous vote , less one vote from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Numerous safeguards have been put in place .
The European Commission proposed a ban on information about prescription-only medicines broadcast on television or radio , and the European Parliament has decided to extend this to the written press .
Manufacturers are subject to numerous obligations : descriptions of product characteristics , strengthened labelling , and prior authorisation by health authorities .
I do not understand all the ' commotion ' that the issue has caused , especially in French-speaking Belgium , amongst consumers ' associations and mutual societies , supported by certain MEPs who , even before the discussions had started , had already condemned these two laws .
This is facile political posturing that I find regrettable , given the high expectations of patients when faced with illness and given that , without these laws , the public would be at the mercy of the cowboys on the Internet .
in writing . - We decided we would vote in favour or abstain depending on the result of the third part of Amendment 31 , which ensures that pharmaceutical companies can only provide information material to health professionals for their own use , not for patients via healthcare professionals .
This was key for the Greens / EFA .
As it was finally adopted , we decided to support the report in the final vote .
Our vote in favour of this measure is a consequence of the formal distinction that has been made between information on medicinal products and advertising .
We support the greater dissemination of information on medicinal products , if this improves patients ' awareness .
We do not , and shall never , agree with any measure that clearly or surreptitiously attempts to introduce forms of advertising , turning an ethical medicinal product into a commercial product .
The fact that the information on drugs will not be allowed to be published in newspapers or magazines , nor much less broadcast on the radio or television , is therefore appreciated .
It is also a good thing that this proposal for a directive clarifies which and how much information can and must be divulged , including scientific information and clearly excluding advertising material .
The amendment that introduces certification and monitoring of Internet sites that publish said information further assures us that the information will not constitute advertising .
The pharmacy is and must remain a basic healthcare facility , and as such a protected area with regard to the rules of trade and competition .
We believe that this rule helps pharmacies carry out their difficult role in pharmacovigilance and education on the correct use of medicinal products .
In an age when people search for information themselves , patients must be informed clearly , objectively , reliably and well about the effects of medicinal products .
Although advertising of medicinal products is banned in the Union , the Commission has created an opening .
Its proposal - which I did not endorse - lacked such a strategy , and the distinction from advertising was too vague .
In addition , the Commission gave too many rights and too much responsibility to the pharmaceutical industry .
Now that Parliament has made major changes , however , I can support the proposal .
Companies ' use of official documents ( summarised product information , evaluation reports ) and the channels through which they make the information available are restricted : health newspapers and magazines , websites and letters to patients are no longer permitted .
All guidance on the medicinal products must be screened and approved in advance by the competent authorities .
This precludes self-regulation , which the original proposal did not do .
I still have my doubts about the feasibility of this proposal , as a mandatory government information strategy would still be stronger than the government monitoring companies ' policies .
I nevertheless voted in favour of the legislative proposal as , at the end of the day , it does ensure better information for patients .
The Fjellner report on information on medicinal products raises legitimate concerns regarding the possibilities for pharmaceutical companies to advertise to patients .
My colleagues in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety have certainly improved the text by refusing to support several kinds of disguised advertising and by proposing that Member States ' health authorities check communications from pharmaceutical companies to the general public on their prescription-only medicines .
Nevertheless , I remain very cautious about the extremely fuzzy line between information and advertising .
I am fiercely opposed , for example , to the idea of authorising companies to advertise their medicines to patients via medical personnel .
I do not want doctors to be put under pressure and to become salesmen and -women for the pharmaceutical industry .
That is why , despite the strict supervision laid down by my colleagues , I abstained on a text which I found truly problematic .
I voted in favour of the report because it provides a clear and sustainable improvement to patient information on medicinal products .
The advertising of medicinal products continues to be prohibited .
The doctor-patient relationship will not be adversely affected by the directive and the authority of the service provider to prescribe medicinal products remains clear .
Overall , we have a very successful proposal for a directive from the pharmaceutical package for second reading .
This directive will introduce for the first time uniform regulations on the provision of certain information to the general public on medicinal products subject to medical prescription .
The necessary information is to explain to patients the benefits and risks associated with prescription-only medicinal products to enable them to make informed decisions .
Following consultation with patient organisations and healthcare professionals , among others , the Commission will adopt quality criteria for information .
These criteria will ensure the reliability of the data provided - including on websites and on Internet portals - and will hold the pharmaceutical industry accountable for the information it provides .
Mr Fjellner 's amendments also recommend information campaigns to raise awareness among the general public of the risks of falsified medicines , which have already had fatal consequences in Member States such as the United Kingdom .
For years , the EU customs authorities have been noticing a rapid increase in the import of falsified medicines , in particular antibiotics , painkillers and even cancer medicines .
Contrary to some reports in the media , the directive relates only to medicinal products subject to medical prescription .
No one need fear for their herbal tea .
Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 lays down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishes a European Medicines Agency .
The amendment to Directive 2001 / 83 / EC emphasises better information for patients , especially in relation to the distinction between information and advertising .
Following this amendment , the regulation , for its part , should be amended so that certain items of information on the products it covers can also be subjected to prior monitoring by the European Medicines Agency .
With this aim in mind , the European Commission has tabled a proposal to amend the regulation , concerning the dissemination to the general public of information on prescription-only medicinal products for human use .
The European Parliament , called on to express an opinion on the proposal , has tabled a number of amendments to the European Commission 's text .
These are the reasons that have led me to vote in favour of the resolution amending Directive 2001 / 83 / EC .
These two sets of legislation work hand in hand to improve information to patients on the medicines that are issued to them .
The Greek Communist Party voted against both proposals for a regulation and the corresponding European Parliament reports , because they shift the responsibility for responsible , reliable and accurate information for patients from government departments to the multinational pharmaceutical companies .
Information for patients is a government , not an individual responsibility .
The profits made by monopoly pharmaceutical groups and protection for public heath are mutually exclusive .
The recent vaccination scam in connection with the supposed ' new flu ' pandemic is a typical example of how targeted information translates into profits of billions for the international drug companies .
We maintain that the responsibility for informing citizens about drugs in general , not just drugs available on prescription as provided for in the regulation , should rest solely with the State .
That is the very least that is required in order to protect patients and workers .
Drugs , drug research and the means for disseminating knowledge and information are in the hands of the multinationals , whose only criterion is profit .
Workers and health professionals cannot be certain of the quality and efficacy of drugs and of the knowledge and information which they receive .
This policy needs to be combated , in order to eliminate business from health and drugs .
We need government drug agencies and free national health services .
I voted in favour of this report which strives to ensure the key EU objective of ensuring the proper functioning of the internal market for medicinal products for human use and of better protecting the health of EU citizens .
The document adopted today will create the conditions to plan a clear framework for information on prescription-only medicines to consumers with a view to promoting more informed consumer choices and will ensure that the direct advertising of prescribed medicines to consumers continues to be prohibited .
According to the European Parliament 's proposal , a publicly accessible pharmaceutical database must be established in the EU in all the official languages of the Union with assurances that it will be updated and administered independently of the business interests of pharmaceutical companies .
The establishment of the database will simplify information searches and will allow information to be understood by the non-expert public .
I voted against this report , to which I have always expressed my strong opposition .
While I approve of the idea of providing better information to patients , I disapprove of the means used to do so .
The pharmaceutical industry 's goal will never be one of philanthropy .
Moreover , there is a very fine line between information and advertising .
It is true that the text , which was adopted almost unanimously , has nothing to do with the Commission 's initial idea . The latter would have simply opened the door to advertising disguised under the label ' Information ' .
That proposal corresponded , moreover , to the pharmaceutical sector 's clear expectation of being able to get out of the legal ban on advertising of medicines .
The report , as adopted today , includes many more guarantees : that the information provided by pharmaceutical companies for dissemination will , in particular , be checked beforehand , and will not be disseminated by the media .
Nevertheless , the authorisation to publish package leaflet summaries means that there will be items that must be highlighted and others , such as adverse reactions , which may well be regularly excluded from the summaries , as they do not ' sell ' well .
Is that not already a promotional move ?
Was that really the aim ?
Was the game really worth the candle ?
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on amending , as regards information to the general public on medicinal products for human use subject to medical prescription , Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 .
This regulation sets out Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use , establishes a European Medicines Agency and helps to ensure the right of patients to reliable , accessible and independent information , validated by the competent authorities , on the medicinal products available .
Given how important patient compliance and the correct administration of medicinal products are for successful treatment , it is vital that the public , that is , the patients , have access to good quality , non-advertising information that is true , current and not misleading , in line with the Summary of Product Characteristics .
The best-placed body to provide current and accurate information for each medicinal product is its marketing authorisation holder .
Parliament has rightly decided to focus on and protect the interests of patients .
I could not agree more with this approach , although I do not believe that there is any need to limit the possibilities afforded by the Commission 's proposal on disclosure of information by the pharmaceutical industry , under the ' push principle ' .
This was a balanced proposal that took the interests of all parties into account , involving health professionals and protecting the public from advertising about medicinal products subject to medical prescription , which quite rightly remains banned .
I do not believe the text that has just been adopted will actually change the reality of patient 's access to information much , which I think is a missed opportunity .
in writing . - It is important for patients to be better informed about any medications they are taking .
It is important too that any information they receive is objective and that the pharmaceutical industry does not blur the line between information and advertising .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) has done a good job in amending this proposal and I was able to support this report .
in writing . - I do not agree with direct-to-consumer advertising in relation to pharmaceutical products .
It is important for patients to have access to information on the medicine that they are taking but I feel that this type of advertising would undermine the doctor 's role as gatekeeper and may damage their responsibility to patients .
I congratulate Mr Fjellner on his important work as regards information to the general public on medicinal products for human use subject to medical prescription and more particularly on EU procedures for medicinal product authorisation and monitoring .
The current EU legal framework on the scientific information provided to European consumers presents many problems , particularly as regards the different interpretations of the directive by individual Member States .
The report approved today aims to improve the level of harmonisation of the regulations in the sector in an attempt to close the gaps and eliminate the disparities that exist today with regard to safeguarding the right to health .
This is all situated within a broader strategy of health literacy , aimed at ensuring that the European public can , in fact , easily access scientific information on prescription-only medicines .
I voted in favour of this report as I am particularly interested in health-related topics , especially concerning equal access for patients to medical care and information .
At the moment , the level of information about the medicines available on the market varies hugely in Europe , which I could say is even unfair to patients .
Patients must have the right to obtain complete , correct information about medicines .
The proposals from my colleague Christofer Fjellner have gone precisely in this direction , thereby giving priority to the patient .
The amendments made by the European Parliament to the European Commission 's legislative proposal highlight that manufacturers of medicinal products must provide basic information such as product characteristics , a label , patient information leaflet and a publicly available version of the assessment report .
However , so that we can ensure that the information is reliable , I think that national authorities must monitor stringently the specialist sites which supply such details .
This report consists of a reminder of what the European Medicines Agency should be .
One cannot oppose a draft that states obvious facts such as the need to ' place emphasis on the rights and interests of patients ' , the need to oblige companies to publicly list the adverse reactions of their medicines and the need to publish information in all the official languages of the European Union .
One can , however , be taken aback by the fact that such commonplaces have to be pointed out 15 years after that Agency was created .
Parliament should denounce the Agency 's lack of transparency and say loud and clear that it should be reformed in everyone 's interests .
in writing . - ( PT ) Access to quality information relating to medicinal products that are subject to medical prescription will contribute to achieving better results in terms of patient health , because the better informed they are , the more likely they will be to better understand decisions related to their treatment .
Therefore , the objective of this proposal cannot be limited to harmonising European legislation , but should also promote health , through the improvement of knowledge in the area of health .
The pharmaceutical industry has an important role to play in the promotion of literacy in the area of health , but this role should be clearly defined , and participation by the sector strictly regulated , in order to prevent commercial considerations from leading to an excessive consumption of medicines .
It is also necessary to avoid misleading advertising and to try to provide better information to the consumer ( patient ) , who has access to a variety of uncontrolled information through the Internet , which is not the case with regard to the reliable information provided by pharmaceutical laboratories .
In order to safeguard the rights and interests of patients , the latter should be able to avail themselves of good quality , objective , reliable and non-promotional information on medicines .
If we wish to protect health , pharmaceutical leaflets must be as clear and comprehensive as possible , and must satisfy basic quality criteria .
With this same concern to protect patients and provide information to the general public , we must promote the easiest possible access to information , in particular by summarising the characteristics of the product and providing a leaflet for these in both electronic and printed form .
That is why we will have to ensure the availability of certified and registered websites offering considerable amounts of independent , objective and non-promotional information .
Mr Fjellner 's report is very timely .
The veiled advertising of medicines is unacceptable .
Doctors must be able to give their patients recommendations on medicines .
Doctors must regulate and prescribe medicines to patients , in order to avoid speculation and competition between drug manufacturers .
Pharmaceutical companies should be limited to providing support in the form of information , but in no event must they be allowed to try and foist their products on patients .
Doctors are responsible for treatment ; they must also decide which medicines should be administered to the patient in the course of that treatment .
in writing . - ( DE ) In view of the fact that , in Germany alone , around 25 000 people die each year as a result of adverse reactions and interactions and 3 % of accidents can be attributed to prescription-only medicines , it is clear that we must provide patients with better information .
For instance , we could take France as an example , where any functional impairment is clearly indicated on the packet .
We need to provide patients with information , but we also need to help them through the medicinal product jungle , for example by agreeing on the daily routine , package designs or special labelling .
This will save the public purse billions and spare the patients the adverse reactions and interactions .
This proposal contains a couple of initiatives intended to enable patients to be better informed about the medicines they have been prescribed and the use of these medicines .
Whether patients will actually make use of this improved access to high quality information is questionable given the behaviour of many patients .
Nevertheless , it is of course important for the information to be made available throughout the EU .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the report .
Since it focuses on the patient 's right to information , I fully support the report , which includes some important innovations .
The first concerns the Internet : Parliament intends to make consumers aware of the risks of buying drugs online while also pushing for the proposal of ad hoc legislation on this selling method .
The second concerns the ban on advertising prescription-only drugs , because it is important to draw a distinction between generic and non-generic drugs , not only from the viewpoint of information to be given to patients but above all with regard to compliance with good practice in the manufacturing of active substances , particularly outside Europe .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report on the proposed regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 as regards information to the general public on medicinal products for human use subject to medical prescription , introduces new rules with regard to the transparency and effectiveness of the information , placing the emphasis on the interests of patients , protecting them , a fact on which I based my vote in favour .
Important points are the establishment of a European Medicines Agency , and clear contributions towards guaranteeing the right of patients to reliable , accessible and independent information , validated by the relevant authorities for the available medicines .
There are many sources of independent and evidence-based information on treatment options available within the European Union .
These resources take into account cultural specificities and contexts for the population , including health determinants .
Increased access to quality information will help achieve better health outcomes for patients as better informed patients are much more likely to continue necessary treatments and have far more chance of understanding the decisions related to their treatment .
Consequently , if properly phrased and implemented , the proposal will generate added value .
The regulation being discussed fails to take into account technical developments , as well as the opportunities and challenges created by the Internet .
Patients in Europe already have unlimited access via the Internet to uncontrolled and frequently incorrect information about prescription-only medicines in a few seconds .
However , access via the Internet to controlled and safe drug information is very limited for most patients .
This is especially a problem for those who need information in their own language .
Therefore , the objective of the proposal can not only be to harmonise European legislation but also to improve health through improved health-related knowledge .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposed regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending , as regards information to the general public on medicinal products for human use subject to medical prescription , Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency .
I believe that it is essential to guarantee patient access to reliable and independent information on medicines subject to medical prescription that are available on the market .
In today 's sitting , we voted at first reading on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council as regards information on medicinal products ( EU procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products ) .
Parliament and patient organisations have been asking for such a proposal for a long time , in order to enable patients to better informed on the medicines they are prescribed and taking .
The current regulation is not in line with technical development or the possibilities and challenges created by Internet .
Patients in Europe already have infinite access to uncontrolled and often incorrect information about prescription-only pharmaceutical products in a few seconds .
The rapporteur proposed to shift the focus of the proposal and to mandate pharmaceutical companies to provide certain information to the patients and thus , to put the ' patients ' right to know ' at the centre of the legislation .
Increased access to quality information will contribute to achieving better health outcomes for patients as better informed patients are more likely to continue necessary treatments and better understand decisions related to their treatment .
The proposal will therefore bring an added value .
in writing . - This report welcomes the proposal by the Commission on information to patients on prescription-only medicines-0663 ) .
Parliament and patient organizations have been asking for such a proposal for a long time , in order to enable patients to better informed on the medicines they are prescribed and taking .
Increased access to quality information will contribute to achieving better health outcome for patients as better informed patients are more likely to continue necessary treatments and better understand decisions related to their treatment ; so the proposal , if properly phrased and implemented , will bring an added value .
Therefore the objective of the proposal can not only be harmonisation of European legislation but also to improve health through improved health literacy .
The pharmaceutical industry has an important role to play in promoting health literacy and good health , but their role must be clearly defined and their involvement strictly regulated , in order to avoid commercially driven overconsumption of pharmaceuticals .
We , the Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament ( Dan Jørgensen , Christel Schaldemose , Britta Thomsen and Ole Christensen ) , have abstained from voting on the report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on amending , as regards information to the general public on medicinal products for human use subject to medical prescription , Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency .
Even though the report contains a number of good proposals , we do not believe that we can vote for a proposal that runs counter to the Danish constitution .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on amending , as regards information to the general public on medicinal products for human use subject to medical prescription , Regulation ( EC ) No 726 / 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency so that it will guarantee in future a legal EU framework enabling European citizens to have equal access to correct and clear information about medicinal products .
The report presented by the Commission on 20 December 2007 concerning ' current practices with regard to the provision of information to patients on medicinal products ' indicates that Member States have adopted divergent rules and practices with regard to the provision of information on medicinal products , resulting in a situation where patients and the general public have unequal access to this information .
Europe 's citizens are entitled to have access to correct and clear information about medicinal products .
I think that it is important that the regulation safeguards the interests of patients and ensures that the latest communication media are used to provide the general public with information that is correct , accessible and easy to understand , in a transparent way , independently of the commercial interests of the pharmaceutical companies .
In view of the fact that , in a former job , I acted as a consultant for one of the interested parties in this matter , I have today abstained from voting on these reports , in other words , and .
Every year , in Europe , there is an estimated 9.3 million tonnes of electronic equipment waste .
The fact is that this equipment often contains a substantial amount of highly polluting materials .
This waste presents a considerable environmental challenge .
Reprocessing aside , it would appear vital to restrict , from the outset , the use of these hazardous substances .
Large industrial groups have already started to restrict their use .
Nonetheless , we need clear rules in order to provide a common framework for this essential task .
I therefore voted for the European Parliament legislative resolution on the adoption of a directive restricting the use of these substances .
However , this has not been an easy vote .
Indeed , the proposal contains a number of derogations , particularly as concerns photovoltaic panels .
As they allow for a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , we saw fit to tolerate the substances that they contain .
However , this became an issue for debate , naturally , on the priorities of the Union 's environmental policy , which unfortunately faces mutually contradictory issues .
I supported this report .
Every year , in the EU alone , an estimated 9.3 million tonnes of electrical and electronic equipment ( EEE ) are sold annually , the biggest share of which are large household appliances and IT and telecommunication equipment .
As the market continues to grow and innovation cycles become even shorter , the replacement of equipment accelerates , making waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) the fastest growing waste stream .
WEEE arisings are estimated to grow to 12.3 million tonnes by 2020 .
WEEE includes several hazardous substances , which can be released into the environment and damage human health and the environment , especially if not treated appropriately .
These problems have not been solved with RoHS 1.0 .
I support the document 's proposals that the European Commission should strengthen the prevention of the use of harmful substances and periodically examine the prohibition of other hazardous substances and their replacement with more environmentally friendly alternative substances or technologies which would ensure an appropriate level of protection of human health and the environment .
The European Parliament has ratified the agreement with the Council under the ordinary legislative procedure by adopting , at first reading , the recast of the directive restricting the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment .
This is good news for European consumers : electrical and electronic equipment sold in the European Union make up a substantial proportion of consumer goods sold , The quantity of electrical and electronic equipment sold each year in the European Union alone is estimated at 9.3 million tonnes .
The increasingly frequent replacement of these various items of equipment presents the issue of waste and of the hazardous substances present in that waste .
It is necessary , for safety and public health reasons , to restrict their use .
The idea behind the recast of the current directive , which dates back to 2003 , is to progress even further in restricting the use of hazardous substances .
The Commission is also due to revise its legislation in three years ' time , in order to adapt the legislation still further to future innovations .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Evans , on her work and the good compromise that she managed to reach amongst our political groups .
The text adopted , a recast of the directive currently in force , aims to set more ambitious parameters for the use of electrical and electronic equipment ( EEE ) .
It should be noted that in recent years the European institutions have , with great effort , made notable progress in making the disposal and production of electronic equipment more respectful of the environment and human health .
I voted in favour of this measure , which fits into this context and certainly represents both a burden and an opportunity for companies and small and medium-sized enterprises .
In fact , the ability to offer consumers less polluting products is a good chance for enterprises to improve their business processes and their global competitiveness .
Finally , the new parameters examined in this report will guarantee both greater protection for European consumers and greater respect for the environment .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( recast ) , as I believe that the agreement reached with the Council meets the objective of contributing to the protection of human health and the environment , simplifying and giving greater coherence to existing legislation .
According to the Commission , 9.3 million tonnes of electrical and electronic equipment ( EEE ) are sold every year in the EU alone , most of which comprises large household appliances and IT and telecommunications equipment .
As the market continues to grow and innovation cycles become shorter , waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) is seen as the fastest growing waste stream .
It is estimated that WEEE will increase to 12.3 million tonnes by 2020 .
The recasting of the directive on the restriction on the use of certain hazardous substances is aimed at broadening the scope of the directive and strengthening its preventative part , so that environmental damage can be corrected at the source as a priority , in line with Article 174.2 of the treaty .
However , this directive essentially focuses on large distributors , neglecting the budgetary impact that it may have on small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) producing EEE , and it does not offer solutions in the wake of the proposal and the report on BioIntelligence , which stated that under this new scheme , SMEs that produce medical supervision and monitoring equipment are likely to face problems .
in writing . - ( PT ) This recast relating to the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( RoHS ) is necessary , according to the Commission , because of uncertainty with regard to scope , a lack of clarity with regard to legal provisions , and disparities among Member States with regard to the conformity of the products in question .
Prior to the vote , I received several calls to reject the inclusion of PVC on the list of substances identified for priority review within Annex III of the RoHS Directive .
I would like to state that I disagree with this inclusion , as the listing of a series of suspect products , including PVC , not based on any criteria , does not make sense .
Considering a product to be susceptible a priori of being banned in the future without any scientific basis gives rise to an unacceptable situation of a lack of legislative definition .
In the case of PVC , an initial assessment carried out under the terms of the REACH Regulation concluded that it is not very hazardous , and is not a priority substance for inclusion in Annex III .
I voted in favour of this report because , during the negotiations that preceded the plenary vote , this list was withdrawn .
The Commission should now carry out a reassessment , three years after this legislation came into force .
The amount of sales of electrical and electronic equipment in the EU and the inevitable increase in waste from this equipment means that there is a need to replace certain hazardous substances in them , so as to minimise their impact on the environment and ensure the protection of consumers and public health .
We realise that this is necessary , and see the search for solutions that could provide an answer as valuable .
We therefore voted for this report .
Over the course of the discussion process that has taken place over recent months , the Council has reached agreement with Parliament , following negotiations on certain more controversial and troubling issues .
We regard the fact that the proposed final text excluded polyvinylchloride from the scope of the directive , which allows production in certain industrial sectors to be maintained , as a positive factor , as these sectors could have been seriously hit had this been included , as was proposed .
I abstained on the Evans report on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment because I find Parliament 's approach strange .
On the one hand , the report relentlessly opposes , without any scientific proof , nanoparticles , which , because they are small , must necessarily be hazardous .
On the other hand , the proposal for a directive , by claiming to want to encourage the development of renewable energy technologies , excludes wastes from solar panels .
Either electrical substances are hazardous , or they are not .
If the aim is to impose the ' precautionary principle ' , then it should be applied to solar technology , too .
I voted in favour of the report on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( RoHS ) , because the extension of the area of application to cover all electronic equipment represents a definite improvement .
However , I find the fact that there are so many exceptions problematic .
In particular in the area of renewable energies , photovoltaic modules , which consist in part of cadmium telluride compounds , are not covered by this directive .
This substance is not only harmful to health , it is also hazardous and therefore really ought to be placed within the scope of the RoHS Directive .
The danger that , as a result , photovoltaic installations would have to completely disappear from roofs would not arise .
Rather , there are numerous cadmium telluride-free alternatives on the market .
I therefore disagree in this regard with the decision of the majority in Parliament and the Council .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment is increasing all the time , and it brings together several hazardous substances .
These substances may be discharged into the environment and harm human health if they are not treated properly .
This directive will enable numerous companies to make even more progress in designing new and safer electrical and electronic equipment by encouraging technological innovation .
The reduction in hazardous substances , upstream , will also lead to a reduction in recycling costs .
Finally , and critically , we have obtained an exemption for solar panels in order to encourage the development of renewable energy technologies within Europe .
Poland is one of the largest producers of television , radio and domestic electrical appliances in Europe .
It is also a country in which sales of this type of appliance are rising year by year .
The development of technology and the growth in demand for goods of this type are also causing an increase in the quantities of what is known as e-waste , and there is a problem with processing this waste and with the effect of this process on environmental pollution .
Therefore , the new provisions of the Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive are extremely important for the producers of this type of appliance .
They are required to eliminate harmful substances and to raise safety standards for appliances which are intended for everyday use .
This is also good news for consumers , because the new rules introduce the obligation to use substances which are safe for health and the environment , and this applies to all producers of electrical appliances throughout the European Union .
in writing . - Though not very ambitious , the first reading compromise improves the current legislation - I therefore voted in favour .
Besides the new methodology for substance restrictions , one key improvement is the open scope : all electric and electronic equipment , including equipment for the generation of electric currents , will in the medium term fall under the RoHS legislation .
A major drawback , however , is the long list of exclusions , including photovoltaic panels .
Excluding this decisive ' clean ' technology from environmental legislation will send the wrong signal , EU-wide and globally .
This is about setting the right regulatory framework for coherent sustainable investments !
Even if the production of photovoltaic panels with hazardous substances like cadmium telluride might be more cost-efficient , less problematic alternatives have existed for a long time and have proved to function excellently .
I do not see any need , therefore , to cover our roofs and fields with potentially hazardous waste , shifting the disposal challenge to future generations .
On this point , I strongly disagree with the position and decision of the EP 's and Council 's majority .
in writing . - The compromise negotiated by my colleague Jill Evans marks progress in this area of law .
The legal certainty it provides will lead to improvements in environmental protection and I accordingly voted in favour of the report .
The constantly rising production of television , radio and domestic electrical appliances is the result of the development of modern technologies and the increase in demand for this type of product .
As consumers , we expect functionality and ergonomics from these appliances , but above all we should require that different types of product comply with appropriate norms which regulate safety standards both for the user and the environment .
We exchange used appliances for new ones , producing alarming amounts of waste , and the dangerous substances used in their production are causing irreversible damage to the ecosystem .
Therefore , it is indispensable to introduce legislative regulations which will limit the use of harmful substances in the production of appliances which come into our homes , and which at the same time will support producers in the introduction of innovative , ecological measures .
in writing . - The current RoHS restricts the use of six hazardous materials that were once contained in certain electrical and electronic equipment .
It is being recast in order to simplify it and to make it easier for producers to tell which substances are banned , so as to avoid any unnecessary mix-ups that could be dangerous to the consumer and waste companies ' resources .
The European Union needed a detailed set of rules on the use of certain substances considered hazardous in electrical and electronic equipment .
This requirement is made clear from Commission data , which shows that , every year , in the EU alone , an estimated 9.3 million tonnes of electrical and electronic equipment ( EEE ) are sold .
As the market continues to grow and innovation cycles become even shorter , the replacement of equipment accelerates , making waste electrical and electronic equipment the fastest growing waste stream .
After a short transitional phase to allow companies to adjust to the new legislation , the use of hazardous substances will be banned from all electrical and electronic equipment , albeit with some exceptions such as photovoltaic panels .
The measure will also require competing third-country industries to observe the same obligations imposed on our own businesses , with the express requirement that imported products must comply with the same safety standards guaranteed by EU rules .
I therefore ultimately believe it is a priority to safeguard certain primary assets such as public health and the environment , albeit in the knowledge that we are operating in conditions that are very much defined by the severe economic crisis that has affected Europe and the world .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment .
The current Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive restricts the use of six hazardous materials in the manufacturing of certain electronic and electrical equipment .
It is intended to avoid toxic waste once this equipment is thrown away , to ensure that Europe 's unwanted mobile phones , computers and fridges do not damage the environment or human health by the seepage of chemicals in landfills or by giving off toxic fumes at incineration .
The directive is being simplified .
The use of hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment is a major problem for public health , for the environment and for waste management .
These risks are even greater in recycling and recovery operations under poor conditions in developing countries , especially in the case of illegal exporting for disposal in dumps in poorer countries .
With this draft legislation , all the material in question will be included under this directive .
In future , therefore , all materials will have to comply with the provisions of the directive if this is deemed necessary in an environmental assessment .
This directive contributes to the setting out of clear rules in the Member States as regards placing these substances on the market , and subsequently reusing them .
This directive will lead to a significant improvement to the present situation , which is why I voted in favour .
However , I believe that some hazardous substances that were left out of the directive should be included within the next three years , following a review and assessment of their impact .
in writing . - ( PT ) The increased use of electrical and electronic equipment , combined with their considerable technological development , has led to an ever shortening life cycle .
This , in turn , has led to serious problems with regard to the use of dangerous substances in this equipment , as well as difficulties in the management of the ever larger quantity of waste .
Therefore , this directive relating to the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances ( RoHS ) is aimed at broadening its scope and strengthening its preventative part , so that environmental damage may be corrected at source as a priority , in line with Article 174 ( 2 ) of the treaty .
This recast is essential for there to be a successful reduction of hazardous substances in this type of equipment .
I fully support Mrs Evans 's report .
However , I should like to add that this issue should be paid more attention .
The use of lead , magnesium , mercury and rare-earth metals in electronics and industrial technology is unavoidable .
Our task is to compel manufacturers to move over to less harmful materials .
Where that is not possible , it is essential that the public be informed of the potentially deleterious effect on consumers of all the harmful substances that have been used .
The directive on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( RoHS ) governs the use of hazardous substances in devices and components .
It is also an important instrument for setting a European , as well as global , standard for manufacturers .
The extension of the scope of the directive is intended to also take account of the waste treatment of hazardous substances .
I abstained from voting , as the report does not yet completely resolve all of the problems associated with the handling of hazardous substances .
There has certainly been a rapid growth in the market for electrical equipment , in particular in the areas of IT and telecommunications .
This and the ever shorter innovation cycles are also resulting in ever increasing amounts of electrical waste .
The recast of the RoHS Directive is aimed at preventing the use of hazardous substances that could harm the environment or human health .
Some of the proposals are controversial : on the one hand , large computer manufacturers like HP , ACER or Sony Ericsson have pronounced themselves in favour of a ban on all brominated flame retardants in electrical and electronic equipment .
On the other hand , the results of the Commission 's studies are clearly not very conclusive , at least as regards the potential damage to the environment .
In addition , there are concerns being expressed by the industry with regard to the ban on PVC , particularly in the area of the cables industry .
The negative properties of PVC are disputed and there is a fear that costs will increase if there is a ban on PVC-covered cables .
These arguments need to be weighed up before specific bans are laid down .
I have therefore abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of the report for a variety of reasons .
I agree that fixed installations and photovoltaic panels should be excluded from the scope of the directive .
I was also pleased at the adoption of a methodology for reviewing the hazardous substances contained in Annex IV , as it means that the list of substances to be examined by the Commission ( Annex III ) can be removed .
I also believe that the not overly broad definition of ' dependency ' to mean needing electricity for equipment operation is correct .
I also believe it premature for the legislation to cover the evaluation of nanomaterials , which are currently being examined by the Commission .
Lastly , I applaud the fact that the scope is ' open ' to include all electrical and electronic equipment .
in writing . - ( PT ) My vote in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( recast ) was due to the improvements introduced by mutual agreement with the Council , which should contribute to major improvements in the protection of public health and the environment , and waste management .
I would highlight the simplification and increased consistency of the new legislation .
The reorganisation and restriction of the use of hazardous materials was imperative in view of the substantial increase in sales of electrical and electronic equipment within the EU .
With this legislation , we are contributing to preventing the waste that we produce with electrical and electronic equipment , such as mobile phones , computers and refrigerators , from harming the environment and human health through the introduction of chemical products into the environment , either from landfill or through the release of toxic gases from incineration .
I would like to thank Mrs Evans for her excellent work .
I voted in favour because I agree that the RoHS recast needs to be put into the context of the EU 's international obligations to reduce total releases of dioxins and furans , with the goal of their continuing minimisation and , where feasible , ultimate elimination .
The final destiny of large quantities of waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) remains unclear .
High-temperature incineration remains the exception .
Sub-standard treatment of WEEE - in the EU or in third countries - risks remaining a reality for significant amounts .
Emissions of dioxins and furans can only be addressed via material choices at design stage .
In the EU alone , an estimated 9.3 million tonnes of electrical and electronic equipment ( EEE ) are sold annually , the biggest share of which are large household appliances and IT and telecommunication equipment .
As the market continues to grow and innovation cycles become increasingly shorter , the replacement of equipment accelerates , making waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) the fastest growing waste stream .
The volume of WEEE items is estimated to grow to 12.3 million tonnes by 2020 .
The key aspects of this recast of the directive are as follows :
open scope
differentiation between RoHS and REACH
modification of the exemption criteria
criteria for deciding on the duration of exemption / grace periods
codecision for future restrictions instead of comitology
specific provisions on nanomaterials .
I welcome that agreement was reached on first reading .
I voted for this report as the new proposal for a directive is simpler and will offer manufacturers an easier instrument to use for classifying their products in the categories envisaged by the directive .
It also takes into account the socio-economic impact linked to the protection of health and the environment when amending the exception criteria .
According to the Commission , it is advisable to reformulate the current directive relating to the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment , adopted in 2003 , on the grounds of clarity and legal certainty .
This recast naturally requires the expansion of the directive 's scope , so as to contribute to the protection of human health and the ecologically correct recycling and disposal of waste from electrical and electronic equipment .
With regard to this question , it is now crucial to take into consideration the potential impact of the recommended solutions on small and medium-sized enterprises .
Nearly eight years ago , the European Parliament adopted a directive on the restriction of hazardous substances ( the RoHS Directive ) , and thereby responded to a strong demand by consumers for safe and non-harmful everyday consumer products .
This safety approach was implemented mainly through a ban on the use of lead , mercury and cadmium in products as diverse as domestic appliances , radio and television sets , electric trains and video games .
I welcome the revision adopted today , which extends the scope of the directive to other products , but without prejudging substances as important as PVC .
Similarly , it was important to reconsider the restrictive position on nanomaterials adopted by the Committee on the Environment in June .
This revolution in the infinitely small deserves better than a simplistic position : for or against , as in the case of Genetically Modified Organisms ( GMOs ) .
It is also essential for the RoHS Directive to be workable and , in this respect , I welcome the account that has been taken of the potential effects of these substances on health and the environment , the establishment of a methodology and the guaranteed complementarity with the Registration , Evaluation , Authorisation and Restriction of Chemical Substances ( REACH ) Regulation .
At today 's sitting , I voted in favour of the revision of the directive on the use of hazardous substances in electric or electronic equipment .
Partly as a result of new scientific knowledge on the subject , the text - a recast of the 2003 directive - seeks to introduce restrictions on the use of materials such as cadmium , chlorine , mercury and polyvinyl chloride ( PVC ) , which have been shown to endanger human health .
Despite being aware of the strong opposition from the manufacturers of the sector , in particular against the limitations on the use of PVC , I believe it is a primary duty of politics , and consequently of democratically elected politicians , to try to control the use of substances that , even if only potentially , can damage human health .
At the same time , we need to encourage the use of alternative and replacement substances within the limits of the available technology .
I believe that the final outcome for electric and electronic equipment waste is of particular importance , particularly in cases in which these contain materials later recognised as dangerous .
In such cases , in fact , disposal must be even more rigorous and careful .
in writing . - According to the Commission , every year , in the EU alone , an estimated 9.3 million tonnes of electrical and electronic equipment ( EEE ) are sold annually , the biggest share of which are large household appliances and IT and telecommunication equipment .
As the market continues to grow and innovation cycles become even shorter , the replacement of equipment accelerates , making waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) the fastest growing waste stream .
WEEE arisings are estimated to grow to 12.3 million tonnes by 2020 .
WEEE is a complex waste stream , including several hazardous substances .
These substances , or their transformation products , can be released into the environment and damage human health , especially if not treated appropriately .
Risks for human health and the environment are further increased by sub-standard recycling / recovery operations in developing countries .
According to Article 174 ( 2 ) of the treaty , environmental damage should as a priority be rectified at source .
The waste hierarchy in the waste framework directive gives first priority to prevention , which is defined inter alia as setting out waste prevention measures that reduce the content of harmful substances in materials and products .
I really hope this report will help to solve those problems .
in writing . - Electronic equipment produces the fastest growing waste stream in Europe , and reducing the carcinogenic and toxic substances from this waste stream must be a top priority .
The open scope of the legislation , as recommended by the Environment Committee , is a much better approach than that proposed by the Commission .
A definitive list of specific products could exclude new products from the regulation , and we need to ensure that the legislation not only facilitates - but also keeps up with - innovation by industry .
It is encouraging to see that several companies are now phasing out the use of some of these potentially harmful substances from their products .
But we still need to adopt ambitious legislation which will encourage the rest of industry to follow the lead of others and to innovate in order to ensure better environmental protection .
I have endorsed the report on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment .
This report is a step in the right direction .
It extends the category of equipment to , inter alia , medical apparatus .
In addition to heavy metals such as mercury and lead , a number of brominated flame retardants are banned .
Moreover , the report provides an open scope , enabling all electronic equipment , with a number of specifically defined exceptions , and also other hazardous substances to be covered by this directive in the future .
Clear criteria are laid down for this .
However , I regret that a ban on PVC has not been included in this directive as the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance had proposed .
It is very important to achieve a reduction in hazardous substances in electronic waste .
Even though European legislation prohibits the export of hazardous waste for recycling , studies have shown that more than two thirds of European electronic waste is exported .
Often , this e-waste is dumped illegally in places such as West Africa , where waste treatment is very substandard and causes tremendous health problems and environmental pollution .
There is much money to be made from this fast-growing market in waste , and so sound supervision and monitoring are necessary to curb the illegal export of electronic waste .
It has become impossible to imagine our daily life without electrical and electronic equipment .
The European Restriction of Hazardous Substances ( RoHS ) system that regulates the use of hazardous substances in this electronic equipment has in fact become a universal system that is used in no less than 28 non-EU countries .
To date , restrictions have already been imposed on mercury , lead , cadmium and a number of flame retardants on the basis of the current RoHS Directive .
Rapid technological progress and better scientific knowledge have compelled us to recast this legislation .
The recast of the directive is also necessary in order to make RoHS an efficient , flexible instrument .
Indeed , from now on , it will be possible to exclude hazardous substances more quickly , which will benefit humans and the environment .
The relationship between the Regulation on the Registration , Evaluation , Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals ( REACH ) and the RoHS Directive is also laid down , and thus double regulation avoided .
For these reasons , I have endorsed with conviction today the agreement that Parliament was able to conclude with the Council .
I hope that an agreement can also be reached quickly regarding the Directive on Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment ( WEEE ) .
After all , the two legislative instruments are inextricably interlinked .
This is a good report , which takes most of the concerns of the industry and environmental protection concerns into account in a balanced manner .
Although it will surely not be possible to achieve complete satisfaction in relation to such a complex matter , this provides a very close approximation .
I have voted in favour of the Evans report because the overall balance of the agreement reached with the Council is positive .
Nevertheless , as shadow rapporteur , I would like to express my displeasure at the fact that solar panels have been excluded from the scope of the directive after intense lobbying from the sector .
As a result , cadmium will be allowed to remain in solar panels placed on the European market for ( at least ) another ten years , whereas that will not be allowed for any other electrical or electronic equipment .
I expressly disapprove of a situation where a sector which ought to be a driving force in our evolution towards a green economy has been anxious to evade this important environmental legislation and where a majority in Parliament and the Council have given in to the interests of one type of technology in particular ( the use of cadmium telluride thin-film solar panels ) .
In today 's vote , I endorsed the report on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment .
Recently , we have been able to see the significance of the problem addressed by the legislation we have adopted , as several million households around the European Union have exchanged their CRT television sets for modern LCD screens .
Today , those same households are thinking about changing their LCD televisions for LCD-LED ones .
The experts say that used electrical and electronic equipment is becoming the fastest growing source of waste .
In addition , analyses carried out by the research institute Öko-Institut have demonstrated the adverse effect of PVC and halogenated flame retardants on the environment and human health .
I am sure the document adopted today will contribute to a reduction in the amounts of hazardous substances of this kind .
in writing . - ( FR ) Parliament today adopted the motion for a resolution on the international Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , to ensure better international application of anti-counterfeiting measures .
ACTA is a tool for making the existing regulations more effective and for providing better protection against violations of copyright , trademarks , patents , designs and geographical indications .
I voted in favour of this resolution , tabled by my political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , as I believe that ACTA provides a protective shield for European industry .
Hence , we will be able to ensure the protection of copyright , as well as creativity and innovation in cultural and scientific matters .
Indeed , we should stop and reflect today on how better to combat piracy , and this international agreement is a step in the direction of the more effective application of anti-counterfeiting measures .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Conservatives and Reformists on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement , known as ' ACTA ' .
This agreement aims to combat the proliferation of counterfeiting and the increased piracy of ' copyrighted ' products by establishing a new international governance structure .
I think it is crucial to protect creativity from theft , for that is what piracy and counterfeiting really is .
The Union , which aims to become the world 's most competitive knowledge-based economy , cannot remain indifferent to this major problem .
That is why I welcome the adoption of this resolution .
It is a strong text which should have united all MEPs .
Unfortunately , it was only adopted by a slim majority .
While the European Commission was offering strong guarantees as regards respect for fundamental rights , the left in Parliament preferred to cling onto groundless protest slogans .
In my view , the European Union must spearhead this fight against negligence and lack of commitment of which China and Russia are frequently guilty in this area .
Our competitiveness in the globalised economy is at stake .
Combating counterfeiting is an essential element of EU political strategy , aimed at ensuring fairness , uniform conditions for our manufacturers , employment for our citizens and respect for the principles of the rule of law .
With the emergence of digital technologies , counterfeiting took on an uncontrollable international dimension , and so international cooperation is the main tool for combating this problem .
I supported this motion for a resolution which sets out the European Parliament 's objectives and priorities in the multilateral negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement , which aims , for the first time , to establish a comprehensive international framework to combat infringements of intellectual property rights more effectively .
I feel that it is important to ensure that IPR enforcement measures are not an obstacle to innovations and competition and that there is no damage to IPR restrictions and the protection of personal data , or that the free flow of information is restricted or legitimate trade unjustifiably impeded .
I voted against this text : the European right has given in to the demands of certain governments and to the pressure of the cultural industries , at the expense of the fundamental rights of European citizens .
All the safeguards which we asked of the Commission have been dismissed out of hand by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
That sends a bad signal to the Commission ahead of the Sydney negotiations next week .
Furthermore , the vague definition of the term ' commercial scale ' , relating to the increase in criminal sanctions in the area of on-line copyright infringements , could encourage States to adopt legislation leading to the criminalisation of private users and technical intermediaries .
ACTA must not have the effect of enabling the European Union to carry out investigations into individuals or to introduce flexible response systems or the like .
Finally , the Commission must carry out an impact assessment quickly - before rather than after ACTA has been implemented - regarding its application and its consequences for fundamental rights , data protection and the E-Commerce Directive .
This will allow the strengthening of international cooperation in combating counterfeiting , creating a tool to protect intellectual property rights ( IPRs ) effectively .
It is not intended to create new rights , but to ensure respect for existing rights through repressive measures and the creation of a comprehensive international framework of assistance to the parties .
This is a difficult agreement , with conflicting interests that leave room for controversial interpretations as to its effects .
Protecting IPRs is essential , but , on the other hand , it is vital to ensure a balance so that freedom of expression and innovation are not threatened , and so that the ability of individual to exercise his or her civil and fundamental freedoms is not constrained .
Counterfeiting is a very serious problem that carries enormous risks for European industry , the economy and innovation .
I hope that this agreement will be a step in the right direction , and that in forthcoming negotiations it will be possible to resolve the ambiguities and omissions that still plague the text , such as in the reference to false geographical locations .
I could like to congratulate the Commission for its efforts in increasing the transparency of the negotiations , and I hope that it will maintain this stance , keeping Parliament fully informed of the progress of negotiations .
I voted for the joint motion for a resolution on the ' Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ' proposed by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , along with another three political groups from the European legislative .
The intention behind this resolution was both to respect fundamental freedoms and individual rights and keep free access to the Internet .
The resolution also endeavoured to guarantee access to medicines in developing countries .
It is deplorable that this resolution failed to win the vote of the House as the socialist position supported the interests of European citizens .
in writing . - ( PT ) I agree on the whole with this motion for a resolution , which concerns the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , approved after long months of debate and efforts to find a compromise solution between the various political groups , which was unfortunately not achieved .
For the sake of the healthy functioning of the markets , the protection of the single market , the competitiveness of European companies within a global economy , and the creation and maintenance of jobs within the EU , it is important that the Union makes action against counterfeiting in its various forms a priority of its internal and international policy .
Aware that ACTA does not recommend a solution to a complex and multi-dimensional problem such as counterfeiting , as expressed in paragraph 3 , I still believe that ACTA constitutes a valid tool for making existing standards more effective , thus benefiting exports from the EU and protecting rights-holders when they operate within the global market , where various holders of industrial and intellectual property rights are currently the victims of systematic and widespread violation of copyright , trademarks , patents , designs and geographical indications .
in writing . - I voted against this resolution , which states the position of the European Parliament ahead of the initialling of the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , because the conservative majority in this House refused to raise the need for basic safeguards for our citizens vis-à-vis this global copyright agreement .
Parliament has yet to see evidence that the legal basis for this negotiation is consistent with the Treaty of Lisbon prior to the initialling of the agreement .
The Commission must also demonstrate to us that cooperation between service providers and copyright holders will not impinge on citizens ' fundamental rights , especially the right to privacy , the right to freedom of expression and the right to due process .
This requires an assessment of the impact of ACTA on data protection and fundamental rights .
We need a guarantee by the Council and the Commission that ACTA will not necessitate any changes to EU law as far as criminal measures relating to the enforcement of intellectual property rights are concerned .
Civil enforcement provisions on patents could also negatively impact access to generic medicines , and the Commission should address this concern .
We should withhold our consent to ACTA until we receive written guarantees on these critical issues .
A question remains over the content of the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) .
The main aim of this agreement , which has been negotiated for years in the utmost secrecy between 10 or so countries , is to combat counterfeiting and to protect intellectual property rights .
Nonetheless , it should be noted that neither China nor Brazil nor India has participated in these negotiations .
Furthermore , while counterfeiting must be combated , the well-known provisions in the treaty in question imply the establishment of measures that might be considered to be attacks on individual freedoms : supervision of Internet access providers , strengthening of border controls , and greater difficulties in transporting low cost generic medicines to developing countries .
These are all concerns that have been relayed by many MEPs , who do not wish to place ' blind ' confidence in the negotiations conducted by the European Commission .
The resolution , which was adopted by a slim majority - and only just - cannot actually be regarded as support , as doubts remain over whether the text complies with the acquis communautaire and whether it is compatible with respect for fundamental rights .
I abstained from voting on the resolution on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) because I believe that , although the text has some important points , it is excessively critical of the agreement under consideration .
Overall , I believe that the ACTA is favourable to the economic interests of the EU , and that it strikes a balance between protecting intellectual property rights and ensuring fundamental rights .
After much insistence by Parliament , there has been a substantial increase in the degree of transparency in the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) negotiations , and since the round of negotiations in New Zealand Parliament has been kept fully informed .
The negotiated text reflects the main concerns expressed by Parliament , especially on issues such as respect for fundamental rights , privacy and data protection , respect for the importance of a free Internet , the usefulness of safeguarding the role of service providers and the need to safeguard access to medicines .
The fight against counterfeiting is a priority , and international cooperation is fundamental to achieving this objective .
With the possibility of new emerging and developing countries acceding to the agreement , thus promoting widespread protection of intellectual property rights , the ACTA will be able to achieve the required multilateralism .
in writing . - ( PT ) The agreement negotiated is an important step in the fight against counterfeiting , and is a key element in the EU 's political strategy for ensuring justice , a level playing-field for European producers , the preservation of jobs for citizens , and respect for the rule of law .
The fight against counterfeiting should be one of the priorities of internal and international political strategy , and international cooperation is fundamental to the achievement of this objective .
ACTA is a tool that makes existing standards more effective , thus benefiting exports from the EU and protecting rights-holders when they operate within the global market .
I would stress the importance for European companies and jobs within the EU of protecting geographical indications , and I welcome the efforts made by the Commission to include the protection of geographical indications within the scope of ACTA .
Finally , I would emphasise the importance of the Commission confirming that the application of ACTA will not have any impact on fundamental rights and data protection , or on the efforts that the EU is currently making to harmonise implementation measures for intellectual property rights .
Had I not decided to boycott the sitting after the lamentable episode of Social-Eurocratic totalitarianism that we have just experienced , I would have voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution of the left-wing groups on the counterfeiting agreement .
I would have done so not because I have changed political persuasion , but because I believe that this agreement is insufficient to protect our industries from counterfeiting , that it fails to guarantee respect for geographical indications , that it serves little purpose if it does not involve China , the biggest counterfeiter in the world , and that it endangers the rights and freedoms of citizens as it concerns ' intangible ' property rights .
I am also in favour of all the requests for prior information , impact assessments and so on set out in this resolution .
In short , this agreement is , as it stands , pointless and potentially harmful .
It should not even be under negotiation , and even less so , given the issues it covers , by the European Commission alone .
I voted against the motion for a resolution on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Conservatives and Reformists because that text is by no means sufficient to protect individual freedoms .
MEPs have regularly expressed their many concerns about the negotiation of this international agreement and before the agreement was definitively ratified by the Member States and the European Union , it was important to raise a number of problems , particularly those relating to access to medicines , the responsibility of Internet access providers , and searches of travellers ' personal luggage at borders .
Unfortunately , the joint motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , for which I voted , and which expressed these concerns , could not be adopted , as it was just short of the number of votes required .
in writing . - I am disappointed that the resolution supported by my own group today was not adopted .
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) has the potential to have an extremely negative effect on civil liberties and today 's vote does nothing to diminish those fears .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Conservatives and Reformists on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) .
The resolution expresses the same concerns as those expressed by EU citizens with regard to data protection .
It expressly rejects a ' three-strikes ' regulation , which has been discussed as a measure to be used in the event of copyright infringements .
The resolution also points out that the agreement must be in line with the acquis communautaire , in other words the common body of EU law .
Counterfeit products and international copyright infringements damage the European economy , thereby putting European jobs at risk too .
Decisive measures must be taken to counter this .
I applaud the fact that the most controversial provisions have been removed from the final form of this international agreement , such as the responsibility of third parties , mandatory checks on computer memories when crossing borders and the mandatory application of the ' digital guillotine ' .
Although I welcome the effort made here to provide greater protection for intellectual property rights , I am not convinced that the form of the agreement presented to us here is entirely optimal .
I am very concerned that countries such as China and Russia are not signatories .
The fact that the agreement places greater emphasis on protecting the holders of rights , and not the actual authors , makes me concerned as to whether the agreement will really serve to protect general intellectual property rights , and not just to protect the rights of a narrow group of entities based mainly in the US .
Moreover , the fact that it was not possible to include geographical indications in the agreement only confirms my fears .
It is perhaps not necessary to comment again on the method of negotiating the agreement , but I do believe that a similarly non-transparent form of negotiation to that chosen for ACTA will not be repeated and Parliament will in future be informed in good time over the negotiation procedure for similar agreements and the content of the agreements .
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) has increased and continues to increase the effectiveness of the rules that promote European Union exports and protect those people who are increasingly subject to widespread infringements of their intellectual property rights when they operate on the global market .
As is emphasised effectively in the joint motion for a resolution , the fight against counterfeiting at global level represents a key aspect of European Union political strategy , with the aim of being able to offer standard conditions of competition for all European producers .
I believe that in this sector , as in others , the essential nature of cooperation between States has now been clearly accepted .
The protection of copyright , trademarks , patents , designs and geographical indications is certainly a sensitive issue because it is concerned with fundamental human rights , but today 's motion constitutes a serious appeal to continue in the right direction .
The Commission must , in fact , commit itself to guaranteeing the inclusion of effective methods for actually enforcing the protection of geographical indications , because this is essential for companies and the employment of European citizens .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Conservatives and Reformists .
This PPE / ECR resolution points out that the fight against counterfeiting is a priority within the Union 's internal and international political strategy and that international cooperation is a key element in the global pursuit of this goal .
In taking up the concerns of the European Parliament and of our fellow citizens , such as respect for fundamental rights , the protection of privacy and personal data , the recognition of the vital role of unrestricted Internet access , the importance of protecting the role of service providers , and the need to safeguard access to medicines , the act makes the current rules more effective .
It aims to provide better protection against all violations of intellectual property rights , trademarks , designs and patents in the interests of Community exports and the holders of these rights .
Contrary to what has been said by its detractors , the agreement is fully compatible with the acquis communautaire .
It does not introduce , for example , the so-called ' three-strikes ' procedure .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) as it : 1. is fully in keeping with the acquis communautaire ; 2. will result in a positive impact on the measures for protecting intellectual property rights globally and for protection against other territories such as Asia , Australia , the Pacific region and so on ; 3. will protect competition at EU level and cultural diversity , as well as contribute to job creation .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) .
ACTA is concerned with the enforcement of IP law at international level and concerns commercial copyright violations .
This is a very delicate subject where we need to give rights holders adequate protection and a reasonable return on their investments without , on the other hand , infringing civil liberties , restricting access to medicine or criminalising individuals for trivial breaches of copyright .
The right place to carry out this assessment is in the Trade Committee when it considers whether or not to give Parliamentary assent to ACTA .
Protection against counterfeiting and the protection of intellectual property are undoubtedly an important element on an international scale .
However , no clear significance emerges from the proposed ACTA agreement in terms of high quality and especially balanced protection of the interests of all EU Member State citizens .
This agreement , which has taken a long time to draw up , has lacked transparency at various levels in the preparatory stages , and is geared in its context more to the interests of one group .
Although the agreement also declares , among other things , a strengthening of the monitoring by relevant bodies of goods in transit and the export regime or ex officio negotiations , a question arises here as to scope and other possibilities for enforcing the agreement , as its effect seems debatable without the agreed ratification by a large number of important countries worldwide .
In relation to actually ensuring the protection of intellectual property , it can be said that on a global scale there is now a whole range of recognised , functioning and sufficiently proven instruments , institutions and contractual arrangements which currently ensure protection against counterfeits .
At the same time , the assurance that it is not necessary to change the acquis communautaire would , for a document of such importance and such a character , merit the submission of a more thorough legal analysis .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution as it represents an important step in combating counterfeiting without calling into question issues such as the transportation of generic medicines , and it ensures fundamental rights such as the right to privacy and data protection .
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) was negotiated behind the backs of our citizens and in opposition to UNO and its World Intellectual Property Organisation , the sole body that can legitimately establish such an agreement .
In the case of ACTA , a handful of countries have negotiated among themselves the rules that are to prevail in the area of intellectual property rights .
This misappropriation of international law to the benefit of the richest countries and their closest allies is wholly intolerable .
What is more , given that there is uncertainty over a possible patenting of living beings and potential obstacles to the circulation of generic medicines , what is imperative is not to be concerned about this point or regret that point , while accepting that we have been faced with a fait accompli .
I am voting against this text .
in writing . - ( PT ) The introduction of the draft Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement on 2 October 2010 , following the Tokyo round of negotiations , is very important .
There is also a need for the Commission to make available to Parliament and the public the definitive text of the ACTA agreement following the meeting to negotiate technical aspects that took place in Sydney between 30 November and 3 December 2010 .
Combating counterfeiting is one of the main priorities of internal and international political strategy , and international cooperation is fundamental to the achievement of this objective .
We are perfectly well aware that the agreement negotiated will not solve the complex and multi-dimensional problem of counterfeiting , but it is a step in the right direction towards putting an end to this serious problem , which is responsible for severe losses to the EU economy and the gross domestic product of Member States .
It is essential that this agreement come into effect as soon as possible .
Any delay will open the gates to the plain theft of intellectual property .
Manufacturers ' costs exceed all imaginable amounts .
Piracy on the Internet is an extremely topical issue these days .
Many Internet service providers and European Union citizens are involved in unethical activities .
In this context , we must regulate all operations associated with the downloading and so-called exchange of information .
Inaction as regards the prevention of counterfeiting promotes impunity and appears cynical .
I fully support this motion for a resolution .
I abstained from voting on the joint motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement as I believe that the text in question is overly critical and that it should be more balanced .
In the tabled version there is a clear indication that our final position will be opposed to the adoption of the agreement .
I believe that the agreement is generally favourable to the economic interests of the European Union , especially given the fact that we want our economy to be based on innovation , research and development , or ' smart growth ' .
I therefore believe that enhanced protection of industrial property rights , including patents , is essential for European competitiveness .
On the other hand , I believe that initial concerns about generic medicines , protection of the right to Internet access and the protection of geographical indications , or designations of origin , were satisfactorily overcome in the final negotiations .
We cannot ignore the progress that has been made .
Obviously , not everything is satisfactory , but an international agreement must be judged in overall terms .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) / European Conservatives and Reformists and against the others because the international ACTA makes it possible to combat counterfeiting more effectively , which will lead to better copyright protection and , by extension , help protect European industry .
Furthermore , the ACTA will help protect consumers against counterfeit products , which are becoming increasingly prevalent on European markets .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) on ACTA , inasmuch as I believe that it is essential for the agreement to be implemented .
This must be done quickly without any more delays or time-wasting , otherwise we risk an impasse in negotiations to the detriment of both manufacturers and European consumers alike .
Europe has an obligation to continue concentrating its efforts on two issues .
The first issue is that it must be compulsory for European geographical indications to be protected in both civil and customs terms , as these are today suffering damage that affects not only the agri-food industry , the counterfeited products of which suffer unfair competition typically involving the use of names that copy and evoke familiar European brands , but also industries operating in the design and fashion sectors .
The second issue is the obligatory need for common rules to control online sales .
This sector has seen an increase in the sale of books , films , music and millions of counterfeit goods , which harms not only consumers but also European manufacturers .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Conservatives and Reformists on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , as this is an agreement designed to safeguard justice and healthy competition .
The agreement introduces a full international framework to strengthen the fight against infringements of intellectual property rights .
It promotes the accession of other developing countries to the agreement , as participation in ACTA is not restricted .
Negotiations on the agreement now take account of the EU 's main concerns , including : respect for fundamental rights and privacy ; data protection ; respect for the role of the free Internet ; defence of the role of service providers and the need to safeguard access to drugs and protect public health .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am convinced that this motion for a resolution represents an important step in combating counterfeiting , while maintaining the necessary balance between conflicting values .
It does not call into question freedom of expression and innovation , and guarantees fundamental rights , such as the right to privacy and data protection .
There are opposing interests that make consensus difficult , but what has been achieved here with some success is an agreement that is essentially a meeting of common desires .
The transparency adopted by the Commission during these negotiations in keeping the EP informed is to be applauded , and I hope that it will be possible during forthcoming negotiations to resolve the ambiguities and omissions that are still pointed to by all parties .
I believe that the agreement reached will strengthen international cooperation in the fight against counterfeiting , creating a tool for the effective protection of Intellectual Property Rights and the guaranteeing of fundamental rights .
It is also essential to ensure respect for existing rights through repressive measures and the creation of a comprehensive international framework of assistance to the parties involved .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution as it represents an important step in combating counterfeiting without calling into question issues such as the transport of generic medicines , and it ensures fundamental rights such as the right to privacy and data protection .
in writing . - ( PT ) The fight against counterfeiting , which is a global phenomenon , requires a multilateral approach , based on the strengthening of cooperation between the major parties involved globally .
Consequently , although I am aware that the agreement negotiated will not solve the complex problem of counterfeiting , I am convinced that it constitutes a step in the right direction .
Today , I voted for the recently finalised international Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) .
The aim of the new multilateral ACTA between the European Union , the United States , Australia , Canada , Japan , Mexico , Morocco , New Zealand , Singapore , South Korea and Switzerland is to strengthen the protection of intellectual property and contribute to the fight against counterfeiting and piracy of products such as big-name clothing brands , music and films .
I am aware that the agreement negotiated will not resolve the complex and multidimensional problem of counterfeiting , but I believe it constitutes a step in the right direction .
In any case , I call on the European Commission to confirm that the text does not have any repercussions on fundamental freedoms and European Union legislation .
I would also note that Parliament has the right to veto international agreements .
in writing . - The European Parliament just narrowly failed to adopt a resolution demanding that the Commission clarify and assess the consequences of the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ACTA .
The numbers were 306 in favour , 322 against , with 26 abstentions .
The resolution had been put forward by the Green Group ( including the Pirate Party ) , the Social Democrats , the Liberals and the left .
Instead , an alternative resolution by the Christian Democrat group EPP and the Conservative group was carried .
This resolution basically welcomes what the negotiators have been doing so far , without placing any specific demands on the Commission for further clarifications or assessments .
This was a defeat , but it is far from the final word on the issue .
The resolution has no formal effect at all , but is merely an expression of how Parliament feels .
The deciding vote will ( probably ) be some time early next year , when Parliament will be asked to give its consent to the agreement .
If we get a No vote then , the agreement will be scrapped .
The vote today was a reminder that we will have to continue working hard to get more information on the effects of ACTA so that the European Parliament can make an informed decision in the final consent vote .
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) is an agreement that protects our citizens , our creators , our artists and our businesses , and that is why I support it .
Indeed , it helps clarify the means of redress available in the event of flagrant breaches of intellectual property rights in one of the countries party to the agreement .
The Commission has been transparent , ACTA cannot go beyond the acquis communautaire , cannot exceed any of the measures taken within the framework of the European directives , and cannot under any circumstances violate fundamental rights .
It has been negotiated outside the traditional international institutions ( the World Trade Organisation and so on ) because China and India opposed any agreement .
Finally , ACTA is an open agreement , and all those States that wish to participate freely in it can join with us , so that together we can provide legal , and also physical , protection to our fellow citizens against the damage caused by counterfeiting .
I therefore voted for this motion for a resolution .
The European Parliament has expressed its opinion on the ACTA agreement on numerous occasions .
For example , I voted in favour of Parliament 's motion for a resolution in March 2010 with regard to the lack of public scrutiny and transparency in the negotiations and I have signed Parliament 's written declaration concerning ACTA .
At that time , the Commission deserved criticism , as it does now , for the lack of transparency in the negotiations for both Members of this Parliament and for the citizens of Europe .
I think that , as things currently stand , Parliament 's previous opinions are adequate , and I voted against all of the proposals in the resolution .
It is important that Parliament takes its responsibility for international agreements very seriously .
The Commission negotiates and signs the agreements .
Parliament has the right to be fully and immediately informed during the process and , after the Commission has signed the agreement , it has the right to approve or reject it .
It is reasonable for Parliament to make its position clear , which we have done in many ways , to ensure that the Commission does not negotiate agreements that lack Parliament 's support .
The joint motion for a resolution required the Commission to present a number of time-consuming analyses before it was to sign the agreement , which would run the risk of creating a situation in which other parties would start to doubt whether Europe really is a serious party with which to conclude international trade agreements .
This would damage Europe 's chance of participating in negotiations on international free trade agreements in the future .
I endorsed the European Parliament motion for a resolution on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , because I think that as part of the fight against piracy it is necessary to establish common principles for the enforcement of intellectual property rights .
The problem of the counterfeiting of goods and the unauthorised use of other people 's intellectual property is still widespread .
It is particularly difficult in the case of intangible property , such as the copyright to musical and literary works and patents .
ACTA will be a good tool for establishing a common legal platform whose objective will be to fight counterfeiting and piracy .
I am very pleased that the report by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Conservatives and Reformists has been adopted .
As a result , the poisoned , demagogic work of the opposition did not have a chance .
Congratulations to the authors , our coordinator , Mr Caspary , and the whole group for showing unity here on this important matter .
I voted in favour of my group 's motion for a resolution because the fight against counterfeiting is crucial and must be worldwide to be effective .
Counterfeiting is a growing parallel economy and one that allows for large-scale money laundering .
Furthermore , our industries , already penalised in export terms by the undervaluation of the yuan and the weakness of the dollar , cannot in addition tolerate seeing counterfeits produced outside the EU unfairly compete with their products on the internal market .
This globally organised theft has a serious effect on creativity and innovation and disastrous consequences for our jobs and for the safety of misled consumers .
Our development model , focused as it is on the knowledge economy , requires the protection , at international level , of the fundamental right that is intellectual property .
This vote henceforth opens the way to the ratification of the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement , which will make it easier to bring legal appeals where intellectual property rights have been infringed in one of the signatory countries .
In this way , we are laying the foundations of a multilateral strategy which will protect that which makes our economic development dynamic : our inventions , our brands and our artistic works .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Financial supervision ( signing of acts )
Colleagues , let me introduce , in a few words , our Lex signing of the Financial Supervisory Package .
This will be done in a few minutes .
This package will constitute our financial supervisory activities adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure .
Today we are signing into law a European Systemic Risk Board which will be responsible for the oversight of the financial system within the Union and will contribute to the smooth functioning of the internal market .
Secondly , we are also establishing three other European supervisory authorities to protect the public interest .
They will monitor banks , securities and markets , as well as insurance and occupational pensions .
Finally , we are signing an omnibus directive which amends a whole set of 11 directives in order to bring them into line with the European system of financial supervision and the Treaty of Lisbon .
An enormous effort has been made and there has been great cooperation , I found , between the European institutions .
The procedure was very fast and effective .
Successive presidencies , the Spanish and the Belgian , were very active , and I thank them for their cooperation .
The Commission was very active and cooperation was very close .
To the Members of the European Parliament , staying in this Chamber while we go and sign , and to the Commissioner I say : it is a great deal .
I thank the Commission , which was so active all the time in the preparatory meetings and all the discussions , for its engagement .
But our work of course is not finished .
The economic governance package we are shortly debating will be very important as well .
We know well that it is under way in our legislative procedure and we hope we will be ready as quickly as possible .
What can I say in conclusion ?
The whole package which we are signing today will start to apply in the European Union from 1 January 2011 , so very soon .
This is very important information for all of us , for the markets and for our citizens , because it is intended to help our citizens .
We shall now go and sign the legislative package .
( The President signs the acts , together with Olivier Chastel ( President-in-Office of the Council ) , Michel Barnier ( Member of the Commission ) , José Manuel García-Margallo y Marfil ( rapporteur ) , Sylvie Goulard ( rapporteur ) , Antolín Sánchez Presedo ( rapporteur ) and Peter Skinner ( rapporteur ) )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
A new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011 - 2020 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on ' Towards a new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 ' .
Mr President , Commissioner , recently , we have talked a lot about the institutional changes which have resulted from the Treaty of Lisbon .
These include the External Action Service and the procedures for work on the budget , but the Treaty of Lisbon also has reference to Union policies .
Today , we are debating the first post-Lisbon energy strategy , which the Commission has prepared for the years 2011-2020 .
It should be emphasised that both the Commission 's strategy and Parliament 's report reflect the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon - what it says about energy solidarity and its concern for energy security and supply .
The Commission 's strategy and Parliament 's report also lay emphasis on strengthening energy policy and making it more European in character .
We can achieve this by undertaking certain measures .
Firstly , we must speedily implement current European energy legislation in the Member States .
Therefore , we fully support the Commission in adopting tough measures against governments and businesses which neglect to take action in this area .
Secondly , for our common objectives to be achieved , the common energy market has to work well .
This also concerns the need to build a renewable energy market in Europe .
In order to achieve our objectives , it is essential , therefore , to extend and modernise the European and cross-border energy infrastructure .
This is often opposed by monopolies and the governments which protect them .
However , without a Europe-wide network , key objectives of the European Union will not be achieved .
There are two main obstacles to be overcome , here : administration and finance .
On questions of administration , we need above all to establish clear priorities and rules for the selection of key projects .
Without these criteria and without clear rules , project selection will cause much conflict and discord , and will give rise to suspicion instead of hope .
At national level , however , regulatory measures are essential , particularly in the context of cross-border projects .
Let us move , now , to the most important problem - the financing of infrastructure .
We know what tensions currently accompany the approval of next year 's budget , but even greater tensions are going to affect the Financial Framework after 2013 .
However , the expenditures which we plan must reflect the policy objectives of the European Union , by which I mean the energy security of the citizens .
We are also going to have to find new ways to attract investment from businesses and banks .
We talk about this in the report .
Energy policy is , today , increasingly related to the foreign policy of the European Union .
Our relations with external energy partners should be shaped by the principles of Europe 's internal market .
Foreign businesses entering the European market must operate in a transparent way and in accordance with the law , and must be managed under transparent agreements .
This concerns both pipelines which will arise in the future as well as those which are currently under construction .
Commissioner , I value the help you have given Poland in our negotiations with Russia on the Yamal gas pipeline .
I would like , however , to see similar action in the case of other pipelines , including Nord Stream .
I would like to stress that transparency must apply to all current and future projects , and not only to some of them .
In summary , Mr President , the Union needs a long-term vision for energy policy .
We need a European energy community .
If the Commission wants to accelerate action on the part of businesses and Member States , then it , too , must be credible and really bring this very good strategy , and also an infrastructure package , into force .
In the future , the European Parliament is going to want to monitor implementation of the strategy , because it is meant to have a real influence on the situation , and not just be an expression of our wishful thinking .
Finally , something which is very important is the attitude of the Member States to the objectives contained in the European Commission 's strategy and in my report .
Will they be ready to curb national interests in favour of the common , European good ?
Will they oppose the activity of large interest groups and take into account the security and good of consumers ?
We , as Members of the European Parliament , insist on this .
I congratulate you , Commissioner , on the energy strategy for the next 10 years .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying that I am impressed by the number and quality of your ideas , critical comments and constructive contributions in respect of what was presented by the Commission as a draft Energy Strategy for 2011 to 2020 .
I would like to thank Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska for her presentation , for bringing together the contributions from her fellow Members in an intelligent way and for the establishment of priorities , which is something that I personally feel is important .
We will be pleased to include your report in our work in the coming weeks , as the next few weeks are going to be very busy as far as energy policy is concerned .
The Energy Council on 3 December , followed by the unique opportunity for the Heads of State or Government to address the issue of energy on 4 February , will provide impetus for our common goals and for the Europeanisation of energy policy .
As far as I am concerned , Parliament is a crucial partner in this .
The position we are starting from could be described as extremely difficult .
We have a single market that is not yet complete .
For 12 years it has been the law for electricity and gas , but it has not yet become reality .
We have more sub-markets and regional borders , and we must do everything we can to ensure that in the next five years the single market can also be implemented for industry and consumers with the goal of greater competition and transparency .
Secondly , we have a patent lack of infrastructure .
If you look at the foundations that exist in the single market for other products , goods and services - roads , railways , airways , airports , the digital world , waterways - you can see that we are still a long way from what we need in terms of infrastructure for the transport of energy , in particular gas and electricity , in order to meet our European energy policy objectives , namely to enhance the security of supply , solidarity , competition and consumer interests .
We need to make up some ground in the next two decades in terms of what has been developed in the last two centuries in the case of road and rail and in the last ten years in the case of the digital world .
This has to do with acceptance by the people and transparency .
We need transparency in order to achieve greater acceptance for the development of infrastructure for electricity and gas , and we need the appropriate financial resources , which have to be provided primarily by consumers via energy prices , but which , where there are European interests involved , are also a public responsibility of the European budget .
Thirdly , we have a largely untapped potential in the area of energy efficiency .
Anyone who , like us , is dependent on imports and at the same time wants to make progress in terms of sustainability , climate protection and environmental protection must oppose energy wastage and lead the way with targeted energy initiatives , energy saving and increased energy efficiency in the public , industrial and private sectors .
Energy efficiency will therefore be the next item on the agenda for both of us .
I await with great interest Parliament 's own-initiative report , which is close to completion and on the basis of which our strategy for energy efficiency will be presented to the general public , yourselves and the Council next spring .
Another part of our strategy is the issue of affordable energy .
The Belgian Presidency rightly points out that electricity in particular may also cause a division in society as a result of the fact that energy is becoming more expensive and therefore no longer accessible to everyone .
This means that we must extend the security of supply in our strategy to include the area of affordable energy for industry and jobs and for private households .
Research is another important aspect .
Europe cannot take care of everything , but energy research can be a point of focus for the European budget over the next few years and for a partnership between the public authorities and the industry carrying out the research .
Then there is the matter of external relations , the external dimension : Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska has already drawn our attention to this .
We need a common , coordinated European strategy in our external energy policy where the major interests of Europe are concerned .
We are still the largest market for energy in terms of consumption , ahead of China and the United States .
If we focus our purchasing power and our infrastructure strategies , we will have authority .
If the old principle of ' divide and rule ' comes into play , others will find it easier to oppose us .
We do not want that to happen .
With that in mind , I would like to thank you for your diverse and intelligent contributions and your report .
It will guide me in my continuing work on our strategy , which we will subsequently put to the European Council .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , who has done an excellent job .
Her report is , of course , as ambitious as it is extensive , and I must say that it is the result of the tough and successful negotiations that resulted in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy adopting it practically unanimously .
Continuing with this subject , I would like to point out something of which we are all aware , but which there is no harm in saying : the energy situation in Europe is not exactly an optimum one .
Not only are we increasingly dependent on energy imports obtained from outside Europe , but we are also having to deal with the huge investments needed in our energy infrastructures at a time when Europe is still suffering the consequences of the crisis .
This is all in the context of not yet having managed to apply our own energy legislation .
Now in this parliamentary term we have an instrument that was not available in the previous one .
The Treaty of Lisbon not only provides a series of clear objectives such as the internal energy market , security of supply , energy efficiency and promoting energy networks , but it also gives the European Union a legal framework and a sound legal basis - Article 194 - for acting in the field of energy policy .
In this new context in which we are having this debate , I ask all my fellow Members to support this report , which proposes a series of measures aimed at guaranteeing energy supply and full implementation of the existing legislation and programmes .
It also stresses the need to invest in research , promotes the development of pan-European energy grids and gives the creation of the internal energy market the priority it deserves .
Thank you very much , and I ask you all to support this report tomorrow .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska , for her excellent and open cooperation .
To me as a Social Democrat , it was important to work to achieve an energy policy and energy supply strategy that has a clear consumer perspective and which also provides transparency on the energy trading market and ensures that the climate crisis has consequences for our decisions on the conversion to renewable , sustainable and safe energy sources and energy systems .
In this regard , we have also achieved a certain amount of success , which I am pleased about .
The wording concerning consumers ' rights has been improved and made clearer and , just as the Commissioner says , so has that concerning the right to purchase energy at sensible prices so that households can afford it .
Something must be done to tackle energy poverty .
The wording concerning the issue of the climate has also been made clearer , even if there still remains a great deal to do in this regard .
I also think it is important that the Member States ' responsibility for the energy mix , for example , is clearly indicated in the strategy .
The biggest disappointment is that the report does not contain any binding targets for energy saving and increasing efficiency - that is a shame .
The Member States will probably not achieve the 20 % target , which is a very big failure by our standards , because saving energy is one of the best ways of reducing our dependence on imports , strengthening our competitiveness and creating jobs .
We will come back to this issue in Parliament in a different context and then we hope to receive strong support from the whole of this Chamber as well as from the Commission .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all , let me thank and congratulate Ms Kolarska-Bobinska for an excellent report and then let me start with a little story from the real world .
Ten years ago , China did not produce one single windmill ; today , China houses one of the world 's top ten wind-energy companies .
In two years , they expect to have two companies in the top five .
Ten years ago , there was nothing .
Today , China represents 50 % of global windmill production .
China is moving and they move fast .
In this light , I am sorry to say , the Commission 's new energy strategy is discouraging in its lack of ambition for a greener future .
We need an ambitious energy strategy for Europe , not only in a COP-16 resolution that nobody reads anyway .
We need to implement ambitious , concrete policy targets in Europe .
' When the time is right we can get ambitious ' seems to be the strategy of the Council and Commission .
Well , the time is right and we cannot sit back and relax and wait for some grand international binding agreement before we act .
For an energy strategy to deliver on climate , on growth , on jobs , we need a much more ambitious and market-based approach so that we can use the market mechanism to our advantage .
It is up to ourselves to create a drive in the market , to show the pioneers where we want to go so that they can take us there .
That is why ALDE is calling for the EU to move to a 30 % CO2 reduction target .
The carbon market , the main mechanism for our CO2 reductions and green investments , does not work .
It is flooded with quotas and the price is too low , so there are no incentives to invest in green technologies .
We believe that the EU needs to make this move for the sake of our economic growth , climate and energy security .
Come on Europe , come on Commission ; let 's walk the talk .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would firstly like to give my thanks , and those of my group , for the work achieved by Lena Kolarska-Bobińska , as well as by all the shadows .
It was probably not easy to get us all together - like herding sheep - but you did .
My first message is , ' implement , implement , implement ' .
We do not need a new energy policy .
We have to implement the climate package , the third internal market package and the security of gas supply .
Then we have to add targeted policies to that .
You mentioned energy efficiency .
That is crucial and we await Mr Bendtsen 's report , which will go into more detail on that .
The second concerns the internal market .
Commissioner , I think you have done an excellent job on the infrastructure package , but I hope there will be no relaxation , in a certain sense , on competition policy .
We have a good record over the last five years in going against market domination and this must be a key focus of our European energy policy .
Regarding renewables , our report is much more outspoken and your EU strategy and the Energy 2020 strategy are very vague .
Jens Rohde is right .
Renewables will make up 70 % of all power investments in Europe over the next ten years .
Renewable technology is our biggest export market in all energy technologies .
I do not think that it sends the right message to dilute renewables in the EU 2020 strategy .
We would need a specific chapter for what will be the biggest investments of the next ten years .
In our report we are also much more cautious about reopening the discussion about national fit-in systems and other systems .
Governments want national support schemes and we should not confuse this debate by reopening that one .
Gas will be important , as will oil in the future .
I have two concrete questions for you .
One is to ask how you see the gas market in the power sector for the next decade .
Secondly , at your press conference you were very clear about peak oil and also the risk of reaching USD 200 a barrel , so how does this link in with the transport policy at Commission level ?
Mr President , I would , of course , like to add my voice to the thanks being expressed to the rapporteur for her very good cooperation in the preparation of this very difficult report .
The report emphasises all the most important challenges facing European energy policy .
I think that , above all , the Union has to deal with the anti-market clauses in agreements with third countries .
This is one of the biggest obstacles .
In particular , Russia imposes restrictions in access to gas pipelines , and also bans re-exporting , restricting the property rights of European businesses in relation to gas which has already been purchased .
This is what happened in the case of the Polish contract with which the Commissioner is familiar .
The purpose of Russian policy is to maintain a monopoly on the gas market for as long as possible .
The Gazprom monopoly in Central Europe is being maintained at the cost of the common market , at the cost of competition and , finally , at the cost of consumers ' rights .
In such cases , the Union must react very decisively , and must not exclude the diplomatic factor and the role of the High Representative for Foreign Policy .
Otherwise , our reaction will simply be unbalanced .
Union diplomacy in general should devote more attention to issues related to raw materials .
This is a subject which is growing in significance and is a major challenge for our services , taking into account competences in the area of EU trade policy .
In our energy policy , we should most certainly give full support to modern technologies , liquefied gas installations , geothermal energy and shale gas .
Until we have ensured security and diversity of gas supply , we cannot allow ourselves to abandon coal too suddenly .
Otherwise , we will only increase our dependence on gas , particularly in Central Europe , where coal still plays an extremely important role .
There is one final matter : I think a certain institutional problem should be noted .
All the matters about which Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska has spoken in her report received very inadequate attention in the European Commission communication , which evidently was drafted without taking account of Parliament 's position .
This is a very bad coincidence - this process has gone very badly .
I do not think we should act like this .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska on her excellent and very hard work .
As we have heard a lot of ambitious targets here - and my honourable friend Mr Turmes referred repeatedly to application - I think we should all congratulate the Commission on the recent communication which it issued in November on energy strategy issues .
This is the first realistic strategy we have seen .
The Commission refers specifically and clearly to the difficulties ; it defines them and suggests what the difficulties are and where there is a margin for us to implement the targets we have set .
Commissioner , as you have put a realistic strategic energy policy before us , and I truly welcome that , I should like to propose a practical and realistic solution to the south stream .
We have two small pipelines : the ITGI and the TAP .
They are ready , they are up to speed .
You can move forward .
Nabucco is big and it is therefore complicated and there may be delays .
Move forward , therefore , with the two small pipelines .
( BG ) Mr President , I wish to voice my support for the report which has been compiled , especially for the last part of it , which calls on citizens ' interests to take precedence over political arguments .
The reason is that there is a very simple example of this .
Two major projects are currently being developed : South Stream and Nabucco .
There are some radical factions in Bulgaria saying that these projects are mutually incompatible .
It is almost a case of having either South Stream or Nabucco .
I believe that the competition between both these projects is the only possible way of ensuring secure , cheap energy for Europe 's citizens .
Another extremely important issue , which must not be overlooked in any way , is nuclear energy and its development in relation to the politicisation of this issue .
The reason for raising this is because the decision to shut down the reactors at the Kozloduy power plant in Bulgaria was political .
Instead of generating billions of euros from them , some of which could even be included in the EU budget , Member States now have to pay compensation due to the political decision made to shut down these reactors .
Apart from this , we have been noticing recently a mood of hysteria surrounding the issue of nuclear power plants .
I would like to urge you for us to counter those activist organisations adopting impartial measures in order to oppose this issue ; most of all because they do not offer any alternative .
Nuclear energy is actually the option which can also ensure secure , cheap energy .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska for her very constructive and intensive work .
Since I am expressing my thanks , I also support the report , in contrast to some of my fellow Members who are praising the report but will attempt , by means of some key amendments , to make radical changes to some of the passages tomorrow .
I would therefore like to address the demand that has been made many times for us to be more ambitious .
I am not sure whether what has been stated in this regard is ambitious or whether it is excessive .
I am very grateful to Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska for presenting a realistic policy , because that is what is called for in times of economic and financial crisis .
We do not need to unfold new dreams , but to table something that will make it possible for us in one , two , three or four years ' time to demonstrate that we have achieved it .
I am very grateful to her for mentioning the importance of the energy mix and the responsibility of the Member States , which will then decide themselves what they want .
We will not insist that there is only one perspective and that is renewable energies .
The perspective includes renewable energies , coal , oil , gas and nuclear energy and also nuclear fusion .
I would be very pleased if everything that Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska has written and that has received the support of a large majority is actually retained .
She addressed the issue of financial responsibility , the need to develop and to establish infrastructure and not to simply demand this and say that the money must come from somewhere .
She also pointed to the responsibility of enterprises .
This brings us to the single market .
In this regard , we do not need to call for a new package and new legislation .
Rather , we need to demand implementation and a review and to be realistic so that the standards we have established are also put into practice .
Last but not least , we must not simply slap new things on top and then in the end be surprised when energy prices are so high that citizens can no longer pay them .
Is it ambitious or is it irresponsible to simply pile on new things , increase costs and then complain about energy poverty among citizens ?
Sometimes the debate focuses solely on industry , but it will hit citizens with full effect in the next few months and years .
In some debates , I would like us to consider at the start what the end result will be .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , congratulations to Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska and also to the shadow rapporteur from my group , Mrs Ulvskog and the other rapporteurs on their excellent work .
Given its strategic nature , this is an extensive report , which tackles the different aspects of EU energy policy in detail by constructing the strategy on the basis of the considerable quantity of legislation that we have adopted in recent years .
In the short time that I have I would like to highlight two very important aspects of this report : interconnections and taxation .
At this point we now very urgently need to resolutely apply the legislative and financial mechanisms that we have at our disposal in order to strengthen the weak links in the trans-European energy networks within the correct time frame , which is very important .
With regard to taxation , I believe that in order to be developed to market levels , efficiency , saving energy and renewable energy not only need specific taxation measures , but also tax incentives in the form of the appropriate deductions or exemptions .
Mr President , we have enormous problems with the energy market and the grid in Europe , not to mention that energy production is mainly based on fossil sources .
If someone says implementation , implementation , implementation , I would say focus , focus , focus , and I would mention some examples .
We still lack 50 % of financing for the SET-Plan .
We have budget negotiations that go in a totally different direction from this energy strategy .
We had to fight - excuse me , I do not want to be taken out of the Chamber - like hell for the EERP , energy efficiency and alternative fuels , and in research we have the same problem .
The same week as we are discussing what is , I admit , in part a good strategy , Commissioner , we are voting on a coal subsidy report that says that Spain subsidises coal in an uncompetitive coal market to the tune of EUR 50 000 per job , whilst the average is EUR 17 000 per job .
How can we be competitive and modern if we take decisions like this ?
It undermines the whole strategy .
( SK ) Mr President , experience from previous years , when the breakdown in gas supplies from Ukraine and widespread electricity blackouts in a number of EU countries proved that our energy system lacks the reserves necessary to deal with crisis situations , has shown us that any solution will require extensive investment .
Therefore , when deciding on the necessary changes , we will have to proceed in a coordinated and careful manner in order to make the most efficient use of the resources invested .
The submitted report responds to this state of affairs in a very comprehensive way , taking account of practically all the issues that will have to be addressed in order to resolve our energy problems .
This includes everything from legislative bases and distribution of powers through to trading rules , network modernisation and financing .
As well as ensuring energy security and support for research and development , the need for greater energy efficiency and the use of renewables has not been forgotten .
With its comprehensive and balanced approach , this report is , in my opinion , a good starting point for further work on improving the European energy system .
( DA ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur for a splendid piece of work and a well-balanced report .
There is no doubt that there is a rapidly increasing need for a new energy strategy for Europe , and European enterprises are in no doubt about that either .
We are becoming more and more dependent on gas from Russia and oil from the Middle East .
The energy strategy has become both part of Europe 's foreign and security policy and a question of security of supply .
Our decisions in Europe are crucial for our competitiveness .
There is a need for huge investment in the future to enable us to attain a complete and cohesive internal market , and there is also a need for massive investments in energy efficiency .
A penny saved is a penny gained .
Energy efficiency is also the cheapest way of reducing CO2 emissions .
I would like to thank Commissioner Öettinger for his comments today regarding energy efficiency .
As far as energy efficiency is concerned - irrespective of whether or not the targets are binding - I am happy with the Commission 's communication , which lists a large number of areas where we can do more .
I am also open to giving the Commission more power to reject the national action plans if they are not adequate for achieving our 20 % objective by 2020 .
Moreover , the United States and China are investing heavily in areas that will increase energy efficiency .
Everyone is fully aware that the price of energy will increase in future , and Europe is currently suffering from a lack of competitiveness in a global world .
By means of sound investments in energy efficiency , infrastructure , smart networks and so on , we therefore need to give our enterprises the opportunity to achieve greater competitiveness .
An additional benefit will be new jobs and innovative enterprises in a Europe that is currently losing thousands of jobs .
( ET ) Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur and colleagues on this successful report .
The creation of a pan-European energy market is in the interests of all Europeans .
In opening up energy markets , however , we have ignored the issues of market transparency and comprehensiveness .
I am worried about the fact that , while hundreds of billions of euros ' worth of electricity , gas and CO2 emissions quotas are changing hands on the markets , there is a clear supervisory and legislative gap .
I therefore welcome the European Commission 's initiative to fill the gap .
I hope that the Commission 's communication , shortly to be adopted , will be centred on consumer protection and define a clear pan-European regulatory framework which establishes unequivocal rules and definitions in order to avoid insider dealing , market manipulation and to increase market liquidity .
I believe that ACER , the European Union 's energy market regulator set up by the third internal market package , must eventually carry out supervision of electricity , gas and emissions trading , and I suggest that supervision of these three markets should be brought under the aegis of a single regulator in the Member States .
Mr President , I am glad the Commission 's 2020 Energy Strategy refers to the ongoing review concerning the impact of indirect land use change .
It is vital the Commission meets its obligation to come forward with a proposal on this by the end of this year , both to allay widespread public concern that some biofuels currently on the market may not be producing a net reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , and also for the sake of industry which is developing innovative processes whose added value deserves to be recognised .
On that question of energy certainty , I would also ask the Commission to rethink its comments on the harmonisation of national support schemes for renewables .
I am all for action at a European level when it adds value , but Member States have only recently brought out their National Renewable Energy Action Plans and are working to implement them ; this would be harmonisation too far .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on her excellent work on this report .
The energy sector is the driving force behind economic growth .
Europe has had a strategy for energy and combating climate change since 2008 .
Implementing this strategy is crucial , but the Treaty of Lisbon allows us to go further , opening the way to create a true energy community within Europe .
We need to deepen the internal energy market , build and forge links between networks , ensure solidarity on energy and put the consumer at the centre of our concerns .
There is a need to increase public funding and the development of tools and programmes to encourage energy efficiency .
Scientific research and technology play a key role in achieving these objectives .
In view of this , I welcome the launch of various European industrial initiatives under the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan and I call upon the Commission to put the rest of the measures in this plan into practice .
The eighth framework programme should also make research and the development of innovative technologies its priority in the field of energy .
It is therefore vital that there is adequate funding to support clean and sustainable technologies .
This is the only way that we will be able to maintain the competitiveness of our industry , promote economic growth and create jobs .
( NL ) Mr President , the word we have heard most so far here today is ' strategy ' ; and rightly so .
We welcome the Commission 's strategy , therefore .
Nevertheless , we find it a little disappointing , Commissioner , as a good strategy entails carrying out a sound assessment - an assessment of the supply problems and , in particular , of the ecological problems and also the social problems - and it is on the basis of this strategy that we set priorities .
I attach very great importance to the word ' priority ' , as that means putting things in rank order .
Energy efficiency is top of this rank order .
You have mentioned this , but why , if we consider energy efficiency so important , is it so hard to draw up objectives that we mean to enforce in our Member States ?
This is crucial .
We know that it works , and it is a way to get where we need to go .
Therefore , I should like to ask the Commissioner to actually take up this priority , and also to really present it in your preparations for the major summit in February .
( SL ) Mr President , Commissioner , today we are deciding the course of energy development up to the year 2020 , but this period is much too short .
It takes many years to get energy facilities up and running .
The construction of grids and electric power plants takes its share of time too .
The service life of such constructions is several decades .
That is why investors need fairly stable political guidelines for a much longer period .
If we want to meet our climate change and energy sustainability targets , we must develop a policy framework for much further in the future .
We need a strategy document for energy development until at least 2050 .
Nuclear energy is increasingly becoming one of the energy sources of the future and I would therefore highlight three tasks that I see facing us at European level in that regard .
First of all , we need to take legislative action to ensure safe decommissioning of nuclear power plants and disposal of radioactive waste in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Secondly , we must ensure , with effective and transparent procedures , that new electric power plants are constructed in accordance with the highest possible safety standards .
We can do that by introducing minimum standards for the approval and confirmation of designs of new nuclear power plants .
Moreover , we must consider licensing new types of nuclear power plants at European level .
That would help us take advantage of combined knowledge and help countries which are only now introducing nuclear energy and those with , in effect , relatively small administrative bodies .
Thirdly , we need to make the decision-making process on nuclear issues more democratic .
Nuclear energy is only one of many potential sources of energy and , therefore , decision-making procedures must be the same as those for coal , renewables , gas and oil .
The European Parliament must be given codecision powers .
We do not need to revisit the Euratom Treaty as this could be done through an inter-institutional agreement .
( PL ) Mr President , energy makes up around 40 % of the costs of production , while labour accounts for barely 15 % , but obtaining the raw materials for the generation of energy itself requires energy .
Therefore , the competitiveness of the economy is going to depend upon energy .
The dogma concerning the effect on the global climate and promotion of what is being called a ' carbon-free ' economy is nonsense .
Getting bogged down in binding carbon targets is an example of proposals which are socially and economically irresponsible , just like the CCS technology which has been imposed on coal-fired power stations - but why not on other fuels ?
Why is the driving force of progress not effectiveness ?
I must issue a warning about social discontent in relation to the creation of energy poverty .
In the new Member States , energy accounts for around 40 % of family expenditure .
I must also issue a warning about the loss of energy security due to legislation which has been imposed , and in particular the Climate and Energy Package .
One more thing - why can the Member States not decide for themselves about how to reduce their own CO2 emissions , as they can decide about their energy mix ?
( NL ) Mr President , the new Treaty of Lisbon has made energy the shared responsibility of the EU and the Member States .
The Second Energy Package , which actually forms the basis for this strategy , clearly merits additions , and the report provides a good analysis in this regard .
Yet the Member States , and their private and public parties , must get on board .
The operational programmes between and within Member States are becoming increasingly important .
Sufficient percentage targets have been laid down , for both the climate and energy .
There is no need for new supplementary binding targets .
As has already been said , it is implementation that counts , carrying citizens - consumers - with us .
It may also be so that the Commission must improve its assessment of these national programmes , and that our resources , possibly Eurobonds , must be made dependent on this .
There is still a gap between words and deeds .
The first of two focal points is energy efficiency : a great opportunity .
This contributes to the competitiveness of our companies and also to employment - in the installation and construction sectors , for example .
Take a look at your own country , too : tens of thousands of jobs have been created in Germany as a result .
The second focal point is - yes , you said it - the infrastructure connecting countries and within countries , and smart grids .
This is where the Eurobonds are necessary .
I have a question for the Commissioner : will progress be made towards these Eurobonds in December ?
We are talking about new resources - we need money - and I should like you to tell us whether you will indeed be raising money by these means ?
Action : that is what is needed .
( RO ) Mr President , the European Union 's energy strategy must focus on energy efficiency , reducing the consumption of primary energy and energy poverty , as well as on promoting energy from renewable sources and the Union 's energy security .
However , it is absolutely imperative for the Union 's energy strategy also to be linked to industrial policy , transport policy , research and innovation policy , as well as the policy for combating climate change .
We call on the Commission and Member States to develop the financial and fiscal instruments required for energy efficiency , especially in the construction sector , and to make energy efficiency and the smart energy infrastructure a priority in the future Multiannual Financial Framework .
The Union must attach greater importance to the Eastern Partnership , especially to the Black Sea region , which is of particular geopolitical significance for energy security and diversification of the Union 's energy supply routes .
We also call on the Commission and Member States to continue the European Southern Gas Corridor project , especially the Nabucco project , which could significantly increase energy supply security .
( HU ) Mr President , both Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska and Commissioner Oettinger deserve praise for this work , which is indeed an important effort .
As a result of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union 's energy strategy will be built on four new pillars : the single energy market , security of supply , energy efficiency and the interconnection of European energy networks .
When mapping out our new energy strategy , we must bear in mind a few challenges .
While our fossil fuel supplies are gradually diminishing , we can increase available supplies by finding new raw material exploration sites and by research and development efforts .
Europe 's dependency on energy increases proportionally with the increase in its population .
By 2030 , Europe will be forced to secure 65 % of its energy imports from non-EU sources .
For natural gas supplies this figure may reach 80 % .
We must aim to further diversify transport routes and acquisition sources .
The refurbishment of power stations currently in operation may also be of key significance .
It is not sufficient to devote significant sums to decommissioning outdated power stations - we must also pay attention to maintaining them .
Member States must carry out an overarching review of their stance on nuclear energy .
We must continue our efforts in the area of nuclear energy development , otherwise we will not be able to meet our climate change targets .
I recommend that we exercise caution in this area , to ensure that our ambitious plans do not pose a threat to our industrial and commercial competitiveness .
In this sense , we see a balanced report containing commitments that can be realistically met , which is why I strongly support it .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , guaranteeing sustainable , safe and accessible energy surely represents one of the major challenges for Europe over the coming years .
The European Union 's policy objectives require a series of actions which cannot be ignored .
The full realisation of the internal energy market is an objective that can only be achieved if the current legislation relating to the energy package is applied by all Member States .
I believe that in order to fully meet the objectives of the strategy , we cannot flinch from investing in modern and intelligent infrastructure , particularly in the research and use of renewable energies .
These very investments not only represent the most economically beneficial solution for reducing the EU 's energy dependence , but will also contribute to combating climate change .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs and to you , Mr Oettinger , because what you have presented in the last few days and weeks is crucial for the development of the European Union .
However , like Mrs Van Brempt , Mr Turmes and others , I am of the opinion that we need to go a step further , because - if I may say so - a sensible , environmentally sound energy policy is almost like a launch vehicle for green growth and green jobs .
We discussed this again yesterday with the President of the Commission .
Unfortunately , very little has been said about this today .
Nevertheless , we must take these extra steps .
Of course , a lot of what is involved in environment-oriented energy policy is still more expensive .
However , if we consider the environmental benefit , and what it means for European industry to play a leading role , we see that it is also very important for jobs .
Mr Reul is right : we need many energy sources .
Perhaps not all of them - in that respect our opinions differ on many points .
However , we need to know the direction in which energy efficiency , energy saving and renewable energies are going .
These are the engines of a future-oriented European economy .
( RO ) Mr President , the energy issue is a major priority which cannot afford to be deferred .
It is important for the future 2011-2020 action plan to make a significant contribution to strengthening the European Union 's common policy .
We require close cooperation , especially in the area of energy infrastructure , as well as appropriate EU funding .
I think that , apart from obtaining public and EU funding , in order to develop an EU strategic infrastructure which will involve expanding and integrating all the local , regional and European energy markets , we must focus greater attention on the private sector and investments from there .
I think that a good way to achieve this is to promote public-private partnerships by offering the necessary political and administrative support , a certain level of funding and some public guarantees .
This will help us successfully obtain the funding which is so vital to the future of any energy policy .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , today I should like to talk briefly about the welfare of our citizens and about islands .
Usually , we have pleasant thoughts of islands , we like to go there - the sun , the warmth .
The isolation of the southern islands even benefits the welfare of the islanders , since it attracts tourists , but when it comes to energy , isolation or island status is particularly harmful to the population .
This is precisely what is not needed .
Why ?
Isolation in the field of energy means some monopoly 's normal predominance in this market , and for the people concerned that in turn means both uncertain supply and high prices .
This report contains the solution .
Infrastructure , infrastructure , infrastructure .
Let us build interconnections in the European Union , to bring all of us together , so that our citizens can enjoy decent prices and security of supply . Thank you .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express my appreciation for this resolution , which is an excellent piece of work in four respects .
Firstly , it reasserts that energy efficiency and energy saving are economically advantageous priorities to reduce Europe 's energy dependence and combat climate change .
Secondly , it emphasises intelligent infrastructure .
Thirdly , it urges us to fully implement current European legislation .
Fourthly , it strives to bring about an energy policy with a robust and consistent international dimension .
Finally , I should like to underline the importance of energy security and investment in research , development and innovation to protect the interests of consumers , businesses and citizens as well as possible .
( LT ) Mr President , I really believe that all European Union Member States are now experiencing the greatest headache over their energy and first of all I would really like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for the fact that practically all of us , the representatives of all of the Member States , had the opportunity to offer our own proposals , and thanks to some intelligent compromises , a very good document was born .
I also feel that it is not so important to have ambitious plans as it is to have real plans , that is , real infrastructures , interconnectors , a real opportunity for people to choose the energy supplier they will buy energy from , and of course , a real market price .
I believe that if we achieve this we will have accomplished a great deal .
I feel that in future we also ought to have better control of Member States ' desires and interests , because if we are creating a common energy market , those interests must be reconciled .
Commissioner , I would also like to thank you for reacting very promptly to the signing of certain agreements and I am grateful that the principle of solidarity is deeply rooted at EU level .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have read the report carefully and I endorse it overall .
However , I was left rather puzzled by various references to the future of coal in the European strategy , in particular in paragraph 52 , in which the Commission is asked to draw up legal provisions to facilitate the building of coal-fired electric power plants .
Several years ago in the United States , a political and citizens ' movement was started which has de facto led to a sort of moratorium on the building of coal-fired power plants .
As well as CO2 emissions , this decision is also based on the problem of dealing with the ash , which contains many toxic substances .
Therefore , I absolutely do not support the defence of coal-fired power plants and I would note that so called ' clean coal is , in many cases , more of a slogan than a reality .
I have also heard several fellow Members fiercely defend nuclear energy , in terms of both costs and safety .
Unfortunately , whoever says this shows that they do not know what they are talking about .
Alternatives exist , they are renewable , they are genuine , and the European Union must plot its path for the coming decade in that direction .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report offers some very interesting points in that , starting from the basic concept that Europe must provide itself with common energy policies , it carefully analyses both methods and timescales .
Speaking personally at the European Energy Forum , organised by President Buzek , among representatives of the 27 EU Member States and the European Parliament , I expressed a favourable opinion on a common energy plan that would allow for equal conditions of access to energy for private individuals and businesses , hence eliminating today 's sometimes notable cost differences .
I am sorry that the now inevitable references to the European Union 's responsibility in combating climate change have been inserted in such a good report .
There are specific documents related to that subject and I find it redundant that we continue to add references to it in order to satisfy certain environmental extremists .
As far as we are concerned , a second commitment period to the Kyoto Protocol can only happen in a global context , involving all the main economies with a legally binding agreement .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur and give my thanks to the Commissioner who is considering energy strategy and policy with such goodwill .
We have ambitious aims to reduce the climate change process .
As far as protection of the environment is concerned , energy can be a partner , but it can also be an enemy .
In the European Union we are dependent on fossil fuels , used for energy extraction .
With the depletion of the EU 's resources , we are increasingly dependent on third countries and so it is not just important to develop renewable energy , but to also invest in research into increasing energy efficiency .
In the previous part-session we debated the allocation of additional money for energy under the European Economic Recovery Plan .
Perhaps it would also be appropriate to be able to allocate money from other European Union financial mechanisms , earmarked for overall energy efficiency .
Renewable energy is important for us not simply because of climate change , but also energy security .
The bilateral agreements of some Member States , implementing projects such as ' Nord Stream ' , causes distrust not just over environmental issues , but also principles of solidarity , and therefore there must be transparency in this area .
( RO ) Mr President , in my opinion , enhancing the EU 's renewable energy potential is one of the report 's key elements .
This is why I wish to recall that the Dobrogea region in south-eastern Romania will become the largest wind park in Europe in a few years ' time .
Construction of the 522 turbines will be completed in 2011 .
This will enable Dobrogea to supply 50 % of national energy consumption .
Infrastructure is another key element for an efficient energy market .
The EU must choose among those projects which prove their efficiency and economic profitability .
The AGRI interconnector , which is one of Romania 's main contributions to the development of the energy infrastructure , incurs low costs and offers an alternative .
Diversification of energy supply sources is a must in the oil sector as well .
The P8 pipeline is a good example of this .
Romania and Serbia have recently resumed the feasibility studies for building the first section of the pipeline between Constanţa and Pancevo .
( RO ) Mr President , diversification of sources , a new energy infrastructure and an increase in the proportion of renewable energy sources are important to the European Union 's energy future .
At the same time , however , we must not stop using old energy sources either , which can certainly be improved using innovative technologies , according to the possibilities and needs of each Member State .
However , the most important factor in this for me and the citizens whom I represent is that we must retain an affordable price for all consumers , as well as preserve and even create new jobs in this area .
We must not end up in the situation where there will be surplus energy available on the European energy market , because this will not be purchased due to the high prices .
( EL ) Mr President , I would think that , following the Treaty of Lisbon , it goes without saying that the European Parliament will be able to contribute much more to energy policy .
I agree with everything the rapporteur said and I would highlight the fact that , nowadays , energy policy has far more to do , directly and indirectly , with the foreign policy in general both of the Member States and of the Union itself .
I would agree that there is a need today for the necessary works , infrastructure works , and that we also need regulations governing how agreements are executed .
Today we are asking for clear contracts , transparency and specific reference to renewable energy sources .
However , what we see before us , Commissioner , is the need for a common energy market .
That would help the small island states of the Union in particular , so that , in one large market , we can address the major issue of energy with transparency .
Mr President , I should like to say to the Commissioner that the new energy strategy report ignores the elephant in the living room : peak oil .
But at least the Commission has at last woken up to this gigantic and immediate threat .
The moment one recognises peak oil , the majority of this largely well-meaning report becomes , sadly , incinerator fuel .
The huge energy gap opening up cannot possibly be filled by Mickey Mouse renewables or shale carbons .
Coal , nuclear fusion - and in the long term nuclear fusion plus fission - are the only energy sources dense enough to save us as the oil age comes to an end .
Commissioner , now that this has been recognised , can we look forward to a new , serious approach to energy ?
We must ditch all the nonsense about wind-power grids and global warming and concentrate on real scientific solutions to the peak oil crisis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are entering into the debate here , and if I take the points on which your speeches focused , we have a broad energy mix in the European Union , in the Member States and also in Parliament .
I have heard talk of everything from 100 % renewable energies right up to nuclear fusion , nuclear power and coal .
That means that the hot question will be : will we agree on a long-term strategy ?
Will we get consensus in Europe ?
If we do , what will the consensus be ?
We are currently working on the strategy that comprises the three targets of 20 % renewable energies , 20 % CO2 reduction and 20 % increase in efficiency .
That is the strategy for the new decade .
It is right that we need a long-term strategy .
The Road Map that we will present to you as a rough draft next spring will provide this .
With this Road Map we intend in the next year to consider the next 40 years with you and the Member States and to submit forecasts for energy requirements , the energy mix , environmental targets and the security of supply for four decades .
Not an easy undertaking .
Imagine for a moment that we were in 1970 before the oil crisis , before the fall of the Wall and with only a few Member States , and we had to use the expertise that we had in 1970 to shed light on 2010 and the current energy situation .
Our estimates would have been completely wrong .
Do we know what technical capabilities will emerge in the next 40 years ?
What new political interests the Member States will have ?
Nevertheless , I am in favour of the attempt to produce the Road Map 2050 .
Then the question of why we need binding CO2 reduction targets was raised , and why the Member States cannot do this .
It is quite simply because that was what was decided .
I accept the 20 % CO2 and the 30 % if we find other partners worldwide .
This is a decision by Parliament , to which you belong , and the Council , and I implement it .
If you want something different , let me know .
I believe that if there were no binding targets , the Member States would simply not comply with them .
If we abandon binding targets , the Member States would do less or nothing at all , particularly in difficult economic times .
The subject of energy efficiency was mentioned .
In our strategy we are only creating the headings for this .
Details of how this is will be implemented in practice and the instruments , measures and financial corridor will follow in the spring when we will have to present the energy efficiency strategy , which you are currently debating .
There have been questions about the internal market .
Please trust me and Mr Almunia .
We will ensure full compliance with the second and third internal market packages , we will deal with treaty infringement proceedings and do everything we can to ensure that in the next five years gas and electricity achieve an internal market with competition and transparency .
In the last few weeks we have been advising the Member States - the Polish Government in the Jamal case , the Bulgarian Government in the South Stream case and with regard to gas supplies to Bulgaria .
In fact , the Member States are not always willing or in a position themselves to ensure compliance with internal market rules in their bilateral agreements .
Where our advice is sought we provide it , but the involvement of the Member States is also required .
There are also large Member States in which the internal market does not work .
One country is not far from here and perhaps it is even the country that we are in right now .
Thus , I would ask the Members from France : are you prepared to work with me to create an internal market in France and in other countries ?
I need your support in this - not at a national level , but at a European level .
In connection with the Southern Corridor , the decision with regard to Nabucco , TAP or ITGI will , I believe , be taken in the first quarter of next year .
However , a gas infrastructure requires us to discuss the question of how much gas will we need for heating and electricity conversion in the coming decades ?
It is currently 500 billion cubic metres per year .
Will it be less or will it be more ?
This will also be addressed in the Road Map 2050 .
Mr Rohde mentioned the example of China .
In my view , China is always good to use as a comparison , but preferably not as an example to be followed .
You are right that there has been a great deal of investment in wind energy in China .
That is true , but you failed to mention the fact that China is currently buying up the world 's coal and is investing much more in coal .
In the last year , China invested more in renewable energies than Germany did , that is true .
Nevertheless , the proportion of renewable energies produced in China is falling , because much more is being invested in nuclear power and coal .
Moreover , China refers to nuclear power as a form of renewable energy .
I do not agree with that .
Consequently , a comparison with China is important , but I would seriously advise against holding China up as an example for us to follow in our European work .
Thank you once again . I also need you when it comes to the European budget .
Calls have been made for more to be done and for more resources to be provided for research and infrastructure .
I go along with that .
I take every euro that you give me , but the budget is decided by the Council and Parliament .
On the basis of our good experience with the SET plan , with energy research funding and with the economic recovery plan , I trust that we will produce a good proposal for infrastructure and that you will support it so that , in the next decade , sufficient European funding with added value for appropriate European measures in the areas of infrastructure and research will be provided .
With this in mind , we certainly have sufficient opportunity for constructive cooperation .
Mr President , as can be seen , the subjects of discussion and the opinions expressed in the European Parliament are very varied and different .
Therefore , this report is the result of the compromise which we had been seeking .
I think it is a very good report , because we have built a consensus .


I would like to express my thanks to the shadow rapporteurs - Mrs Ulvskog , Mr Rohde , Mr Turmes , Mr Szymański and others - for the fact that we have built this consensus in such a nice way .
I would also like to thank Mrs Castillo Vera for her cooperation , help and support , Mrs Toth of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for her help , Mr Hillman and also the Commissioner and staff of the Commission , who answered my numerous questions and responded to my various ideas .
In Brussels , today , a battle is going on between supporters of the idea of intergovernmentalism and those who want to act on the idea of solidarity .
Both the European Parliament and the Commission are faced by the necessity to guarantee that solidarity is , however , victorious over individual national interests at future meetings of the European Council .
We have worked out a certain consensus .
We have a strategy , and , as Mr Turmes has said , in view of this we must implement it , implement it and once again implement it , defending ourselves against various particular interests .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon tomorrow , Thursday , 25 November .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( PT ) I believe this new energy strategy to be imperative for putting in place a competitive , sustainable and secure strategy .
At a time when Europe finds itself ever more dependent on energy imports , I believe it to be essential that it continues to play its dominant leadership role in energy matters , by focusing on innovation and technology .
Making our energy strategy more sustainable will require a continued focus on renewable energy , through the introduction of increased competition within the sector so that we can effectively implement the internal market for energy .
That will lead to a reduction in costs and an increase in competitiveness for the economy , and also create wealth and jobs , which are important for a healthy balance of trade .
I come from an outermost region , which currently has a level of energy self-sufficiency of around 27 % , and aims to achieve 75 % by 2012 .
The Azores have set more ambitious specific targets than the EU , with results that are already recognised at a European level , particularly with regard to geothermal energy , through an ambitious energy policy of partnerships between the region and the best national and international research centres .
The Union should look to these examples , and increase its support in the areas of research , innovation and project development .
It is time for us to talk about a genuine European energy strategy .
There are currently gaps in the implementation of EU energy legislation .
The provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon provide the European Union with a sound legal framework for developing an efficient single internal market , which will guarantee supply security , sustainability , interconnection of networks and solidarity .
In this context , new Member States , which are much more vulnerable to external disruptions to their energy supply , need the support of the European Union to tackle these challenges .
Furthermore , I would like to urge you to keep the possibility of coal mines being subsidised by Member States , at least until 2018 .
In a capitalist world the term ' uncompetitive ' is synonymous with social scourge .
We must take into account the human factor and think about the adverse socio-economic repercussions of closing the coal mines which provide a major source of jobs , before labelling a mine as uncompetitive .
This report seeks to contribute to a new energy action plan , within the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy .
In principle , a new plan may prove to be an important initiative provided that the mistakes and shortcomings of previous plans are taken to heart .
It is pointless to insist on the very approach and the proposals that have left us lagging behind where we should be .
The strategic shortcomings of European energy policy which should be taken into account include the following points .
Energy policy has been positioned as an appendix to an ' environmental ' policy whose ultimate objective is to open up new areas to financial speculation by making greenhouse gas emissions permits profitable .
However , the issue of energy merits a tailored approach based on the improvement of specific indicators such as energy intensity or energy deficit .
In the field of energy it is also presumed that by implementing the functioning of markets where private investors operate , everything will be solved as if by magic .
Three successive packages of legislation have already been issued , public resources have been spent , and yet we still do not have competitive markets , investment in infrastructure or more accessible energy for consumers .
This represents a failure in all aspects of the stated objectives .
The argument that biofuels would bring only environmental benefits and offer major agricultural and industrial development to European countries has collapsed .
I am pleased to see that there is an increasingly strong commitment in Europe to realise a single energy market .
This is aptly demonstrated by the fact that both the report of Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska and the latest energy strategy and infrastructure priorities of the European Commission are urging structural changes .
We are all finally beginning to see that remarkable success requires significant investments , concrete action plans and the removal of administrative burdens .
This is the only option for all Member States to achieve the main objectives of the Treaty of Lisbon : the single market , security of supply , energy efficiency and the expansion of renewables .
It is , I believe , a vital step forward that the documents mentioned earlier treat energy development efforts in Central and Eastern Europe as an urgent priority .
Last year 's gas crisis also made it obvious to Western states that Member States in our region depend heavily on one gas source alone , and that the single market does not function here .
Europe has realised that access to alternative gas sources , the creation of the North-South Gas Corridor and the elimination of isolated markets increase regional supply security while also making a significant step towards the achievement of a single market .
At the same time , the strengthening of electricity networks and the regional interconnection of oil pipelines also increase our region 's flexibility .
The level of commitment , however , cannot stop at creating a strategy alone .
I am confident that structural changes supporting the efficient realisation of a single market will soon be implemented , and that we will achieve a speedy and transparent licensing process , create regional initiatives and provide access to new financing instruments .
in writing . - After several dramatic experiences with energy supplies , it has become clear that energy is a key factor of EU security .
The need for a long-term strategic vision on energy is obvious .
The new proposed energy strategy aims to serve this need .
First and foremost , Europe needs a coherent and harmonised internal energy market , which has to integrate different energy networks , linking them with each other .
This is an absolute priority for the EU 's stability and security .
Today there are still isolated regions of the EU that depend almost one hundred per cent on external energy supplies .
In the case of imported gas , this is true of the three Baltic Member States .
They depend on Russian gas exports , which Moscow is using as its foreign policy tool .
The result is that the Baltic nations , being immediate neighbours of Russia , pay 30 % more than Germany for the same Russian gas .
The new Baltic Sea Strategy should aim at developing integrated grids around the Baltic Sea .
I support allocating a higher proportion of the budget for the common energy policy .
Developing modern and efficient energy infrastructures will need priority investments .
Enhancing energy efficiency means investing more in research and development and in new energy technologies .
The energy strategy being proposed must promote in the long term a diversified combination of energy sources , including not only renewable energy sources but nuclear energy as well .
However , it will not be possible for this strategy to be viable as long as the transmission network is not strengthened so that it can support market integration and the development of large-scale sustainable energy production .
Furthermore , consolidation of interconnections and links with third countries is of paramount importance .
Distribution networks need to be expanded and modernised as a matter of urgency to be able to integrate the increasingly frequent instances of distributed production .
It goes without saying that market integration also requires a better use of existing operational networks , based on the cross-border harmonisation of the market structure and by developing common European models for managing interconnections .
Last but not least , another crucially important factor is the setting up of an EU ' smart ' network capable of managing , distributing and measuring in real time all the different production and consumption models in order to ensure the safe , efficient operation of the future electricity system .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to welcome this report , especially the references to the development of the potential of the bioenergy sector .
The potential of this sector in Europe is untapped .
One relevant factor in this context is that some Member States are facing the situation where huge areas of agricultural land are left uncultivated every year .
This abandoned land could also be used from a renewable energy perspective .
The situation in Romania , which I am most familiar with , provides a clear example of this : approximately 3 million hectares of land remain unused , while the power lost across this area is roughly 187 terawatts per hour .
I believe that this issue must be considered during the debates on the future of the common agricultural policy .
The request made to the Commission to propose a policy framework and support further promotion of the deployment of sustainable second-generation biofuels in Europe is timely and I hope that it will be adopted by the EU .
Obtaining energy is one of the most important challenges facing today 's world .
A long time ago , the European Union backed a policy of obtaining energy using technologies which ensure low CO2 emissions .
The rapporteur 's recognition of this idea as a strategic objective is no surprise and has my full support .
The second strategic objective - to guarantee energy security to all Member States - also has my complete support .
The rapporteur links this objective to the establishment of a low emission economy .
This matter is particularly important for Poland .
It is no secret that Poland 's energy security is based on coal .
Therefore , in order to achieve this objective effectively , it is essential to have strong financial support from the EU .
Poland - and many other Member States - recognises the need to build a low emission economy , but is not , however , able to achieve this objective without European aid .
Finally , I would like to express my satisfaction at the recognition by the rapporteur of the need to ensure energy for the citizens at affordable prices as one of the strategic objectives of the new energy strategy for Europe .
In accepting the three main strategic objectives of the new energy strategy for Europe , I would like to express my emphatic support for the motion for a resolution on Towards a new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 .
I am very pleased that , once again , we have the opportunity today to actively debate issues relating to energy security in the European Parliament .
Let there be no misunderstanding here - this subject is just as sensitive as the subject of gas .
In recent years , the EU as a whole has increased its dependence on energy supplies from particular third countries .
There is an inherent risk on the market , not only on account of the economic aspect , but also due to the lack of democratic rights and human rights and the involvement of companies that lack good business concepts .
Unfortunately , we have to acknowledge that Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska 's report , which is an excellent piece of work , is being debated and voted on a little too late .
The European Commission already issued its Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 on 10 November , so it is presumably too late to affect that .
Better late than never , however .
I will therefore add to today 's opinions the fact that France has decided to sell a Mistral class warship to Russia .
We assume that it sincerely regrets its decision .
The motion for a resolution which has been tabled still lacks explicit references to two important matters .
The first of these is financial support from the European Union budget in the search for alternative sources of fuels such as shale gas .
The use of shale gas has now enabled the US to guarantee its independence in terms of energy supply .
Scientists and geologists report that , for the European Union too , a similar possibility of energy autonomy is becoming apparent .
I think it is important to change Union policy on this matter so that it supports the exploration for and use of shale gas .
It is also important to ensure financial support to institutions which are involved in the development of technology for extracting and transporting shale gas - including the use of CO2 in the process of fracturing shales .
The second matter is the lack of explicit reference to making specific investments in fuel transmission projects .
This is another document which has no connection with a strategy .
The European Parliament must , at last , designate energy projects which are important for its security and the ways in which they will be funded .
Despite the declarations which have been made , both in the Eastern Partnership and the Black Sea Synergy programmes , construction of the Nabucco gas pipeline , which is to connect deposits in Asia with users in Europe , continues to be postponed .
The strategy also lacks reference to the possibility of using deposits in Africa and the Arctic .
The last matter which has been omitted is the lack of a clear explanation of the term ' European Union energy security ' .
What , in fact , does it mean ?
Is it supposed to refer to the Union as a whole , or to a state of security of supply to the individual Member States which today make up the European Union ?
Preparations for Cancún Climate Change Conference ( 29 November-10 December ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on preparations for the Cancún Climate Change Conference ( 29 November-10 December ) .
Mr President , honourable Members , following the conference in Copenhagen , the European Union decided quite quickly to proceed via a gradual , pragmatic approach in the future .
Focusing on an ' all or nothing ' approach is no longer possible .
Gradually , the building blocks must be put in place for a post-2012 framework .
We realise that progress on the negotiations on the creation of an ambitious regime to combat climate change beyond 2012 has been very slow .
The participants have very widely differing perspectives , something that was evident just recently during the latest official negotiating round in Tianjin , at which very limited progress was made .
Honourable Members , it was against this background that the Environment Council and the European Council put the finishing touches to the European Union position for the conference in Cancún .
The positions of the other institutions , and naturally also your motion for a resolution , were noted in the process .
It has already been established that Cancún will not produce a legally binding post-2012 framework .
Given that the contents of the package of measures for Cancún are not yet clear , the European Union position , which will also offer the European negotiators the necessary flexibility , puts forward various elements .
It is at all events clear that the package of measures for Cancún must be balanced , which means it must contain elements making it possible to accommodate both the developing and the developed countries .
What , then , are the main elements of the EU 's position ?
First and foremost , there is the need to achieve a balanced result ; to balance negotiating rights in the context of the Kyoto Protocol and of the Convention on the one hand , and within the frameworks themselves on the other .
Secondly , there are the conditions for a second commitment period in the context of the Kyoto Protocol .
Thirdly , there are the outlines of essential components of the Bali Action Plan , namely a common vision , mitigation , adaptation , technologies and financing .
The EU maintains its view that a single legally binding instrument is the best way to give shape to the post-2012 framework .
Given that , last year , this position gave rise to a great deal of misunderstanding and that this is also very important in the international negotiations , the EU intends to adopt a flexible stance : flexible with regard to a second commitment period , but subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions .
What are these conditions ?
All the major economies must be involved in this post-2012 framework .
The framework must be ambitious and effective , environmental integrity must be guaranteed and progress must be made on reforming the current market mechanisms and on introducing new mechanisms .
In addition , the developed countries must demonstrate that they are indeed meeting their financial commitments , particularly with regard to the fast-start financing .
The European Union and its Member States have presented the first in-depth , transparent report on the implementation of these financial commitments and will have contributed EUR 2.2 billion in 2010 .
I hope that this report will help restore confidence among parties .
The Belgian Presidency takes the view that tangible , specific measures are needed to meet the expectations of the parties and also to ensure confidence in the multilateral process within the framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ) .
We shall make every effort to contribute to the achievement of the European Union 's objectives .
In this regard , we shall also be counting on you , as always , honourable Members , to help disseminate and , of course , also reinforce this message .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I , of course , share very much what we just heard from the Belgian Presidency .
I am also looking forward to working with you in Cancún .
It is very clear that the legally-binding deal that the EU was ready for last year and that we are still ready for will , unfortunately , not be the outcome of Cancún - not because of us , but because others are not ready for it .
It is true that we are heading for a package which is balanced but , I would also say , substantial and ambitious .
We were actually the first this spring , in February / March , to come forward with the idea of pursuing a stepwise approach in order to build on the Copenhagen Accord and secure the momentum now continuing in Cancún .
But although there seems to be agreement that this is what we should bring home from Cancún - a balanced package - it is easy to say that is what every party would like but more difficult to agree on what that then means .
What is a substantial balanced package ?
Here I would say that , seen from a European perspective , it is clear that we will insist on the need to anchor mitigation pledges , set up an enhanced MRV system and promote the carbon markets .
We should , of course , also have decisions on REDD + , adaptation , technology , finance and capacity-building .
All these elements will have to be reflected in a package that we consider balanced .
One thing I would like to emphasise is that we , the European Union , must remain clear on our conditions for a second commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol .
We must use these conditions to raise the level of ambition and to get others to move .
The conditions attached to a possible second commitment period are very important for environmental integrity and the ambition of the future climate regime .
The EU alone under a second commitment period is neither sufficient nor credible .
Therefore we need to stick to our conditions to lever positive responses from our partners .
I must say that it is my clear impression - also from the pre-COP - that there is growing acknowledgement of our arguments on this .
The draft resolution that we have in front of us addresses all the areas that I just mentioned .
The Commission welcomes very much the guidance being offered by Parliament , even if not all of it can be taken fully on board .
To mention just one example : some of you suggest that we have another target than the two-degree target .
A main priority for us in Cancún will be not to start reopening the Copenhagen Accord and not to start backtracking from what we already have .
I would also like to take this opportunity to emphasise that the EU needs to deliver on our fast-start pledges from Copenhagen .
I can tell you honestly today : we are almost there .
But we still need EUR 200 million from Member States in order to be exactly where we promised to be in Copenhagen .
I take it that you can hear the difference between being able to say , in Cancún , on behalf of the European Union : ' We have delivered ' , and saying : ' We have almost delivered ' .
I really think we should use the remaining days up to Cancún to try to deliver all we pledged in Copenhagen .
I have not mentioned targets : not because they are not important , as they definitely are , and the EU , this year as well as last , would say that we are still ready to go to 30 % provided others deliver as well .
No change there .
If targets are not being debated that much now , I think this is because a lot of other parties are not that ready - for reasons that you know - to discuss targets in Cancún .
I think what is important is to anchor the pledges from the Copenhagen Accord into the formal text .
From that we can improve things .
But I must also say that , no matter what comes out of Cancún , I think it is crucial for us after Cancún to continue to have an intelligent climate policy with ambitious targets , whilst at the same time handling our energy challenges , as you have just been discussing .
We can push for innovation and job creation and we can set ambitious targets .
My final point is that we are working to ensure the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon - obviously - and I can assure you that we will inform Parliament 's delegation at every stage of the progress of the negotiations .
Of course there will be daily briefings with Parliament 's delegation , and we will try to work very closely together .
We strongly welcome the support indicated in the motion for a resolution to ensure that the EU speaks with one voice .
I think that this is one of the main challenges in Cancún : whoever speaks on behalf of the European Union , our partners outside Europe can be sure that they will be met with the same kind of priorities and the same kind of messages .
That is the way our priorities will best be heard .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , if we are to learn anything from Copenhagen , where you , Commissioner , were of course President , then it should be that the European Union must speak with one voice at such conferences in future .
We may have different opinions here on one or two points , but if we as Europeans are divided in what we say there , we will not be considered credible , and if we are not credible other people will not follow us .
Indeed , why should they ?
It is therefore right for the figures we decided on under Chancellor Merkel essentially to be retained and form the basis for this negotiation .
I share your opinion that the ambitious two-degree targets should not now be seriously questioned and a significantly lower degree figure considered , because that will make the ability to meet these targets very much more difficult and people will shy away from us .
I am very concerned that we are putting our intellectual property at risk .
Our industry is investing money and manpower in development .
If we now go and slacken the fence around this intellectual property and leave the holes in the fence that currently exist , then we will lose the valuable elements , namely our intellectual property .
I am all in favour of the transfer of technology , but our enterprises must also see the sense in investing in it , and therefore the intellectual property must not be watered down .
As regards commitments , I am also inclined to demand serious commitments from our partners worldwide .
However , they must be credible and it must be feasible for these countries to fulfil them .
Otherwise they will do exactly the opposite of what we want , in other words they will distance themselves from us .
Presenting ourselves in a credible manner in Cancún is therefore important .
The major decisions will then be taken later in Johannesburg , but we need to prepare the ground in Cancún .
I am a farmer by profession .
If the ground is not properly prepared , there will be no harvest .
Let us concentrate on preparing good ground .
Mr President , ahead of the Copenhagen summit we had very high expectations .
The outcome was not so good .
The day we left Copenhagen it was snowing heavily and it was extremely cold in the meeting rooms .
It was not only Copenhagen that experienced a chilling of the temperatures , but the whole environment debate .
It could be said that the climate is further down the political agenda today than it was prior to Copenhagen .
This is regrettable , but the fact is that it is our job to ensure that the Cancún summit achieves better results and to deal with and improve on the outcome of Copenhagen .
How are we going to do that ?
We will do it , as representatives of Europe , by taking a leading role .
That was also exactly what the UN climate chief , Christina Figueres , called for when she talked during a video conference with those of us from the European Parliament who will be going to Cancún .
We need to show leadership , and we will do this by , among other things , actually implementing everything we promised in Copenhagen - not just almost everything , but absolutely everything .
Then , of course , we need to ensure that we get more people on board .
Together with other specific decisions in Cancún on deforestation , technology transfer and on a way forward for a second commitment period under Kyoto , this could prepare the way for an international climate agreement in 2011 .
I do not think that our expectations should be too low ahead of Cancún .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , there is not much enthusiasm for tackling global warming at the moment , rather widespread public scepticism .
At the beginning of the year we saw snow on the ground yet , if you look at the figures , you will see that the first six months of this year were the warmest on record across the globe .
That is a simple fact .
I want an international agreement in place as soon as possible but I have concerns about the nature of such an agreement .
The distinction between developed and developing countries strikes me as odd .
I wonder how long it is going to be before some of the developing countries overtake the poorest European countries .
I look at the climate change conferences , the enthusiasm with which Saudi Arabia supports the idea of carbon capture and storage being put in the CDM .
Saudi Arabia can surely invest a bit of its own money in doing these things .
Why should we contribute towards it ?
I am worried about the European Union being left behind by the pace of change and I think climate change initiatives and our ability to tackle global warming offer great opportunities .
China is planning on reducing its carbon intensity by 45 % over the next decade .
That means investment in new power stations replacing the old ones ; it means improving its energy efficiency .
There is a real difficulty here in that , if we cannot compete with the Chinese now , how are we going to compete with a more energy-efficient China in years to come ?
I want to see our cap tightened .
I want us to move up from 20 % to 30 % .
I want us to see carbon prices rise so we drive forward the low carbon investments in the future .
I wish I had more conviction that within the Commission there was agreement that this really should be considered and done .
I just do not feel that this is happening at the moment .
I know this Commissioner 's enthusiasm for the subject .
I am not sure she has the full backing of the college .
But maybe we need a fallback position ?
We do need a fallback position , and fundamentally that must be to drive forward our energy efficiency .
Just a few minutes ago we heard Commissioner Oettinger 's plans to bring forward some legislation in the New Year .
That legislation has got to be ambitious .
We have got to save our resources .
We have got to become more competitive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I could have limited my speech to simply recalling the images of this summer in Russia or southern Asia , to reminding you of the absolutely urgent need to combat climate change and , since we are talking about Europe , to move immediately , or as soon as we possibly can , to a target of 30 % by 2020 for greenhouse gas emissions .
Today , if we make no changes , we shall reach 19 % .
We have practically already reached the target that we set ourselves , so we can no longer speak of European ambition if we speak of 20 % .
As far as I am concerned , I am not an obvious admirer of the carbon market , but if we stay at 20 % , we can be sure that we shall be treating the carbon market as a species in danger of extinction and not as a lever in the fight against climate change .
Moving to 30 % would potentially raise EUR 8 billion for European budgets by auctioning quotas .
We know 30 % is possible .
In particular , a binding 20 % energy efficiency target would mean a million European jobs .
This represents savings of EUR 1 000 per household in Europe and , since Commissioner Oettinger mentioned Nabucco , it is the equivalent of 15 Nabuccos .
Are we then going to kill off European businesses if we move to 30 % ?
Obviously not .
Every study shows this to be so .
Some sectors potentially at risk are affected , but the means exist , and until now , the sectors that threaten Europe with extinction are the sectors that have been the beneficiaries of European energy policy .
They have gained billions of euros thanks to European climate policy .
Moving to 30 % would mean clearly siding with those who are bringing about change , siding with those who are making tomorrow 's world .
I should also like to cite some figures .
According to the Ernst & Young 2010 Barometer , China and the United States are the most attractive countries for the development of renewable energy .
According to a recent study , only three of the 50 businesses identified as world leaders in green technology are located in Europe ; the others are in Asia or the United States .
It is therefore absolutely essential to move to 30 % , and I shall conclude by echoing the words of Barack Obama when he said that we could abandon the jobs of the future to our competitors or we could seize the opportunity of the century , as they have already begun to do .
The nation that pioneers the energy of the future would be the pioneer nation of the 21st century , he said .
He lost the elections .
Let us take up this leadership in energy transition and the new economy .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , although I am a signatory to the resolution on the forthcoming climate conference , I also have some critical comments and reservations regarding our resolution .
You know , I am pleased that the optimism which we always broadcast to the world before every conference in the past , and which was then transformed into enormous scepticism , is not so prevalent this time .
I am delighted that we understand that this conference will not produce a global agreement , and everyone in this Chamber knows that without a global agreement , Europe alone , even if it ambitiously increased its own plans by 100 % , would not have the slightest influence on global climate change .
The blind tightening up of our standards may have the consequence of putting Europe at risk , and I confess that I totally disagree with the hidden introduction of European taxes under the pretext of combating climate change .
In order to avoid being wholly negative , I see great promise in supporting cooperation with developing countries , and particularly in protecting drinking water , as well as in our effort to ensure access to drinking water for all citizens , particularly in developing countries .
Although I have critical reservations , I do not intend to retract my signature , and I hope that the forthcoming conference will , after all , result in some further progress .
Mr President , we cannot make the mistakes we made in Copenhagen last year again .
Real leadership and political will are needed to keep the temperature limit to 1.5 oC . This goal is important .
The EU should act unilaterally to raise the emission reduction target for 2020 , and to persuade other developed countries to agree an overall emission reduction target of 80 % to 95 % by 2020 .
Not only will this help the negotiation in Cancún but we need to do this for our own good .
Developed countries also need to provide adequate climate funding ; that and to operate quick start funding along with strong political commitment and full transparency .
There is a need for new long-term funding sources as well .
Among those options , there should be international tax and financial measures and financing from international aviation and shipping .
I ask you to vote against the amendments that want a weaker message to come from this Parliament .
A strong message is needed .
The global economic crisis cannot be used as an excuse to do nothing or to deny climate justice .
Climate change is a problem that needs to be tackled on a global basis , and to do this it is necessary to build trust between us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite the fact that , both in committee and in this Chamber , I had predicted the failure of the Copenhagen climate conference and the document tabled by this House , this experience has taught us nothing .
If we persist in making unilateral requests that Europe should reduce its emissions by much greater amounts than those provided for by the Kyoto Protocol , then the next summit in Cancún - the COP16 - will also be a failure and , once again , Parliament will look terrible .
The resolution adopted in committee not only stresses that contributions to emerging countries should not be less than EUR 30 billion per year by 2020 , but it also encourages the EU to promote the creation of a green climate fund , setting aside USD 100 billion per year starting from 2020 .

The document also tells us how to find the funds , which is by taxing all possible sources such as imposing taxes on financial transactions , trade exchanges and air tickets , essentially taking money straight out of the pockets of citizens and businesses .
The report then launches into utopian requests .
It even asks for us to reduce CO2 emissions in the atmosphere by 30 % instead of 20 % by 2020 and it urges the Commission to present a proposal so that the EU sets itself these objectives unilaterally .
Asking our people and businesses to make such sacrifices at a time of economic crisis like the present is the latest in a long line of European follies .
We have the same position as the Council , which is that the European Union will only be able to consider a second commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol if this takes place in an overall framework that involves all the main economies , ahead of a global , legally binding agreement .
Mr President , choosing sunny Mexico for COP 16 was a good move .
We should be spared a repeat of last year 's embarrassment , when global warmists shivered in the coldest Copenhagen December for decades .
Likewise , using the deceitfully ambiguous term ' climate change ' rather than ' global warming ' may blind a few British taxpayers to the irony of holding it just as an unusually cold summer gives way to an early , icy winter .
An even better trick would be to hold these events only in the spring : look , it is getting warmer every day .
How much longer can the fascistic EU impose ever more punitive taxes and controls on ordinary citizens on the pretext of man-made global warming , when an ever-increasing number of real scientists are rejecting the theory as unfounded and demolished ?
AGW is baseless propaganda , a Josef Goebbels-scale big lie from the green industrial complex because they favour massive transfers of wealth from the little people to carbon-trading crooks , such as Al Gore and Goldman Sachs .
And it is being exploited by leftist political elites to complete the deindustrialisation of the west because spineless conservatives are too browbeaten by global warming hysteria to stand up and tell the really inconvenient truth : man-made climate change is the most profitable con trick in history .
This year 's Bilderberg conference , held in Spain in June , included a session on the dangers of global cooling .
When will the new realism of the people who really shape global politics creep in here , among the people who merely think they do ?
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am truly shocked by the ideas that people like Mr Griffin propagate here in the name of climate change .
What fascism has to do with climate change is a complete mystery to me .
I also think that what he comes out with here is scandalous , and I think that such statements have no place in this House , because the problem really is too serious for that .
I am also concerned that we do indeed have an increased rate of greenhouse gas emissions in our atmosphere .
Take a look at the figures produced by the World Meteorological Organisation .
I am also shocked at the low level of acceptance among the population .
Mr Griffin is also riding this wave , and I also find it shocking that the major emitters like the United States and China are not prepared to enter into an international agreement of this sort .
Recall , if you will , the debate that we had here last year prior to Copenhagen .
If we are not too ambitious and enter into these negotiations with realism , then we , as Europe - a less important emitter - can still achieve something .
How can we do that ?
Commissioner , I value your enthusiasm , but I believe that communicating with citizens is extremely important .
The people do not understand the problem .
Why is that ?
It is because the World Meteorological Organisation 's figures are clear - they are average figures .
It is true that in Europe it is currently colder than it was a few years ago , but , overall , we nevertheless have increasing temperatures throughout the world .
This needs to be communicated , and if we do not manage to do that we will not receive support from our citizens , and that will enable people like Mr Griffin to bring fascism into the issue of climate change .
That is the problem .
Therefore , Commissioner , I would ask you to try to make improvements in this regard .
Secondly , let us achieve the switch to sustainable sources of energy with the incentives that we value .
My fellow Member presented the figures .
The best enterprises are in China and here in Europe we are not so good .
We therefore need to come up with some good ideas to get our enterprises to actually achieve this switch .
Are these binding targets really the great cure that they are always hailed to be here ?
Of course , we also need to have honesty on the markets .
The things that happen in connection with the Clean Development Mechanism - 60 % of the money goes to China - should not be permitted .
To hide behind purely legal arguments in this regard is not good enough .
Let us approach the debate with honesty , because this matter is too important .
You have our support , Commissioner .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Seeber said that the public does not understand the climate debate .
I should like to ask him the following : could it be that the public does indeed understand it , but simply has a different opinion from my fellow Member ?
( DE ) Mr President , I do not know whether I have understood that correctly .
What is important is simply that we have this debate with our citizens openly and - as I said - on the basis of the World Meteorological Organisation 's figures .
These are simply average figures for the world , which indicate that the temperature is increasing by 0.63 degrees , but in Europe our values are different .
This is because weather is a local phenomenon and we are talking about climate , which is a long-term global phenomenon .
Therefore , let us make this decision .
If we say that it is becoming increasingly colder and winters are arriving earlier , then we must also communicate that correctly .
Therefore , my appeal for greater communication is important .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , I am concerned that we are going from one extreme to the other .
Prior to Copenhagen we were perhaps too ambitious , and now , ahead of Cancún , I am concerned that we are not being ambitious enough .
I therefore think it is good that , in its resolution , Parliament addresses all the issues that we believe to be necessary for there to be progress and for us to achieve results even in Cancún .
We have one major demand , and that is that the EU switch its strategy .
Prior to Copenhagen , we made ourselves dependent on what was done in the United States and perhaps on what was done in China .
That did not work there and it will not work in Cancún either .
We should therefore take climate protection measures to protect our own interests .
Hence the call by the majority in committee , and I hope in plenary tomorrow too , for us to increase our targets from 20 % to 30 % .
That will be necessary during the course of the process in any case .
We need to achieve this target at least before we go to South Africa .
I also think that we are still on the wrong track with regard to Kyoto .
Here too , we are relying on everyone else .
I believe that our offer should be to establish Kyoto II .
We will have no problem doing this ; we will achieve it .
Finally , with regard to the EU speaking with one voice : I saw how this worked in Nagoya .
We had one microphone for the EU .
Different people could speak , but they had to convey the same message .
That is what I would like to see from the Council and the Commission in Cancún , too .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , one thing at least is certain after Copenhagen , and that is that the campaign of disinformation that was mounted before Copenhagen has failed , and that the information we were given by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) has been fully confirmed by all the experts at the disposal of the United Nations .
That is the first point I should like to emphasise .
This shows the importance and the urgency of what we must do .
We must draw the consequences of the setback that we experienced at Copenhagen and , as a result , it is absolutely essential that the European Union set itself objectives of its own unfettered free will .
That is the reason why it is essential , as much for the climate as for our industries and our economy , that the 30 % target mentioned in the resolution be voted through tomorrow .
As a fellow Member has just emphasised , the 20 % target has already practically been achieved .
If we want to give a boost to our industries , if we want to remain the leaders or to become the leaders in new sectors , whether in energy efficiency or renewable energy , it is fundamental that we set ourselves this target in the Union .
The second point is that of credibility .
We must stand by our commitments towards the countries of the South , while distinguishing between the different categories of the countries of the South because , effectively , China and Africa cannot be put in the same basket .
That is the reason why , to my mind - and this is a personal opinion that I am now voicing , and not necessarily that of my entire group - it is essential that we have a tax on financial transactions that would enable us to obtain the USD 100 billion we have provided for 2020 .
Finally , I hope at the very least that the agreement on forests , the Agreement on Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation ( REDD ) , can be concluded at Cancún , because that would already be a great step forward .
Let us remember that deforestation amounts to 20 % of greenhouse gas emissions .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with all those who have shown their support for a more stringent reduction in emissions in the EU to 30 % .
This is not just about the future of the human race : it is in our own interest to remain competitive in the energy technology revolution that has begun .
For the EU to be a credible climate leader , at Cancún it should promote a genuine strategy of climate protection and not create new loopholes .
Unfortunately , the EU seems to be operating otherwise where it concerns the accounting rules for forest carbon sinks .
It would appear that the EU is giving its approval to future forecasts as a benchmark for forest sinks , which are inevitably arbitrary .
This would mean more trouble for the industrialised countries , and in no small measure .
The trouble I refer to could be the equivalent of between 3 % and 5 % of all their emissions , which is to say the same figure as that for the combined emissions reduction obligation for all industrialised countries under the Kyoto Protocol by 2012 .
Another drawback with the EU 's policy is the outsourcing of emission reductions to developing countries by means of the Clean Development Mechanism .
It is short-sighted , but also unwise from the point of view of fair competition , if we use the CDM to support those industrial sectors in China which complain here about the risk of carbon leakage , for example .
Projectbased credits should be limited to the poorest developing countries .
( PL ) Mr President , the fight against global warming has , without doubt , become one of the European Union 's most important objectives .
A significant factor in this is , I think , a rational policy for reducing emissions of carbon dioxide and greenhouse gases into the atmosphere .
In Parliament 's motion for a resolution , which has been drafted before the Cancún conference , there is a part which mentions a significant reduction - by more than 20 % - in CO2 emissions from Member States .
It seems that , in proposing a policy of this kind , the Union is not looking at the serious consequences for the economies of its Member States .
While there is such a large reduction on the part of the Union , there is a very feeble statement of the Union 's position in relation to a reduction in gas emissions in the United States or the countries of Asia .
This is a great mistake .
Today , when Europe is experiencing economic decline , we should concentrate more on measures intended to strengthen the Union 's economy , and not burden it with additional costs .
It is not the Member States of the European Union which are the major emitters , but the rapidly growing economies of developing countries such as China and India , and they do not intend to reduce emissions .
Industrial production , and in consequence jobs , might , therefore , be exported to countries outside the European Union .
Our economy will become weaker , and emissions will not fall , but rise .
This policy is going nowhere .
Therefore , this type of policy direction in the field of fighting global warming should be reconsidered .
( DE ) Mr President , the climate conference in Cancún must exert positive pressure on our states in order to make progress in terms of international cooperation and national climate protection legislation .
As part of an alliance of responsibility , the EU must demonstrate political leadership , regardless of what the United States does , and allow itself to be judged by the principle of climate justice .
This means that there must be a second commitment period for the industrialised nations under the Kyoto Protocol .
Additional funds must be provided for financing climate measures .
With regard to long-term financing , the EU must lay its cards on the table in the negotiations .
The EU must present ambitious targets for the reduction of greenhouse gases .
The global temperature must under no circumstances increase by more than 1.5 ° C. This target will result in technical innovations and create jobs at a time of economic crisis .
( DA ) Mr President , in December , everyone - officials , politicians , journalists , activists and many others - will be heading for the summit in Mexico .
This Parliament , too , will be taking part , even if there is always chaos surrounding how many MEPs are permitted to travel .
When we go to the climate summit , there is one important thing that we must remember to take with us : realism .
I am very well aware that this is not such a popular thing to say , but it is important if the people of the world are to find us credible .
The EU ought to be a frontrunner , as it is so splendidly put - in other words it should take the lead and set a good example .
That is all well and good , but we must make sure that we do not go so far out in front that no one follows us .
It is no good pursuing a policy that only a few countries are willing , or able , to follow .
We will only achieve one thing by doing this , and that is to shift our own labour-intensive industries out of Europe to countries with much more relaxed legislation , lower wages and poorer working conditions .
We will lose jobs , and that will harm our European economies .
We should therefore work towards solutions that rapidly emerging countries such as China , India and the South American continent can go along with .
I hope that we will learn from the experience of last year 's meeting in Copenhagen and this year aim for achievable objectives instead of setting our sights on the impossible .
( NL ) Mr President , next week will see the United Nations climate change conference in Cancún .
It is a complete travesty for the EU to participate in this , as there is not , in fact , anything wrong with our climate .
What we are experiencing are normal temperature fluctuations .
May I dwell a while on the real facts of this superfluous conference ?
Next week , hundreds of participants will be boarding planes for Mexico , which will generate CO2 emissions .
What was the objective of the climate change conference , now ?
Ah , yes , it was the reduction of CO2 emissions .
Currently , 11 000 hectares of mangrove forest are being cleared in Cancún .
What was the objective of the climate change conference , again ?
Oh , yes , it was the protection of forests .
Mr President , may I offer the EU some modest advice ?
Leave climate policy to genuinely independent specialists , as all it does is cost the taxpayer an enormous amount of money ; it has delivered nothing in recent decades except for biased reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) and its charlatan chair Rajendra Pachauri .
( ES ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , I would like to start by saying that I felt that both speeches by the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner gave a very different perspective on the Cancún conference to their perspective on the Copenhagen conference .
It is a more realistic , much more viable perspective , and there is therefore much more potential for it to be effective .
If Copenhagen was the all-or-nothing summit - as the President-in-Office of the Council said - Cancún must be the summit that provides a variety of viable and efficient options .
The battle against climate change has two fundamental features : firstly it has to be global , involving all the major polluters , from the United States to Brazil , China and India .
Secondly , it has to be a series of measures that are effective in their impact on climate change , we need to be able to measure that impact , and they must not be detrimental to economic growth .
In this respect we also need to have the humility to recognise that the global challenge of tackling climate change offers a variety of technological and political options .
There are and may be binding agreements , there are sectoral agreements , there is technology transfer and there is support for research .
All the options need to be brought into play , along with a radical increase in energy efficiency in all sectors of the economy and of society .
This is the only way that we will be able to effectively tackle the problems of climate change .
In this respect , if Cancún is the summit that produces a variety of viable and efficient agreements , it will have been a great success .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would agree with Mr Leinen that we really have gone from one extreme to the other .
We had very high expectations in Copenhagen and perhaps we should have very low expectations in Cancún .
Our demands basically concern two issues : the REDD agreement and financing .
If we do not achieve progress on these two issues , there is a risk that no progress will be made in the negotiations and they will perhaps be jeopardised .
If no progress is made in Cancún , the entire negotiating process will be in danger .
That is why we are relying on your efforts , efforts by the European Union , to achieve progress , even if it is only on these two issues , and to keep the negotiations as whole out of danger .
Numerous members said that we actually achieved a 17.3 % reduction in emissions in 2009 .
The 20 % target for 2020 is within reach ; we could achieve it within the next few years .
There is no reason why we should not move up to 30 % or more , if we want to modernise our economy , create new jobs and become competitive once again .
Mrs Hassi also spoke about LULUCF .
She is absolutely right .
The EU 's position , that we should not compare reductions in LULUCF-related emissions with 1990 and should use the line of business as usual , excessive emissions and how much less we are emitting than what the targets would have been , is an absurd position .
We are relying on you in order to achieve results on these two crucial issues during the negotiations in Cancún .
( NL ) Mr President , many thanks to the Commissioner and the Belgian President-in-Office for their introductory speeches , yet I should also like to remind the Chamber that the Copenhagen Accord was extremely weak , and that even what is stated in it is sometimes forgotten .
The 2ºC objective , or even the 1.5ºC objective , is mentioned in the Copenhagen Accord and , if we wish to achieve it , we must now really get down to business with reducing our own emissions - by more than 20 % - and also with providing the funds for the first three years .
The Copenhagen Accord states very clearly that these funds must be from new and additional sources .
Commissioner Hedegaard , you say that we are almost there , but the funds are not new and additional , and so we are far from being there .
Let us be honest about this .
Then there is the matter of the EU 's role , of leadership .
Indeed , this is a question for the Belgian President-in Office : how are we going to do this in Cancún ?
We have now obtained a mandate from the Council , but negotiations will be necessary in Cancún .
If we make adjustments to this , will unanimity of all Member States be required once more , or will the change be made by means of a qualified majority ?
After all , only then can we truly make this leading role a reality .
More ambition , more funds and better negotiations are what is needed .
( NL ) Mr President , the challenge for Cancún is complex and the urgency great , and yet I do see prospects , as I found the outcome of Nagoya hopeful and heartening .
There has been a great deal of discussion on the issue of how to deploy the European Union in this debate .
Are we striving for a 20 % reduction in CO2 or even a 30 % reduction ?
As far as I am concerned , less CO2 is not tantamount to less economic activity , and so we can focus on a reduction target of more than 20 % , as that will present opportunities for more green jobs , for innovation and for sustainable economic growth .
At the same time , I should like to call on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) to really take seriously the criticism of its reports , and create an open scientific discussion platform so that all the relevant information is considered and does not vanish under the table .
If it fails to do so , an atmosphere of mistrust will continue to surround the IPCC reports , something I think unnecessary and undesirable .
( PT ) Mr President , I am going to go back over some things that have been said here .
It was mentioned that Cancún is expected to be an important midway step in combating climate change , and also that it cannot go further or be more ambitious than Copenhagen was or accept the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit .
We know that this was meagre , and yet if there has been no change in the scientific evidence and data at our disposal , it seems to me that there is a change in political will and a lack of courage here , and that we are going to Cancún in fear .
I believe that withdrawal from one of the most severe crises of our times cannot be an option .
I would also like to say that we have an opportunity to put ourselves to the test in Cancún on various matters that have been mentioned here , and also to test our abilities in terms of redistribution and giving support to poorer countries and the poorest people .
I believe that responding to the environmental crisis also means responding in a unified and fair way to the economic and social crisis that we are currently experiencing .
Now that is being realistic .

Mr President , I am happy to read this speech on behalf of Mr Bloom , who has - in my view - been unfairly debarred from the Chamber this afternoon .
We had a fiasco a year ago in Copenhagen , when 15 000 unqualified people , including MEPs and the whole entourage , descended on the place to double its carbon footprint for a fortnight and got hopelessly embroiled in climategate , which was very neatly timed to scotch the proceedings .
Yes , we all remember the University of East Anglia getting shown for what it is : a centre of bogus science churned out by bought and paid-for scientists who rely on the EU 's Research DG and the UN 's ' super quango ' for research funds and laboratories and on the UK taxpayers for their wages .
They were shown up as forgers of data , forgers of climate computer models , hiders of inconvenient data and conspirators with Obama 's green minions .
The taxpaying masses learned in no uncertain terms that the EU and the global green agenda is all about raising our carbon taxes and scaring us into compliance .
Cancún would be not nearly as bad , of course .
It is much warmer .
It is a jolly winter , and the conspirators will be much more careful to hide their global governance agenda this year .
But be warned : we , the people , are onto you .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I share this House 's aspiration .
I want the European delegation 's proposals to gain the support that they deserve in Cancún .
In the context of this debate there is a need to highlight the importance of cities in preserving the environment .
There is an agreement among more than 1 000 mayors in the European Union that demonstrates that the problem is being acknowledged by those authorities , which need to act in order for us to be successful .
Our fine words are worth nothing if we do not have the cooperation of city mayors .
In order to secure that cooperation , it is very important for emissions to be disclosed , as cities produce 80 % of greenhouse gases .
Emissions are currently not disclosed , and what is even worse is that there is no common standard for measuring them .
There is a non-profit organisation called the ' CO2 disclosure project ' , which collects information from thousands of businesses and could , in my view , also be used by local government .
Without the cooperation of the local government and mayors , environmental action will come to nothing , which is precisely what we want to avoid .
( EL ) Mr President , a major environmental scandal is breaking which needs to be addressed at the Cancún conference .
Sixty per cent of the CDM rights sold in the ETS are for the destruction of an industrial greenhouse gas , HFC-23 , at a cost of 70 times over the real cost , which is being paid for mainly by European electricity users .

To date we have squandered about EUR 1.5 billion and , if this state of affairs continues , we shall squander another 3.5 billion by 2013 , compared with the real value of destroying the gas , which is a mere EUR 80 million .
This is generating massive unwarranted profits for a few companies worldwide , for no environmental benefit , given that HFC-23 in the atmosphere has increased over recent years .
This is an unacceptable situation which calls the honesty of our environmental policy and the Kyoto mechanism into question .
Europe needs to set this problem within the context of COP-16 , because a change in international policy on this issue offers a serious opportunity to drastically limit emissions of greenhouse gases straight away at a very low cost and to ask countries such as China , which is currently pumping huge quantities of HFC-23 into the atmosphere , which could be reduced to zero if China used some of the money it makes in taxes on these unwarranted profits , to become involved more actively in efforts to combat climate change .
Wasting over EUR 4 billion of European taxpayers ' money is unacceptable .
It is our job in the European Parliament to defend public interests and consumer interests .

( PT ) Mr President , the international background to this conference is not favourable : there is the global economic crisis , the political and administrative uncertainty in the US , and the stalemate in the US-China negotiations .
Expectations are therefore low , but in spite of this the Cancún Summit should be seen as an opportunity to restore confidence in the multilateral process and climate change and consolidate the Copenhagen Accord .
This is the very least that can be done , and even this requires determination and political leadership during the negotiations , along with ambitiousness in decision making .
Above all , progress needs to be made in areas that affect developing countries : funding , technology transfer and capacity building .
In terms of mitigation , progress is expected , however , especially in setting ambitious and binding targets for reducing emissions and transferring processes , particularly monitoring , providing information and checking .
Regardless of the outcome of the international agreements , the European Union should pursue the objective of reducing CO2 emissions by over 20 % , with a view to creating ' green ' jobs and economic growth .
In summary , the results of Cancún should help with definitions for post-2012 in order to achieve an international agreement in 2011 that is legally binding and fulfils the global objective of limiting the global temperature increase to two degrees .
Mr President , speaking in a personal capacity , let me remind colleagues that the public has lost faith in man-made global warming .
Voters are sick of being blamed for climate change and are no longer prepared to pay for it .
More and more scientists are going public to challenge climate orthodoxy .
The credibility of the IPCC has been shot to pieces .
Recent , minor climate changes are entirely consistent with well-established , long-term natural climate cycles .
Copenhagen failed for the same reason that Cancún will fail .
The USA , with its new Republican majority in the House , will not buy Cap and Trade .
India and China will not forego progress in the name of climate alarmism .
Our green policies are probably unnecessary , certainly ineffectual and ruinously expensive .
If Europe acts alone , we will destroy our economies and impoverish our grandchildren , while making no impact on climate .
We are embracing poverty by choice in the name of a disputed scientific theory .
It is time to change course .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , union and realism will be on show , at least I should like that to be the case , tomorrow when we vote on our resolution for this Sixteenth Conference of the Parties on Climate Change .
I therefore hope that our Commissioner in charge will be able to keep the pragmatic targets that we must meet collectively , but also to defend the absolutely non-negotiable associated conditions that Europe has set .
Neither must we lose sight in these negotiations of the expectations that our fellow citizens and our industries have of a fair balance .
It is the world that must fight climate change , and not Europe on its own .
Therefore it will be essential to recognise the importance of intellectual property that is inadequately protected .
Green technologies must be of benefit to the greatest number , but that does not mean that we must sell our current and future knowledge on the cheap , even for the sake of this vital battle against climate change .
Similarly , to ask for common methods of calculating emissions as well as verification and publication of data so that all emitting industries are put on the same scale seems to be a most legitimate request and not a negotiating tactic .
Finally , and my fellow Member raised this just now , more controversial are the loopholes in the current Clean Development Mechanism that are also to be put on the table .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are all , regretfully , well aware that the real negotiating power does not lie with the European Parliament .
However , the willingness of a number of MEPs , myself included , to work and to participate in a positive outcome of this conference must be encouraged and not neglected , as we have felt it to be in the last few days .
If Europe wishes to be strong at the heart of international dialogues , so must all its lawmakers be likewise .
Mr President , being an optimistic person , I consider that a step forward is now possible at Cancún in the form of a balanced package that will allow countries to take faster , stronger actions across all areas of climate change .
It is therefore of high importance to re-establish Europe 's leading position within the international climate negotiations by introducing the climate diplomacy principle , and for the European Union and its Member States to define and implement a principle of climate justice , advocating therefore an equity clause in future international climate negotiations .
I stress the importance of establishing the mechanism that regulates the funding of the financial aspects of climate change .
New innovative sources of revenue , such as a financial transaction tax , green funds or private sources will be necessary to raise the money required in order to implement climate change adaptation and mitigation projects and to achieve green growth , which contributes to a good life for citizens , and fair growth .
Let us also not forget the gender dimension in climate change policies .
( SL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the gap between the expectations and the results of the Copenhagen conference was unacceptably wide , which is why it was necessary for us to make some changes .
This time , we are leaving for Cancún with much more realistic , yet still ambitious , objectives .
Commissioner , you deserve credit for having ensured that , this time , the Union will be going to a climate conference much better prepared and I would like to thank you for that .
However , I would like to comment on some of the amendments tabled .
The agreement we reached in Copenhagen has produced some significant results , one of them definitely being the decision that we must take action to limit the global increase in temperature to below 2 degrees Celsius . We must persist with this target , and now is not the right time to change it , even if that were to mean aiming for a lower target .
We must remain credible .
We cannot change such important decisions from one year to the next .
I would also respond to the proposals that the Union unilaterally reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30 % .
I believe that we should not distance ourselves again from third countries .
We have to raise this target and we will raise it , but only when the circumstances are right .
However , we have to ensure that we determine the procedure for reaching that decision in advance and , of course , that the European Parliament is appropriately involved in the decision making .
We also need to encourage the development and use of clean technologies at a global level .
While the agreement on the technology transfer is extremely important , we also need to have appropriate arrangements in place for the protection of intellectual property .
Only in that way will climate change become an opportunity , rather than a burden .
Finally , on the issue of funding efforts to reduce the impact of climate change in developing countries , let me emphasise that the European Union already has a financial mechanism for that purpose , namely the European Emissions Trading Scheme or the ETS .
We have to ensure the proper working and effectiveness of the scheme , as well as transparent and targeted disbursement of funds .
I believe that it would be inappropriate to create new financial burdens at a time of financial and economic crisis .
( LT ) Mr President , soon the world will once again receive good , or as has been the custom of late , bad news on climate change , this time from Cancún .
The vast majority of scientists say that time is running out for man to stop climate change , but there has been no fall in the number of people who deny all or refuse to do anything .
The European Union was and should remain the driving force for progress in the talks .
At Cancún , the EU should better coordinate the positions of the Member States .
It is important for us to do our homework , to prove that it is possible to have sustainable economic development and an environmentally friendly way of life .
Only by changing ourselves can we urge others to follow our example .
I would really support a unilateral step by the EU to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30 % by 2020 .
It is particularly important for the newly formulated principle of climate justice to be taken into account at Cancún .
If climate change is not halted or at least limited , the poorest countries and the poorest people will be the first to be burnt by our fast overheating planet .
It would seem that some people , companies and countries are following an old , but modernised , saying : after me - after I have made a massive profit - the flood .
This attitude must not win at Cancún .
( IT ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe 's desire to set ambitious targets ahead of the next conference on climate change is certainly a commitment to pursue with tenacity , the results of which will condition the future of our planet .
However , ladies and gentlemen , this is exactly why we must be realistic and more cautious in our expectations .
As far as we know , the preparatory international negotiations for the Cancún conference have not only failed to record appreciable progress towards a global agreement , but they have confirmed wariness and resistance to the commitments assumed at Copenhagen .
It has already been mentioned , but I should like to refer to China at this point .
For example , China is allowing itself to increase its CO2 emissions by 5 billion tonnes by 2020 , with consequences that can only be compensated for by reducing Europe 's industrial emissions by 100 % by the same year , 2020 - and even this may not be enough .
This fact does not only render the proposal for an unconditional 30 % reduction unrealistic - and we strongly oppose it - but also leads many independent observers to hypothesise an increase , even a significant increase , of global emissions by that date .
In this contradictory situation it would be at the least risky and even demagogical to come up with numbers and sketch out attractive but unrealistic scenarios where the unknown quantities are inevitably reflected in the extent of the costs .
The hope is that the European Union takes a shared , realistic and sustainable proposal to Cancún , because an agreement that gives real , tangible results is always and in any case preferable to expectations which are inevitably destined to fail and make the efforts of governments on major environmental themes even less credible in international opinion , and this would be particularly difficult to repair .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , adoption of a resolution for the 16th Conference of the Parties in Mexico is the first step in a global discussion .
It is a very difficult compromise for all countries .
We should not delude ourselves into thinking we shall achieve immediate success .
We must submit a proposal which is as far-reaching as possible , but which also draws together as many as possible of the countries attending the conference .
The main objective included in the resolution is to reach a compromise on the fight against climate change and global warming .
If we want to achieve this objective , we must win the support of the largest countries and the biggest emitters . Among these are the United States and China .
We must debate this together with them and ask them to consider their economic possibilities .
We should also concentrate on achieving the objectives which we have already written into the European Union 's ecology package .
Some fellow Members are saying it is a modest package , because it talks of a reduction in greenhouse gases of 20 % .
Let us first make this first step , and then let us talk about the next one .
It is also important to have commitments which all the countries can accept .
If we again include commitments which no one will put into effect , they will have no force and will exist only on paper .
We must also direct our attention to those countries which are very weak in terms of economic development and have poorly developed economies .
However , our aim is that money should certainly go to the poorest countries .
They should have access to money from the Union .
On behalf of all fellow Members , I would like to say I think all of us are going to keep our fingers crossed for the Commissioner .
I , too , declare my readiness to give extensive assistance in the negotiations .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Commissioner Hedegaard for her very good and committed work on these climate matters within the EU and at global level .
Knowing that negotiations in the UN framework on all international issues are very difficult at the moment , I think we have to exploit action-based orientation to the full .
We know that the challenge is going to be ahead of us globally in all countries , so action to prevent climate change is always profitable , from the environmental and also the business standpoint .
We have quite a range of studies showing that the EU could cut its CO2 emissions by 30 % or even 40 % by 2020 in a way that would be economically viable and economically profitable .
This would require , first of all , stopping harmful subsidies like the EUR 6 billion yearly in Europe for fossil fuels and more stringent , ETS legislative support , resource efficiency and energy efficiency and tools such as a more stringent eco-design directive .
I think that just by showing the way ourselves , we can convince the others that ( a ) we are serious , ( b ) this is profitable and ( c ) we are doing it for the environment and for the success of the European economy .
( GA ) Mr President , I thank my group for giving me the chance to say a few words on this subject which I am greatly interested in .
Now the outcome of the Cancún conference is important for the European Union from the point of view of optics as well as of results .
We have got to be seen to be realistic and we have to speak with one voice .
It has to be driven home very strongly that global warning is a global problem that needs a global solution with global binding targets .
For that reason we should stick to our targets of 20 % by 2020 .
Anything else would be counterproductive .
It could decimate our economy ; make us uncompetitive while the developing world gallops ahead .
If by 2015 or thereabouts we have reached the 20 % target , we can change it to 25 % or 30 % ; that then would be seen as a PR success .
Anything else - looking for 30 % and not achieving it - would be seen as a PR disaster , as we had with the Lisbon Strategy .
We have had enough of that .
It is time to box clever , to do our part but to ensure that the rest of the world does the same .
Finally , I have heard it mentioned that some Members of the European Parliament may be going to Cancún to protest ; they are quite entitled to do so but I hope they do so in a private and personal capacity and not as accredited delegates .
( PL ) Mr President , my fellow Members have many times stressed the need for a single internal position on climate policy .
I , however , would like to draw attention to the fact that at the coming climate conference we should also use our greatest asset , which , as it turned out last year , is also our greatest weakness .
I am thinking of the multilevel negotiations and the attempt at understanding our partners ' arguments , and also of the skilful search for a satisfactory compromise .
Let us try to bring our EU know-how to bear in climate policy .
The isolation of which the Commissioner has spoken depends on the involvement of the United States , China , Brazil , Russia and India .
Without this , there will be no point to any of the measures taken by the Union .
It should also be said clearly that since rising economic powers want to play a greater international role , they must also accept greater commitments .
The BRIC countries cannot always appeal to their need to catch up on development as justification for their disagreement over radical measures to protect the climate .
Greater authority involves greater responsibility .
( PT ) Mr President , the success of the Cancún conference on climate change is vital to the credibility of the negotiating process under the auspices of the United Nations .
It is therefore crucial that concrete commitments are made and realistic objectives set .
Reaching an agreement on aspects such as policies for forest protection , technology transfer to developing countries and funding is vital .
If there is a failure to reach a global agreement , Europe should still remain open to considering a second commitment period for the Kyoto Protocol , but imposing conditions , especially with regard to the environmental integrity of the protocol , the redesigning of the Clean Development Mechanism and the undertaking of commitments by the major polluters worldwide , such as China and the US .
( HU ) Mr President , in the run-up to the climate conference in Cancún , the European Union and its Member States should finally realise that setting more and more new unilateral target figures will not help exert influence on the United States , China and India , or help include emerging economies in the fight against climate change .
In light of this , the commitment for a unilateral 40 % carbon dioxide reduction proposed by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance seems excessive .
Even a 30 % unilateral commitment makes sense only if there is real action behind it .
I agree with Mrs Hedegaard : the Union can regain its leading role only if it shows concrete results , by investing in research and development , creating green jobs , developing an intelligent energy network , and pursuing a policy of sustainable green growth .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , Parliament has already , and on numerous occasions , made a clear commitment to the climate protection measures .
Unfortunately , this attitude would seem to me to be less prevalent among the decision makers in the Member States .
The environment ministers , who are often very ambitious , are in many cases left to their own devices .
Finance and economic ministers and those with responsibility in respect of the economy hopefully also think in terms of longer timeframes .
However , action is taken most often for a very clearly defined space of time , namely the period leading up to the next elections .
Nature , however , can take no account of every-day political necessities .
It will respond to climate change , with all its associated negative consequences for people , indeed for humanity as a whole .
If we do not succeed in communicating the urgency of this matter , and particularly the urgent need to take action , a significant proportion of our funds will have to go towards disaster aid in the not too distant future .
Commissioner , under the motto ' one planet , one voice ' , I wish you much success in Cancún for the sake of future generations .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I greatly appreciate the presence of Commissioner Hedegaard and the stance she has taken .
I should like to thank you for your commitment to keeping Parliament continually updated on the developments for Cancún .
The fight against climate change must be conducted on a global level and with everyone 's involvement , but the idea that our position must depend on that of other countries is irresponsible and does not do justice to the role that the EU has set itself , namely a leading role in guiding cultural revolutions at a global level , primarily the fight against climate change .
We must set ourselves ever more ambitious targets and ensure that they are reached by the various Member States .
I therefore thank the Commissioner for having reminded Italy , a few days ago , to maintain its financial promises of EUR 200 million to combat climate change .
Unfortunately , I must inform the Commission that the Italian Government 's budget does not seem to provide for these funds at the moment .
I would therefore ask the Commission to use all the powers available to it to make the Member States keep their promises , particularly when it is a matter of such a significant battle for the near future of the people of the world ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Mr President , the European Union had a role in the failure of Copenhagen and in halting progress in international negotiations .
It is not enough to declare that one is ambitious , setting targets for other developed countries , even if these fall short of the recommendations made by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , if there is no focus on the means by which this can be done .
The means to achieve these targets matter more than the targets that have been the focus of this discussion , and this is a central issue .
The European Union is insisting on a market approach , using market instruments which have proven to be two things to date : ineffective and perverse .
This is manna for financial speculators : it is no longer just food , no longer just the sovereign debt of states , but also the very atmosphere , the air that we breathe , that is going to serve a new billionaire scheme for generating fictitious financial assets .
Commissioner , we can trace the causes of climate change back to the irrationality of this economic and social system .
We will find the solution by breaking with this system .
( RO ) Mr President , climate change is certainly the biggest challenge facing mankind nowadays .
Unfortunately , the expectations of the Cancún conference are fairly modest due to the failure of Copenhagen .
In Copenhagen the developed countries were expected to support by various means the developing countries ' action plans for combating the effects of climate change .
However , the impact of the economic crisis , which is being felt particularly hard by EU Member States , forces us to focus on other priorities as well .
Reaching an agreement on cutting carbon emissions is vitally important .
In Cancún the EU must express its common position on the objectives which have to be achieved and bear in mind that the success of the 2020 strategy is subject to fulfilling the climate change objective .
In this respect , I want to highlight the role of partnerships aimed at developing the potential of sustainable energy at regional level and encouraging regions to use renewable energy .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , we know how combative you are , and we know your wish that at Cancún Europe should at last speak with one voice .
I should therefore like you to be able to give us your opinion on two topics , two actions that appear in our resolution , on which we shall be voting tomorrow .
I should like to have your opinion in public on these two propositions before tomorrow 's vote .
Firstly , on the creation of a green fund that would finally let us have USD 100 million a year from 2020 to spend on aid to the poorest countries .
Secondly , on the introduction of a 0.01 % tax on financial transactions that would result in a fund of EUR 20 billion , also for the purposes of aid to the poorest countries .
I believe that this is an important topic of a financial nature which would enable us to move forward more quickly and further .
( DE ) Mr President , the aim of the climate conference is to establish a successor to the Kyoto Protocol , which expires in 2012 .
We urgently need to make progress in combating climate change .
Overall , the EU is well on the way , relatively speaking , to meeting its climate targets .
However , it would be crucial for us , the EU , together with the United States and China , seek to establish the legal prerequisites for a global climate protection agreement .
In these difficult times in particular , the strengthening of environmental policy will also provide a substantial opportunity for economic policy , for example through investment in renewable energies and energy efficiency .
( SK ) Mr President , for two decades now , talks have been dragging on over climate change at international forums .
Despite the increasing awareness of this truly global problem , it can be said from a political perspective that we have wasted these two decades .
The Kyoto Protocol will cease to apply in 2012 , and the fiasco of last year 's climate conference in Copenhagen gives no hope of an early change for the better .
The climate talks in October only confirmed the schism between the so-called advanced world and the so-called developing world , and there will therefore be much to do in Cancún .
If we want the Cancún conference to succeed , there will have to be a fundamental shift in the position of the rich countries .
In the first place , we need to reduce the volume of domestic emissions dramatically .
So-called carbon offsetting is no solution in this context .
If the rich countries buy permits from the poor countries in order to carry on producing emissions , it will not help the climate in any way .
( EL ) Mr President , the question before us is : will we be able to move forward on climate change in Cancún .
It seems to me that our position and our targets really do set the pace in terms of the changes needed in order to pre-empt ecological disaster .
The Union 's positions are still the right positions and we must not only clarify them at this conference ; we must fight to obtain much better results than we had in Copenhagen .
Unfortunately , Commissioner , we must still expect it to be down to us to persuade the large states , especially the United States and China , to join in these general efforts to combat climate change .
I trust that these efforts will be fruitful .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I thought I could limit myself to three basic comments after this lively debate , but I find I should firstly respond to a very direct question from Mr Pargneaux : I think that we can make good progress on the architecture for a green fund .

However , for many parties , some of the very specific sources of finance will probably need a bit more looking into - as it is only two weeks since the High-Level Panel from the UN came forward with these various inputs .
Realistically , we should make substantial progress .
We should know what we want to do with this fund and how to set it up .
Then I am sure , soon thereafter , that we can also deliver on the requirements of the fund .
I think we will have to progress gradually , but we are very much in favour of progressing on the green fund .
Now my three comments .
Firstly , Marita Ulvskog said early in this debate that the climate issue has slid down the international agenda this year .
That is of course true , but it is also true that if we compare our current position to two ago - or to five or ten years ago - we can see that climate is very much up on the agenda today .
Were it not for the run-up to the Copenhagen Accord , can you imagine that the issues on climate change , energy efficiency and how to promote green growth would have survived the economic crisis ?
I would argue probably not .
It is something that this is still very much on our agenda in the EU , and it must also stay there .
Mr Ouzký mentioned that Europe is always ' too optimistic ' ; well maybe it is not always in vain .
It is not the pessimists who achieve big things .
By setting targets , Europe showed the way in 2008 ; and in the run-up to Copenhagen , a lot of economies followed .
Two years ago we were more or less alone in setting targets .
In the run-up to Copenhagen , big economies such as Indonesia , Mexico , Korea , India , South Africa and others - the list is much longer - set domestic targets .
All other things being equal , this is also very important when seen from a European business perspective .
That was something we actually gained .
Now in a lot of countries , these domestic targets will lead to some kind of paradigm shift .
Yes , it is too slow in many ways , but actually we have come quite a long way .
Somebody referred to the emerging economies .
This was not an issue for emerging economies before ; two years ago the emerging economies would have said that climate change was not for them to deal with .
The rich countries would have to deal with it - the developed countries .
Today , because of Copenhagen they acknowledge that they have a co-responsibility .
We must try to build on that in Cancún , and we will .
There were some questions on the CDM .
Yes , it is a problem .
We are facing some challenges in that respect , and that is part of our ' to do ' list for Cancún : to try to take some steps forward in the reforms that are necessary in the CDM system .
I would like to say to Mr Skylakakis that I am happy to announce that tomorrow the Commission will come forward with our proposal on certain use restrictions on industrial gases .
There has been a very fine cooperation with and involvement from Parliament , which is needed in order to reach a successful conclusion with the Member States .
We will present our proposal tomorrow and I think that it will accommodate many of the concerns that this Parliament has raised .
My final comment is to Mr Leinen and Mr Arsenis , who both said that they were afraid that Cancún is being downplayed too much .
I think that to say that we want an ambitious , substantial and balanced outcome - with all the elements that I mentioned and that the Belgian Presidency has mentioned - is not downplaying things too much .
If we really get a decision on forestry , on adaptation , on technology , on the delivery of fast-start finance , on how to measure , report and verify carbon markets , and on the different elements that we have mentioned here , then I think it is substantial progress .
We all know why we cannot get one of the things we would like : the internationally binding deal .
One of the reasons is the lack of progress in the American Senate .
We all know that that is the reason why .
However , I think that if we keep the momentum we are still likely to achieve the European target as soon as possible , namely to have the internationally binding deal .
We will all do our utmost to achieve that kind of progress in Cancún .
The alternative is very bad ; it is very grim .
We must ensure this , and I can assure you that , together , the European delegation will do whatever we can to achieve this , and we will do so in such a way that the world can hear that we are speaking with a now famous ' one voice ' .
I hope it will be the famous ' one voice ' where we are all saying the same thing , where we are coming up with the same priorities , whether we are ministers , from the Commission , experts , or Members of the European Parliament .
I am also looking forward to working with your delegation when we come to Cancún .
Mr President , honourable Members , naturally , I concur with the Commissioner 's words , and I should also like to thank all the Members of this House for their many comments , including the concerns they have expressed .
We have in any case taken note of them and shall take them into consideration .
I should also like to thank the Commission and its services for their constructive cooperation thus far .
I think that we should continue down this path , and that this will also be crucial in the coming days and weeks , both in Cancún and at the climate change conference itself .
The Commissioner has answered many of the points , but I should like to mention some more aspects myself .
I have heard many comments about credibility , about ' speaking with one voice ' , and of course we must do this .
I know from personal experience , having attended the 10th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties ( COP 10 ) to the Convention on Biological Diversity ( CBD ) in Nagoya , that the European Union can indeed do this , and also that this is the only right way to achieve a good outcome .
We must consider not only the experiences from Nagoya but also last year 's bad experiences from Copenhagen , and learn from these .
Indeed , the Council has done so ; we have adopted a clear position ourselves .
We have our Council conclusions , on the basis of which we can proclaim the EU 's unambiguous message , including at international level .
Mr Eickhout , it goes without saying that , if the European Union has to return to the Council conclusions , EU coordination will apply , as has always been common practice , and that the message will be further agreed unambiguously there , too .
I have also heard a number of comments about the progression to a 30 % reduction .
As you know , the Council has endorsed the Presidency report on this point , too : the report based on the Commission communication presenting an analysis of the impact of the progression to 30 % .
In this report - and this has been accepted by the Council - we requested the Commission to further examine the impact on Member States ' levels .
In that regard , it has also been promised that , in spring - at the Spring Council - a discussion will be held , on the basis of the Commission 's further examination , on the progression to a 20 % reduction .
Honourable Members , several of you have rightly pointed out the importance of the conference in Nagoya .
It is not a matter of adjusting our ambitions .
We have to be realistic , but we also have to make every effort to ensure that a good outcome is achieved in Cancún , too - a balanced package of measures .
We , the Belgian Presidency , shall do everything in our power to achieve that outcome .
We shall do so together with all the Member States , with the European Commission and with your support ; we must ensure in this way that , on the strength of the confidence restored in Nagoya - where action at multilateral level succeeded in reaching an agreement once again - we are able to continue in this vein in Cancún and are also able to restore hope for the climate .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 November 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
You may have already heard about the HFC-23 scandal announced at yesterday 's press conference held by the PPE Group .
I too find it completely outrageous that European taxpayers should have to pay approximately 70 times more to destroy a greenhouse gas generated during the production of a refrigerant gas that is already in the process of being phased out , creating enormous extra profits for a few , mostly Chinese and Indian companies .
The scandal adds insult to injury as the European Commission , citing investor confidence , is not planning to suspend the trade in these emissions immediately , before 2013 , and to change this unsustainable situation .
This is even more outrageous in light of the fact that at international climate negotiations the Commission is doing everything in its power to block new accession states from maintaining Kyoto quotas that form part of their national wealth .
It does this in spite of the fact that there are actual emissions reductions behind the quotas that former socialist countries , including Hungary , are entitled to , for which Eastern European countries have paid a considerable price since the regime change .
However , the main issue in the scandal revealed yesterday is precisely that while European consumers have paid EUR 1.5 billion so far to destroy HFC-23 , the atmospheric concentration of this gas , which is 12 000 times more aggressive than carbon dioxide , has increased considerably in the last two decades .
It should therefore come as no surprise to us , ladies and gentlemen , that with such double standards the EU will not have a uniform stance in Cancún , as was the case in Copenhagen .
in writing . - ( PT ) I advocate a binding agreement featuring an international system of sanctions for the climate summit in Cancún that begins next Monday .
It is clear that such an agreement will only make sense if it is binding on the major global emitters : the United States , China and India .
The EU has been a leader in combating climate change , and should be encouraged to build on this leadership , although without forgetting the tremendous efforts that our industries have already made to respond to the mandatory reductions in emissions within Europe .
It should be noted that the EU is responsible for around 15 % of global emissions , and it is estimated that this percentage will fall to 10 % by 2030 , while the US , China and India are responsible for half of global emissions , with this trending upward .
As a result , I cannot agree that the EU should unilaterally limit its CO2 emissions by 30 % , rather than the target of 20 % , if this is not going to be duly matched by other countries , notably the United States .
This does not mean that the EU 's ambition should be scaled back .
On the contrary , I believe that , even if others do not go along with us , we should continue to focus our efforts on scientific research , technological innovation relating to non-carbon energy sources , energy efficiency and the creation of green jobs , in order to increase our competitiveness .
in writing . - ( HU ) Towards a post-Kyoto Protocol ...
The 16th Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in December in Mexico has even greater significance after the unsuccessful Copenhagen summit .
Although at an international level Copenhagen can be considered a step forward , it falls far short of our expectations .
The Kyoto Protocol expires in 2012 , which is why it is extremely important that we have clearly defined global goals that are plain to everyone .
It is not enough that there is relative agreement on the topic within the EU .
It is important that the United States and the major Asian powers adopt our targets as well .
Even if no agreement can be reached on figures and percentages in Cancún , it is absolutely essential that the Convention states agree on concrete plans and commitments , thus preparing the way for the conclusion of a post-Kyoto Protocol in South Africa in 2011 .
Agreement must be reached on topics such as financing , monitoring and control mechanisms .
The European Union must set a good example by demonstrating a unified position .
I would like to start by pointing out that the climate change conference in Cancún is another big chance to do something for future generations , and at least partly make up for what we failed to do in Copenhagen .
It is no longer possible to deny global climate change .
The planting of vineyards in mountain areas , and the cultivation of crops where they never grew before , are examples of this , as is the more frequent occurrence than before of natural disasters .
We must adopt a responsible and long-term solution .
I am not an expert on the environment , and the theories differ , but I do believe that it is necessary to do something .
We must stop discussing whether or not climate change is a fact , and instead discuss how to combat it .
We must stop discussing whether or not climate change can be halted , and instead do something about it .
The EU must be a leader in these discussions , as must all of its Member States .
We have a responsibility for the future of the whole world .
We must support a major reduction in the production of emissions , we must bring together regions , towns and the countryside to protect the environment , we must try to create more green jobs , and we must support investment in research and innovation .
I believe that we are the ones who can still save this planet .
However , we must stand together firmly and in unity .
The climate negotiations in Cancún start in only a week .
The EU has adopted ambitious plans in the area of emission reductions , funding , forestry and technology transfer .
On the one hand , diligence in climate negotiations is important , but this must not obscure the significance of the decisions which will actually be made at the conference .
Conclusions should also be drawn from the disappointing results of the Copenhagen conference on climate change , at which no important , specific decisions were made .
Therefore , during the 16th Conference of the Parties , the European Union should contribute to a restoration of confidence in international negotiations on climate change .
The debate has already gone on long enough .
Now in Cancún , specific relevant measures need to be worked out , on the basis of which it will be possible to make a comprehensive international agreement in South Africa in 2011 .
Future of the Africa / EU strategic partnership on the eve of 3rd Africa / EU summit ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the future of the Africa / EU strategic partnership , on the eve of the third Africa / EU summit .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am first of all most grateful to you for offering me the opportunity to speak about the next European Union-Africa summit , which I know is of interest to a great many of you .
If the first summit , held in Cairo in 2000 , launched the process of continental cooperation , the second , which took place in Lisbon in 2007 , defined the new programme for European Union-Africa relations .
The third , in Tripoli , should consolidate our strategic partnership and finally yield concrete results .
It is on the issues of peace and security that the leading role played by the African Union is of the greatest importance .
In Sudan , the African Union was the first to deploy a peacekeeping mission .
In Darfur , thanks to the panel led by Mr Mbeki , the African Union is taking up a leading global political role .
The progress that has recently been made in negotiating a North-South framework agreement is an important step forward towards a peaceful transition .
The Union 's deployment in the course of an election observation mission , moreover , clearly emphasises our determination to contribute towards ensuring a peaceful transition in Sudan .
In Somalia , AMISOM , the African Union Mission in Somalia , is the only actor present on the ground in Mogadishu .
As far as coups d 'état are concerned , the strict zero-tolerance rule applied by the African Union provides protection and plays a decisive role in re-establishing constitutional order .
The African Union has become the organisation that establishes norms , not only in this sphere but also in that of political governance , on the African continent and in the process of economic integration .
It provides the political framework enabling its member states and regional economic communities to encourage intra-African exchange and transnational infrastructure .
The whole of the portfolio of the New Partnership for Africa 's Development , including its socio-economic development programme , is currently fully integrated with the African Union .
This internal process goes hand in hand with the reforms put into effect in international governance structures as regards African representation .
The African Union is well placed on this issue to coordinate African positions in the international arena .
On climate change , for example , the Prime Minister of Ethiopia has been mandated by the African Union to speak on behalf of Africa on the international stage .
The African Union has become indispensable to the European Union in a number of cases for which we need solutions and contributions from Africa , whether it is a case of peacekeeping , migration , drug trafficking , climate change or the International Criminal Court .
Africa also offers opportunities that the Union should explore , take for example cooperation in the area of energy relations , the Arms Trade Treaty , and the prospects offered by the private sector , to name only a few .
A particular challenge in the framework of European Union-African Union cooperation is clearly linked to the International Criminal Court .
Our African partners contributed to its establishment and their cooperation remains essential to this political objective , which is of primary importance to the European Union .
They have , however , been critical of the manner in which the affair of President al-Bashir of Sudan has been dealt with , and of the fact that the Security Council did not invoke the suspension procedure , which has led the African Union to distance itself from the Court .
As for the Union , we obviously remain wholly in favour of the independence of the Court and we can only leave the matter in the hands of the Security Council as far as a possible suspension procedure is concerned .
During the next summit , we shall clearly express our opinion , while knowing perfectly well that the summit will undoubtedly not bring about a change in the position of the African Union , which has also been clearly established .
Europe remains Africa 's most important partner .
Political , economic , institutional and development cooperation always exceeds that of any other regional partnership or of any relationship with a national government .
However , the Union should not underestimate the rapid growth in the participation of emerging partners .
The Union should be pleased with this new context , but since it has an effect on European Union-African relations , we are also asking for a renewed focus on the known elements that constitute our trump cards and bring added value , for better coordination to be ensured and for priority to be given to situations that are of advantage to all .
For the Union , we find ourselves in an institutional situation without equal elsewhere in the world : two Unions that have regional integration as their goal and which wish to contribute to the advent of a multilateral system of global governance .
The African Union is watching the creation of the new institutions put in place by virtue of the Treaty of Lisbon with interest .
An Africa that is at ease , courted by multiple partners offering for the first time , and indeed the first time in a long while , promising perspectives for growth , will clearly wish to be treated as an equal .
Preparation for the summit is therefore proceeding .
Discussions with our Libyan hosts and our opposite numbers from the African Union have been useful .
A great number of leaders , from both Europe and Africa , have confirmed that they will be taking part at the highest level .
The principal discussions at the summit will be on its central theme : investment , economic growth and job creation , as well as on several associated secondary themes .
We hope that these discussions will lead to concrete results .
Participants in the political dialogue at ministerial level , which took place in Malawi , were able to finalise the summit communiqué , the declaration of Tripoli , and the joint action plan for 2011-2013 .
The latter represents a solid foundation for our future efforts by ensuring a good balance between traditional development priorities - infrastructure , the Millennium Development Goals ; political themes - peace and security , democratic governance and human rights , migration , mobility , jobs ; and new promising spheres of cooperation , such as renewable energy , climate change , information technology and space , to mention only a few .
Finally , I should like to say to you , on behalf of President Van Rompuy , that I warmly welcome Parliament 's positive participation in the discussions on the future of relations between Africa and the European Union , and I welcome the meeting between the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament , which will be held in Tripoli on 27 November , just before the summit .
This meeting will constitute an excellent occasion for drawing up basic recommendations for the debate in plenary which will take place during the summit .
I am equally pleased with the tenor of this debate today , and I await your opinions with interest .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is true that achieving the Millennium Development Goals and overcoming poverty remain at the heart of Europe 's partnership with Africa .
At the same time , our relations go far beyond that .
The cooperation opportunities of the two continents are enormous .
Earlier this month , the Commission presented proposals on how to consolidate our relationship by adding strength to it and focusing on inclusive and sustainable growth in the long term .
The summit in Tripoli will be an excellent occasion to discuss ways of improving our cooperation in this respect .
The Commission believes that there is a need to enhance political and policy dialogue beyond traditional development scenarios .
The EU and Africa must cooperate bilaterally and also work together on the international stage to promote our shared interest : tackling climate change , making progress towards the MDGs and promoting peace and security , democratic governance and human rights .
This aim is to ensure that both sides can jointly address the global challenges that will dominate the summit agenda and prepare the ground for a more effective and mutually-beneficial cooperation .
Given the summit 's focus on investment , growth and job creation , we also need to agree on how to work together to overcome the repercussions of the economic and financial crisis .
This will notably require promoting a more business- and investment-friendly environment .
It will be the occasion to look into promising areas such as renewable energies , information and communication technologies , science and others .
These are the areas where African demands are huge and where , at the same time , Europe has a lot to offer .
We can also build on joint successes so far : peace and security , and regional integration .
This ambitious agenda requires building on the success of the Lisbon Summit in 2007 and on the results achieved since then by the Joint Africa-EU Strategy and its first action plan .
Drawing from the lessons learned , the communication also calls for both sides to do more to overcome the current fragmentation of policy frameworks and financial instruments .
Better synergies between EU policies , notably with sub-Saharan Africa and the Mediterranean region , should be found to ensure real coherence and increased effectiveness and visibility .
Better internal coordination with Member States and the active involvement of all stakeholders - Parliament , civil society , the private sector - are also needed .
In order to deliver better results , the action plan for 2011-2013 should give priority to activities that have a clear regional , continental or global added value .
The summit will be an excellent opportunity to plot our way forward .
It will also require changes on the European side , and that will require us to improve the way the EU steers its relations with Africa .
I believe we will need to continue this debate after the summit , but I am very much looking forward to the debate today so that we will be well prepared for the summit .
Madam President , the common challenges which stand before Africa and the European Union are clear and unequivocal .
Both Mr Chastel and Mr Piebalgs have spoken about this .
Without doubt , we can include , here , the eradication of poverty , peace and security , democracy and human rights , global governance and climate change .
We have also established specific objectives at international level - the Millennium Development Goals .
I agree with Mr Piebalgs that reaching the Millennium Development Goals will be crucial , in fact , for cooperation on development and for the future of Africa .
We have also formulated certain additional goals , which are very important for mutual relations between the European Union and Africa .
These are : improving the good quality of political governance , and effective , honest and sustainable governance of natural and economic resources .
We hope the partnership between the European Union and Africa , as well as common strategies and measures , will produce definite effects .
We hope , for example , that the economic growth being observed in many African countries will foster social inclusion and that it will reduce the level of poverty and social inequalities .
Therefore , we want , in fact , to create the conditions for investment and trade , and , in consequence , for the creation of new jobs .
We are hoping , too , that this development will be sustainable , which means that it will lead to the building of an effective , ecological and competitive economy .
An aspect which will also certainly be emphasised strongly at the summit is the huge , currently unused potential of Africa in the field of renewable energy , including hydro , solar , wind , geothermal and biomass energy .
This is something which represents a certain potential which up till now has not been fully used , and just like other aspects of Africa 's potential , it does not always work for the good of the people who live there .
Concentrating on good governance and on the use of this potential will lead , or may lead , to a qualitative change .
Madam President , the only intercontinental partnership which the European Union has established is the strategic partnership with Africa .
After reading the text which the Commission published ahead of the forthcoming summit , I could not help feeling that it sounded almost too positive .
As if it were written by somebody wearing rose-tinted spectacles .
The reality is , however , far from rosy .
If we want to overcome problems , we must talk about them quite openly .
On the African side , disintegration still prevails .
The political mandate of the African Union is weak and the African continent is still divided , including economically .
The economic partnership agreements between the EU and African countries do not work , and the African regional economic communities make the whole situation even more confused .
In short , it is hard to talk about Africa as one unit .
On the other hand , the Union and its Member States do not have coherent policies on Africa , and they often take a utilitarian or paternalistic approach to partnership .
It would therefore be a good thing if the Commission also took account of these aspects in its report .
Madam President , the present time , marked by the crisis , should leave little room for tried and tested methods and for what has been heard before .
If the EU-Africa summit is not to be in vain , it should succeed in confronting real problems .
What is more , and this is by far the most important aspect , it should open up the prospect of the considerable potential enjoyed by the African continent .
From Africa , we expect a clear message as regards an improvement in its governance , its capacity for realising added value and its determination to stop the pillaging of its resources .
We also expect Africa to point out the obstacles that it is still in no position to eliminate with the help of its own resources .
From Europe , we expect it to develop its listening capacity , its part in the progress of Africa , its concern to free the dark continent of political , economic and commercial slavery .
Europe has an overwhelming responsibility in these areas .
If the European Union-Africa Summit is going to contribute to opening the way to better representation for Africa on the Security Council and at the G20 , and put it in a better position to eradicate poverty , the summit will not have been in vain .
Madam President , relations between Europe and Africa are under strain .
In my opinion , this is not just owing to the economic crisis but also owing to our short-term instead of long-term thinking .
Do we want , in the short term , to see free trade throughout Africa and thus to push through the European Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) of all those countries , or do we want a stable , growing economy in Africa in the long term , with whom we can then do business more generously ?
Do we want Africa to keep its migrants at home now , or do we recognise that our domestic populations are going to age in future and that we shall then be in need of workers ?
Do we want to avoid paying now for global warming and the problems this is causing in Africa and later be faced with a destabilising country , or continent , and large groups of refugees ?
Do we want to casually enter into a conflict with China now to obtain raw materials as quickly as possible , or do we want to still be able to benefit from Africa 's prosperity at a later date ?
Also , primarily , how do we ensure that Africa can benefit from its own raw materials in the long term , too ?
How do we ensure that African citizens are able to call African leaders to account ?
After all , this EU-Africa Summit in Tripoli has also shown that we are dealing with leaders who have long been sitting out their time : Bouteflika , dos Santos , Mugabe - you could wonder whether any of these men have the best intentions for their people .
We must find an answer to these questions .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , Africa is the richest continent in the world and its people the poorest in terms of per capita income .
How is this possible ?
I think Commissioner Piebalgs struck the right note when he said that we need concrete action at a regional , continental level .
To get there we do not need more handouts , which just keep people in subsistence poverty ; we need to work to create economic growth .
Economic growth can only come from enterprise and education , but education and enterprise can only come if there are the instruments to create economic growth .
For example , much of Africa does not have electricity , so Africa does not have the proper education or the proper computers or the proper infrastructure for economic growth .
We now need to put more electricity into Africa , we need clean water , and we need to have food security .
I am delighted that the African Union is now following a policy of zero tolerance for coups d 'état .
Hooray , as the Council said .
What we need to do now is to look at Africa as a modern , emerging economic tiger and enable Africa to be fuelled faster and quicker in order to grow richer .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I thank Mr Deva for his contribution but can I ask him , when he says that the euro handouts are over , if he does not agree that all Member States , including the United Kingdom , should stick to the calendar for achieving the UN Millennium Development Goal of committing 0.7 % of GNP to development aid by the year 2013 ?
If not , how can his aspiration for clean water , food security and an end to poverty be met without the international community meeting its promises on aid levels ?
Madam President , I am very grateful for the honourable Member 's intervention .
I said to the House that handouts will not simply alleviate poverty .
Of course , I support the Millennium Development Goals and I applaud the Conservative government which , while having to cut our national budget by something like 30 % , including our school budget , has ring-fenced and increased our development assistance budget by 27 % .
I am very grateful to Mr Howitt for enabling me to air this extraordinary act of consistency and generosity on the part of the coalition government in London .
But even by increasing the budget by 27 % , and even if we reach the Millennium Development Goals , we are not going to eliminate poverty in Africa until we help Africans to grow wealthier .
Europe did not become what it is today just by eliminating poverty and living at subsistence level .
It grew rich by creating wealth .
Until we create wealth in Africa which can be retained and is not brought back , we will not succeed .
Madam President , the European Union frequently portrays economic partnership agreements as an opportunity for African countries .
It also despairs of seeing these agreements signed rapidly .
However , the question that concerns us is knowing why these countries do not fall over themselves to sign these agreements that would be so advantageous for them .
Quite clearly , views differ on the quality of these agreements , and as long as these differences of opinion remain , the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) Group of States will jib at signing them .
Would it not be advisable to engage further in dialogue and understanding by listening to the concerns and the expectations of the ACP Group of States ?
These states want to talk about development strategy , while , frequently , Europe replies only in terms of opening markets .
It is this listening that the ACP-European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly enforces .
I believe that the other European institutions should proceed in the same manner if we wish to build a real strategic partnership between Africa and the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the third summit between the European Union and Africa is a fundamental opportunity to consolidate relations between the two parties .
During this event we will talk about economic growth , sustainable development and political governance , considering several dossiers , including an examination of the agriculture and food safety sector in the context of the Millennium Development Goals .
In order to guarantee universal access to food , combat poverty in rural areas and improve the quality of agricultural production , the participation of producers ' organisations and sector associations is required so that they can be committed and aware , and improve the distribution and management of natural resources .
The European Union must work to make the best of these opportunities to intensify dialogue and cooperation in support of regional integration in Africa .
In particular , the imbalances and corruption of cooperation initiatives must be fought .
Governments ' responsibilities must not predominate over those of civil society and the participation of all those involved in strategies of sustainable economic and social growth must be guaranteed .
( DE ) Madam President , specific initiatives for growth and employment are to be discussed at the EU-Africa summit , and that is a good thing .
However , it is not good for a ludicrous project like the trans-African Super Highway to be built with EU support , because the 500 km of road , planned for 2012 , to be built right through Tanzania and Kenya , right through the largest game reserve in the world , the Serengeti , is a project that should be rejected .
Every year , millions of wild animals roam through the Serengeti to their watering holes in the north .
Scientists are issuing specific warnings about the ecological disaster that is looming here : if the animals cannot access the water , the ecosystem will collapse , biodiversity will be lost and it will damage local tourism , which accounts for 23 % of Tanzania 's income .
I therefore call on the Council and the Commission to say a definite ' no ' to this project , which represents ecological and economic madness .
Let us protect Africa 's last resources , let us save the Serengeti for a second time .
I would also ask you , if you will , to sign the written declaration against this project , the Serengeti Highway , that I have submitted .
( RO ) Madam President , the European Union-Africa Summit taking place in Tripoli next week provides us with the opportunity to think about the direction in which we want to steer this partnership that links us with Africa .
In my view , the European Commission Communication of 11 November is welcome .
I would particularly like to welcome the emphasis placed in this document on the need to supplement development cooperation with specific measures which could trigger sustainable , inclusive growth in this region .
In fact , if we want the countries in Africa to become the Union 's genuine partners and take control of their own destiny , there is no other way to achieve this than by promoting economic growth .
I would like to highlight three points which I feel are particularly important in our future relations with Africa :
firstly , if we want the Union 's voice to be heard in Africa , we must ensure that we are dealing with a partner who is receptive to our message .
With this in mind , strengthening the African Union in institutional and operational terms is a priority ;
secondly , I believe that partnership in peace and security is the area of cooperation with Africa which works best at the moment , based on the analysis of both the Commission and experts .
However , I believe that we can do more than this .
In my view , we need to strengthen the conflict prevention aspect and the policy consolidation mechanisms because both the conflicts and fragile state of some countries in the region obviously influence the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals ;
finally , I would like to stress how vital it is to establish democracy and respect human rights .
The European Union and Africa are frequently out of harmony on these matters .
Political dialogue must therefore be strengthened and the establishment of democracy in this region must be a matter of priority raised systematically in relations with Africa .
( PL ) Madam President , achievement of the Millennium Development Goals occupies a strategic position in the new plan to implement a joint Africa-EU strategy .
A fundamental problem is to reduce poverty , which has become worse as a result of the crisis .
Almost 30 % of the world 's population lives in extreme poverty , which means having less than USD 1.25 per day .
Over 100 million people do not have access to safe water .
Almost 80 people die of hunger every minute , and this includes 60 children .
Every year , this amounts to 40 million , equivalent to the population of a large European country .
The situation is most difficult in Africa , and in particular in sub-Saharan Africa .
In addition to strategic measures , this also requires an increase in immediate aid .
The dying cannot wait .
The Union is the largest donor of development aid .
Over half of official support comes from us .
We should be proud of this .
We must intensify our aid for Africa , and make it more effective .
Therefore , I support the Commission in its plans to strengthen cooperation on development , based on sustainable growth and action to prevent social exclusion .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Chastel , in 2007 , we Africans and Europeans were very ambitious .
Our joint strategy was based on an action plan containing eight very concrete strategic partnerships .
At the Tripoli summit , a second action plan will be adopted .
For my part , I should like to emphasise four requirements that need to be satisfied for this strategic plan to be a real success .
I would first insist on greater participation by the national parliaments , European and Pan-African , in the implementation of this joint strategy .
Second , there must be better linkage between the joint strategy and the Cotonou Agreement .
Third , the Tripoli summit , which is dedicated to investment , economic growth and job creation , must , if it is to succeed , urgently address the question of improving the climate for business - I have heard this mentioned in several speeches , but it is essential .
The legal and judicial inviolability of private investment is one of the keys to Africa 's economic and social development .
There will be no other development strategy , Mr Hoarau , than the opening of markets .
Everything else is charity and , unfortunately , until now , that is not working , at least not sufficiently .
In conclusion , the final element : I should like to ask you , Commissioner , to see whether it would not be useful to discuss this quickly at Commission level and to draw up some proposals to ensure that those of our businesses operating in developing countries , and particularly in the natural resources sector in those countries , comply or fall in line with the Dodd Act enacted by the US Congress , because that would constitute a giant step in the fight against the pillaging of natural resources and against corruption .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I wanted to ask Mr Michel , given his distinguished career as a development Commissioner and his enormous experience in Africa , whether he could get African parliaments - particularly the African parliaments ' public scrutiny committees on finances and budgets - to be empowered and strengthened and given greater support from us so that they could actually question what happens with their ministers and their presidents in the enactment and clarity and accountability of the legislative and spending process ?
Would he agree that this may be something very important that we can do practically ?
( FR ) Madam President , that would certainly be possible .
I must , moreover , say that the Commission has , for many years now , been financing the operations and capacities of national parliaments in developing countries precisely in order to give them the means of exercising that control .
You will also know that , in another parliament and in another time , our fellow Member , Glenys Kinnock , championed the proposition that strategy documents per country and regional documents be of necessity , I should say almost as a precaution , proactively , debated in national parliaments .
You will also know , for example , that in order for there to be what is termed budgetary assistance , one of the conditions for there to be budgetary assistance , which is an act of confidence in the institutions of a developing country , is that the national budget , and hence the use to which development funds are to be put , be debated in the national parliament .
I believe that , as far as the Commission is concerned , a whole series of conditions and a whole series of methods are already deployed in any case from that point of view .
Madam President , the African Union has proved sometimes to be a disappointment in confronting Africa 's many challenges .
The AU is all too often silent in the face of autocracy , corruption , electoral fraud and illegal coups d 'état .
If the EU and Africa want to deepen and intensify their strategic cooperation in the future , we cannot shy away from expressing our expectations of Africa in a firm and frank manner .
That means , in reality , that the African Union must become a more responsible and responsive organisation with genuine moral and political authority .
When Africa needs help to tackle humanitarian crises , we of course should continue to provide the necessary financial and human resources .
In particular , the EU needs to ensure that its commitment to the Millennium Development Goals remains as robust as ever .
The EU should also reflect on the damage done to African economies by its trade policies and its - sometimes somewhat absurd - farm subsidy regime .
But ultimately only Africans can solve Africa 's problems .
We need to grasp this reality and make it central to our approach to this strategic continent and our relationship with it .
( FR ) Madam President , there is no point in mentioning that a joint strategy is a strategy that sets joint priorities and goals .
We already have this strategy .
What we need today is to put in place specific means of attaining these goals .
To this end , we need clear policy lines , coherent economic policies and stable social criteria .
At the political level , respect for democratic values and human rights remains our guiding thread .
In this context , I should like to invite our partners to ratify the African Charter on Democracy as quickly as possible and to see to it that the commitments undertaken by both parties be respected .
At the economic level , ensuring appropriate and transparent funding of the strategy and fighting corruption at all levels are the additional guarantees for the success of our joint activities .
It is also extremely important that we continue to work towards establishing regional markets in which there is a recognised place for agriculture .
At the social level , dialogue with local NGOs and all the players in civil society must be given priority .
We must constantly be directing social policy to a higher level .
In this respect , I believe that we must keep a special place for education , training and youth mobility , in order to relaunch a new global dynamic .
Our two parliaments , Pan-African and European , must endeavour to establish a regular follow-up of reports and annual action plans , with the assistance of joint experts .
We are thus faced with several challenges .
In order to meet them , we must move beyond the differences between and within our two continents .
The EU-Africa summit is the occasion for proposing effective joint solutions , and it is up to us to grasp this opportunity .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the signs look very promising for the EU-Africa summit .
The summit will revolve entirely around an equal partnership for a better common future .
Two months after the Millennium Development Goals summit in New York , we have the unique opportunity to take further specific , binding steps in the fight against poverty in Africa .
We are , of course , following all of China 's extensive activities on the African continent to safeguard its own supply of raw materials with great concern .
It is very much reminiscent of the behaviour of colonial states .
The European Union must , therefore , press for a regulation that promotes the common good of , and social progress in , the African countries .
That will create work that is sustainable .
I therefore expressly welcome the Commission 's proposal to employ effective controls in the context of raw materials management .
Together with the African partners , we need to support a structural policy that promotes growth and climate protection in order for the African people to escape from the poverty trap .
We support the Commission 's proposals for social cohesion , because they will help to create jobs .
We must put the people of Africa in a position where they can achieve the goal of earning a living wage through their own work .
Finally , I would like to provide a summary of the following priorities .
Firstly , we need to strengthen the African Union and its representations in all international bodies - the Security Council , G20 and the Pan-African Parliament .
The Millennium Goals must be achieved in Africa by 2015 by means of further initiatives .
We must ensure that the social standards stipulated by the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) are laid down and made binding in any economic and trade agreements between the EU and Africa .
Madam President , the Action Plan for the EU-Africa Strategic Partnership includes a section on democratic governance and human rights , which are regarded as ' key for sustainable development ' .
However , we have been very poor at implementing such objectives .
A prime example has been the failure to bring about real change in Zimbabwe .
In 2007 , in the lead-up to the first EU-Africa summit , we complained bitterly about the EU 's hypocrisy in imposing a travel ban and asset freeze on Mugabe and his ilk with one hand , while inviting him to a summit in a European capital - Lisbon - with the other .
Now we find that Mugabe is yet again invited to an EU-Africa summit , albeit in Libya , and we meekly trot along as if none of this mattered .
To rub shoulders with Mugabe is an affront to our principles and is in direct contradiction to the EU 's own , stated position .
It is a failure of our diplomacy in Africa that any African government still has any regard for Mugabe .
Madam President , may I put two questions to the Council and the Commission ?
In Libya , will EU representatives voice their disapproval of Mugabe 's presence ?
Secondly , what is the EU doing to actively promote good governance ?
Without it , there is little hope for a prosperous , democratic future for Africa .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all we must remember that Africa is the tenth world power , even in a year in which we remember an important issue - poverty - which certainly affects Africa as it affects many other continents .
We need to strengthen the association agreements and take action for economic sustainability , particularly through infrastructure , education , health and water resources , with real controls on the adequacy of the financial measures decided upon for African countries , remembering that Africa varies greatly from region to region .
There are regions with particular needs , which often give rise to flows of illegal immigrants , for example .
Instead , we need to adapt migratory flows to the effective needs of the labour market .
A constructive dialogue can certainly protect fundamental rights and support governance in this extremely important continent .
Madam President , at the upcoming EU-Africa summit in Libya , EU leaders will face Meles Zenawi , the prime minister of Ethiopia .
Ethiopia is not only the second most populous country in Africa and the headquarters of the African Union , it is also the partner - in terms of the Cotonou Agreement - which has prevented the delivery of the EU election report in Addis Ababa in 2005 , and more recently in 2010 , in order to avoid exposing the irregularities and the manipulation of the elections .
What good is the talk of democracy , human rights and good governance , which the EU is going to have with African interlocutors , if Meles Zenawi , the dictator of Ethiopia , is the interlocutor for Africa ?
( SK ) Madam President , we all know that the populations of many African countries are now dependent on humanitarian assistance from advanced countries .
In future , however , our assistance should be directed towards stimulating the economic development of the populous areas , so that the citizens of African countries can gradually change the character of their countries through their own efforts .
Mineral resources and human resources give African countries the potential to escape from backwardness and poverty , with some well thought-out assistance from industrialised countries .
If African countries are to attract jobs , know-how and major investment , there is clearly a need for greater political stability , a normal legal environment and acceptable rules for entrepreneurs , who will then be willing to develop their operations in African countries in an honest way .
A major barrier to such an environment is the savage authoritarian regimes whose behaviour discourages all decent people from entering into any form of cooperation .
In my opinion , this is the problem which does most harm to the development prospects of the African continent .
It is a problem that must be resolved .
( DE ) Madam President , everyone knows the African proverb that asserts that ' poverty is like a lion ; if you do not fight , you get eaten ' .
If we consider the current development aid and the cooperation between Africa and the European Union , we cannot help thinking that billions are currently being thrown as food for the lion rather than actually being used to help people .
Of course , the African continent has a whole range of problems .
For one thing , there are the numerous armed conflicts that we do not really succeed in bringing to a peaceful end and which the money provided in aid , which often falls into the wrong hands , repeatedly serves to fuel .
Secondly , the fact that economic growth rates hardly go hand in hand with success in combating poverty is problematic .
In this regard , we need to take seriously the criticism that the EU is pressing the African states to opening up the markets , which could exacerbate poverty and hunger .
This needs to be brought up in the free trade agreement discussions at the EU-Africa summit , along with the criticism that cheap food exports are putting the livelihoods of whole population groups at risk .
( RO ) Madam President , the forthcoming EU-Africa Summit provides a good opportunity for devising a realistic cooperation strategy .
I think that the proposals tabled by the European Commission will , in terms of strengthening relations between both continents , facilitate the adoption of a specific action plan during the Summit .
The decisions made by the Heads of State or Government who will be gathering on this occasion will affect 1.5 billion people in 80 countries .
Eradication of poverty , human rights and economic governance are common challenges requiring a common approach .
This is why it is important that the EU-Africa partnership does not remain that of donor-beneficiary but becomes a partnership between equals .
Just as I have done during the debates on combating poverty , I would like to stress the importance of achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
I think that , in particular , better coordination is needed between the four priority action areas : financing , food security , health and education .
( SV ) Madam President , it should perhaps also be pointed out that Africa has in fact made some improvements itself recently .
However , we know that there is still much to be done .
The economic crisis has unsettled and is still unsettling Europe .
We analyse every-day life , but we pay very little attention to what has happened to the developing countries as a result of the global economic crisis .
I think it would be very important to carry out such an analysis How have the developing countries been affected by the economic crisis ?
I would also like to stress how important it is for us to facilitate , or rather improve , conditions for investments in developing countries , including for European investments in developing countries .
There is no lack of ideas and investments from the developing countries themselves , but there is a need for stability .
It would be an extremely positive development if the aid - or whatever we now want to call it - could help to create stability for the ideas , projects and investments of a domestic nature that could actually be carried out in the developing countries .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this has been an extremely rich debate and I would just like to emphasise a couple of points in answer to some questions .
I think it would be wrong not to recognise that Africa has changed substantially .
Africa has more self-confidence ; and good reason for it .
Economic growth is there and , in a way , Africa has dealt with the economic and financial crises better than Europe has done .
Africa is much more organised and much stronger - even more than the European Commission - and has more power in the form of the African Union .
At the same time it would be wrong to compare the African Union with the European Union , because they are different types of Unions and we should not try to compare them one to one .
However , it is very clear that there is an African Union .
It is also important that Africa understands its power in the international arena .
African countries are looking for representation in accordance with their political way .
That means that this summit is a very particular summit .
It is definitely not a donor / recipient summit .
It is a summit that perhaps may not even be very high profile , but we need to make that relation thrive .
I believe that we need to address two critical issues .
One is a more simple issue : that achieving the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) should be done in a sustainable way through inclusive growth .
That is why we address the issue of energy .
That is why much focus is placed on sustainable agriculture , because without it our results in achieving MDGs and fighting poverty and providing more stability will be under threat .
The second issue is very serious political debate .
Yes , good governance and human rights are on the agenda .
But it is not the case any more that one side is listening and the other one is making its point .
It is a two-way street .
On the one hand , that is a challenge and on the other hand it is an opportunity .
Human rights and good governance are for us the backbone of stability in our societies .
It is not that we wish to preach .
However , we believe you cannot achieve the MDGs and eradicate poverty without addressing these issues .
That means that in all the programmes that we address , good governance is key .
In the ex-ante procedure , we do not engage with governments where we see no hope of good governance .
We then go on to deal with NGOs ; we try to support the population by other means .
However , in each and every project we increasingly emphasise the role of good governance and human rights .
Sustainability is also to the fore in our policy .
We do not finance the Serengeti projects , for example .
No EU money is involved in any project that damages the environment .
Each project is evaluated on the basis of an environmental impact assessment .
We have a very sustainable approach to the projects .
But at the same time it is very clear that we cannot expect that a continent that will double its population in a very short time will not have an impact on the environment .
And again , our role now in the current situation is really to look for sustainable growth ; and renewable energy is the key to providing such a type of growth .
I believe that this is a very particular summit .
It is a summit that is not so much about political slogans , but more about the trust that already exists .
That is rather fragile .
We could benefit from a lot from these relations , but there could be a lot of damage .
I believe that this summit will have a lasting impact , because I believe that the emphasis is on the right areas .
We are looking from Africa 's point of view at Africa 's political role .
We have provided a lot of support to bring Africa to where it is today , and we are committed to moving Africa forward with our support , and definitely by encouraging Africa to have ownership of the processes in Africa .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , somewhat by way of a complement to what the Commission has just told us and by way of a conclusion , I should like to tell you that the third European Union-Africa summit in Tripoli must send an important political signal aimed at deepening our cooperation with Africa in the years to come .
It will be about better cooperation on the challenges faced by the two continents , about better exploitation of the possibilities offered by the combination of their enormous potential and about better coordination of our positions on the international stage .
African and European leaders will not fail to find pointers for the road to follow .
In this debate , we have heard a number of specific pointers , which we shall obviously not fail to pass on .
All contributions , particularly those made by parliamentarians , are welcome .
I should also like to reply to one question in particular .
A number of you have specifically mentioned the economic partnership agreements which , it is true , are a sensitive issue , and which were already a significant cause of disagreement at the 2007 Lisbon summit .
Given the strong reluctance on the part of Africa to conclude economic partnership agreements , it is true that certain players have asked for a political signal that we are taking account of the African position ; others argue for a much more proactive and positive approach on the nature of our proposals .
At the summit , our genuine feeling is that it will be best as far as this issue is concerned to look for an agreement to reopen these negotiations in any case .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next part-session in December .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( PT ) The Africa-EU strategic partnership established in 2007 at the Lisbon Summit allowed the two continents to define common interests and strategic objectives , going beyond traditional EU development policy .
The objectives outlined were put into practice with the adoption of the Joint Africa-EU Strategy and the 2008-2010 action plan which sets out eight priority areas : peace and security ; democratic governance and human rights ; trade , regional integration and infrastructure , the millennium development goals , energy , climate change , migration , mobility and employment , science , information society and space .
The third Africa-EU Summit , to take place in Tripoli , the capital of Libya , will have ' Investment , economic growth and job creation ' as its theme , with the aim of outlining long-term joint guidelines in these areas , while safeguarding the priorities set out in the EU 2020 strategy .
I believe that this is an opportunity for Portuguese traders to make closer connections in the African market as part of their business networks , but the issues of insecurity and the high levels of crime perpetrated by the Portuguese community , particularly the Madeiran Community resident in South Africa , must nevertheless be addressed .
It is therefore vital to strengthen and develop concrete and concerted cooperation , and simultaneously adapt it to new challenges in international relations .
Situation in Western Sahara ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the situation in Western Sahara .
Statements by the Council and the Commission .
Member of the Commission , on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , I thank this House for a very timely discussion on Western Sahara .
I am answering , on behalf of Catherine Ashton , on the basis of the oral questions put forward by Members of the Parliament .
The European Union is worried about the events which took place in Laâyoune at the beginning of November , and it regrets the loss of lives .
Now calm has returned to Laâyoune , even though underlying tensions still remain .
The European Union is worried that the violent outburst witnessed in Laâyoune could hamper the United Nations Secretary-General 's attempts to find a mutually-acceptable solution to the Western Sahara conflict .
Regarding the concerns we are talking about today , we shall make sure that they reach the Moroccan authorities through the appropriate channels .
The issue of Western Sahara is on the agenda of the Association Council 's next meeting in December .
It could also be raised within the Joint Parliamentary Committee between the European Parliament and Morocco .
The European Union continues to be engaged with Morocco on reforms in areas such as good governance , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
The European Union maintains a good and frank policy dialogue with Morocco within the bodies responsible for the follow-up of our Association Agreement .
Within this framework , the European Union has reminded our partner of the importance of it abiding by the international commitments it has undertaken regarding respect for human rights .
As for the use of Western Sahara 's natural resources , it is Morocco 's responsibility to comply with its obligations under international law , including those related to the use of Western Sahara 's natural resources .
The European Union supports the efforts of the United Nations Secretary-General with a view to achieving a just , lasting , and mutually acceptable political solution which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara , in agreement with the Security Council resolutions .
( DE ) Madam President , I have been waiting for 70 minutes for Question Time to begin and would like to ask when it will actually take place .
Normally , the debate is interrupted for Question Time and then continued afterwards .
There will be no Question Time , because the group chairs decided at the Conference of Presidents that it would not take place .
I therefore do not think there is any point in you waiting any longer .
Madam President , they say that the philosopher Aristotle was walking around his famous Peripatetic School with his students when one of them made a comment that upset his master .
By way of apology , he said , ' that was not my comment , it was made by your master Plato ' .
Then Aristotle stopped and pronounced a sentence that has been repeated numerous times on the European stage from the fourth century BC to the present day .
He said , ' Plato is dear to me , but dearer still is the truth ' .
Madam President , Morocco is a positive and active partner of the European Union , and it is also a strategic and fundamental ally in containing radical Islamic fundamentalism .
However , as President Sarkozy said when he spoke here , Parliament is the democratic heartbeat of the European Union , and has an irrevocable and undeniable commitment to the cause of human rights .
Therefore , if these rights are not acknowledged , it cannot stand aside and look the other way .
It must speak out loud and clear about the principles that drive us .
Madam President , the European Union has been , is and will be a loyal partner of Morocco , but that partnership is based on principles and values , and we have to proclaim those principles and values .
I will conclude now , Madam President , by saying that truly , moderation in character or temperament is always a virtue , but moderation in the defence of human rights and fundamental freedoms , especially freedom of expression , is always a vice , always a weakness and always cowardly , and as representatives of the people of the European Union we cannot allow ourselves to act in that way .
Madam President , this resolution was difficult to negotiate , but we have finally ended up with something which I think has managed to satisfy all groups .
I would like to thank my fellow Members for their efforts , because we dare not speak any more about Sahara , knowing as we do what a sensitive subject it is .
There will therefore be no political stance here on the conflict between Morocco and Sahara .
On the other hand , the first point condemns the violence that unfolded during the dismantling of the camp near Laâyoune ; and this condemnation of violence is clear even if we do not currently have all the facts to say who did what .
As for the second point , we regret - to put it mildly - the fact that there is no freedom of the press and that humanitarian organisations and parliamentarians are unable to go to the region .
We believe this is unacceptable .
The third point is closely linked .
We note that Morocco is going to launch an investigation , but we resolutely believe and we demand that there should be an international inquiry to shed light on events .
That aside , in terms of the political conflict , we shall leave that to the UN and we urge both parties to resume negotiations .
Madam President , Commissioner , this debate and the resolution on which we will be taking a vote tomorrow were triggered by two incidents : the death of a fourteen-year-old boy who was killed by a Moroccan policeman 's bullet and , a few days later , the violent dismantling of the protest camp housing more than ten thousand natives of Western Sahara who had peacefully tried to draw the world 's attention , and ours too , to the intolerability of their social , political and economic situation .
This incident has claimed new human casualties , which we regret .
They have paid the highest possible price for this ongoing problem that is familiar to us all .
Western Sahara is the last example in the world of a process of decolonisation having remained incomplete , one where the neighbouring country is enjoying the benefits of illegal occupation of a foreign territory , rejecting Security Council resolutions , repeatedly ignoring UN demands for a referendum and the right to self-determination for the people of Western Sahara and infringing human rights and standards of international law .
Western Sahara , a country of sand and stone which is crossed by a wall of shame measuring more than a thousand kilometres , is rich enough to excite the appetites and expectations of Morocco and those countries that are actively or passively supporting its unrelenting stance .
We know who they are .
The problem of Western Sahara is a political problem , a problem of decolonisation .
It can be solved in only one way , in the same way that similar problems were solved elsewhere , that is on the basis of international law , self-determination of nations and agreements .
We need to strengthen the role of the United Nations in Western Sahara ; the mandate of MINURSO is too narrow , with the mission simply maintaining the status quo , and proving to be powerless and purely a formality .
Commissioner , thank you very much for your clear words .
Despite the different interests of some influential Member States , or precisely because of those , the European Union should play a more active role and use every means at its disposal .
Morocco , too , which enjoys support and understanding in many quarters , should make an effort to resolve the situation constructively .
Madam President , I would first of all like to welcome the fact that we finally have an opportunity to talk about the Western Sahara and to adopt a resolution .
For once the pressure from Morocco has not triumphed , as it has on other occasions .
I believe that this is good for Parliament 's credibility , but also for the transparency of what is happening in the Western Sahara .
Secondly , I want to loudly , clearly and firmly condemn the irresponsible and provocative manner in which the Gdaim Izyk camp was dismantled .
It is true that the violence came from many sides , but I think it is entirely unjustifiable to place those who are defending themselves against an attack on the same level as those who are repressing , persecuting and torturing them .
We therefore demand an independent investigation under the aegis of the United Nations .
We are not talking about a conflict between equals .
Not everyone has the same level of responsibility and not everyone in this conflict is using the same strategies or the same weapons .
We must indeed ask for calm from all parties , but most importantly we must demand that the Kingdom of Morocco ceases its hostile attitude towards the Saharan people and stops harassing parliamentarians , the media and human rights defenders .
The European Union cannot continue to turn a blind eye to this as if nothing were happening .
We in the European Union have a major historical responsibility , particularly certain countries such as Spain and France .
Let us indeed act sensibly , as the Minister , Mrs Jiménez , asked us to do , but the sensible thing to do now is to say ' enough ' to the Moroccan regime .
It all very well to want good trade relations with Morocco .
That is a necessary and positive thing , but not at the cost of human rights or at the cost of infringing international law .
Mrs Jiménez , Baroness Ashton , in order to arrive at a fair , sustainable and mutually acceptable solution , the referendum on self-determination needs to be held .
Let us make that possible .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , the frozen conflict over Western Sahara is destabilising the surrounding region .
Morocco 's intransigence continues to deny justice to the people of Western Sahara , who have been waiting for a referendum on independence for the past 20 years .
While I do accept that Morocco is an important ally of the West in the fight against terrorism , it is deeply regrettable that Morocco will not deliver on its stated commitments to the terms of the UN settlement plan .
We should now , in the light of the report of violence against the people of Western Sahara , give the UN mission there a mandate to monitor the human rights of the Sahrawi people .
But efforts to develop this capacity have been sadly and consistently blocked by France .
This is almost unique among all UN missions : it is the only one without a human rights mandate .
Morocco and the Polisario Front both need to understand what is expected of them in terms of standards by the international community .
We do have a lot of leverage over Morocco here in the EU , particularly over fishing rights and aid .
Hopefully the impending referendum scheduled for South Sudan , which will create a new sovereign state in the south , will provide fresh motivation for all the parties involved to seek a final resolution to this long-standing dispute over Western Sahara - a territory and a people which , in my mind , deserve a peaceful and prosperous future .
Madam President , I would like to start by stating the obvious : we need to tell the Kingdom of Morocco that this is not its parliament .
This Parliament 's sovereignty stems from the citizens of Europe , and therefore it decides its agenda , issues and resolutions , and the constant interference in this institution by the Kingdom of Morocco is unacceptable .
Secondly , ladies and gentlemen , the basic issue is that we are talking about an occupation by the military , police and Moroccan settlers ; an illegal occupation of a ' non-self-governing territory ' as defined by international law .
Morocco has no sovereignty over the Western Sahara ; I repeat , none .
It cannot apply its laws , it cannot apply its sovereignty , and Parliament therefore needs to send a very clear message to the international community and to the Saharan people , as they are the ones that need to decide their future through a referendum on self-determination , which is what the United Nations Security Council has agreed .
All the abuses and repression that are being perpetrated in the Western Sahara by the Moroccan Government only have one aim : ensuring that they cannot exercise their right to self-determination .
The European Parliament therefore needs to be firmer in defending that right , standing with the Saharan people and condemning the abuses .
The dismantling of the Dignity Camp should never have been allowed .
I went there a few hours beforehand .
I am in elected office and I was prevented from disembarking a Spanish plane in order to be present at what was unfortunately about to happen a few hours later , because they did not want any witnesses .
They have a great deal to hide , and Parliament cannot be a party to the systematic concealment of everything that this repression means .
As for the association agreement , ladies and gentlemen , Baroness Ashton - who regrettably is absent - when is it going to be frozen ?
When will we say that this course is unacceptable ?
I believe that Parliament needs to speak out loud and clear , ladies and gentlemen .
( PL ) Madam President , Western Sahara is , today , at a crossroads .
We must not ignore the recent actions of the government of Morocco .
Conflicting reports exist as to what really happened in the camp on the outskirts of the city of Laâyoune .
However , we must not treat lightly the fact that 15 000 people have lost their homes and been forced to leave the towns where they lived , and this is , in fact , only one example of human rights violations which go back to 1975 .
We - the members of the European Parliament - must take a close look at the history of this region and the cruelty which the Sahrawis have experienced , and we must strengthen policy aimed at resolving the conflict and this problem .
Some Member States have tried to resolve these problems by working with the UN , but these efforts , however , have proved unsuccessful .
It has not been possible to agree the recommendations necessary to bring Morocco to book .
UN security forces have been restricted in their activity in Western Sahara , whereas they should be able to exercise complete control and oversee humanitarian aid .
Furthermore , Morocco has not lifted the blockade on free access to the region for journalists and international observers .
One UN observer has rightly stated that attention focussed on this region of Africa might save life and protect the Sahrawis from the Moroccan policy of extermination .
Amnesty International is calling for an independent investigation to be made about the violence .
This is a good idea .
It should be done .
It is not known , today , how many people have died , been seriously injured or have simply disappeared as a result of Morocco 's actions .
Finally , I would like to call upon our House to make a definite reaction which will put an end to the current slow international diplomacy and to develop a solution which will protect the Sahrawis from further cruelty .
( ES ) Madam President , the violence that has shaken the Western Sahara , which we strongly condemn , just as we regret the loss of human life and demand respect for human rights , must not break out again .
There needs to be a permanent , fair and mutually acceptable solution , within the framework of the United Nations , to a conflict that has now gone on for more than 30 years and is condemning thousands of Saharan refugees to despair and condemning a neighbouring area that is of fundamental importance to the European Union to instability .
We therefore call on Morocco , which is a prominent and reliable partner of the European Union , with which we share major interests and plans , to redouble its efforts at dialogue in order to bring a negotiated end to the conflict .
We also call for calm among the Saharan people and their representatives , to whom we offer a message of solidarity in their circumstances .
We also call on them to maintain dialogue with an open and constructive attitude .
We ask the European Union to join in the efforts of the group of countries that are friends of the Sahara , which includes my own country , Spain , in facilitating that dialogue as a credible negotiator in the region .
The opening of a Moroccan parliamentary investigation into the events in the Sahara and the fact that the Moroccan authorities are prepared to inform Parliament about what has happened are significant signs that we do value .
They are not , however , a substitute for a policy of information transparency ensuring the presence of all media in the area .
The resolution that we will adopt tomorrow is the result of a complex agreement which reflects Parliament 's concern regarding stability in the Maghreb and for human rights .
It is also a demonstration of Parliament 's backing for a negotiated end to the conflict , with no prior conditions , but on the basis of the United Nations Security Council resolutions establishing the Saharan people 's right to self-determination .
( ES ) Madam President , the Moroccan authorities deserved our condemnation for the attack on the Gdaim Izyk camp , following which the serious incidents in Laâyoune took place .
The individual rights of the Saharan people , who were asking peacefully for better living conditions , have been infringed .
Moreover , freedom of the press and of information have been limited , and dozens of members of this and other parliaments , including that of my country , the Basque Parliament , have been denied access to the area .
There is no reliable information , therefore we ask the United Nations to conduct an official investigation into what happened .
We do , however , know that there were deaths , injuries and hundreds of people detained .
We regret all deaths that occurred during this incident , because all of them - whether they be Moroccan police or Saharan activists - are irreparable .
I would like to express my solidarity with all of their families .
The camp was attacked on the day that the third round of informal meetings was beginning in New York on the situation in the Western Sahara .
This attack does not favour dialogue , agreements or peace ; on the contrary , it is an obstacle to a peaceful and fair outcome to the occupation of the Western Sahara .
I want to ask for calm from the parties .
Resolving this problem requires permanent dialogue between Morocco and the Saharan people , based on mutual respect and with the aim of fulfilling the United Nations resolutions , which include the Saharan people exercising their right to self-determination .
I will conclude with some self-criticism : we must always criticise violations of human rights .
It does not matter who , where , how or why they are perpetrated , because democratic principles and values must always come before interests .
I therefore ask the European Union for greater commitment .
( PT ) Madam President , the events in recent weeks in the Western Sahara were not an isolated incident .
They are part of a long history of three and a half decades of repression , violence and the oppression of a people .
Western Sahara 's history is one of constant attempts by Moroccans to block negotiations on the implementation of the Sahrawi people 's unalienable right to self-determination .
This is therefore the moment to once again condemn the brutal repression by Moroccan authorities of everyone in the occupied territories who resists colonisation and fights for their people 's legitimate right to self-determination .
This is also the time to expose the real humanitarian tragedy that is being forced upon the Sahrawi people , who are obliged to live far from their homeland in refugee camps , and to call for the urgent strengthening of international humanitarian aid .
There should also be demands for the enforcement of international law and UN resolutions , and the need to hold a referendum .
The European Union and the Member States have a great responsibility in all of this , which they cannot ignore lest they become accomplices , Morocco being a country that benefits from a special status due to several agreements that it has with the EU .
( ES ) Madam President , thousands of Saharans left their cities and peacefully set up the Gdaim Izyk camp in order to demand better living conditions .
The Moroccan security forces violently dismantled the camp and , as a result , serious riots broke out in Al Aaiún .
The Moroccan armed forces killed a young Saharan , and a Spanish citizen died in unclear circumstances .
There are currently no reliable figures regarding the number of deaths , injuries , disappearances or arrests during those riots .
Moreover , numerous MEPs have been banned from entering the Sahara , along with journalists who are still having serious problems doing their work .
Morocco is Europe 's friend and strategic ally , and it is not good to have doubts or misunderstandings between friends .
If Morocco has nothing to hide , it must allow the clarification of what happened .
Therefore , although it is true that the Moroccan Parliament has set up an investigative commission , I think it is essential that an international commission be set up , that European and politicians and journalists have freedom of access to the area and that the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara extend its mandate to the protection of human rights , both in the area controlled by Morocco and in the area controlled by Polisario .
The Commission and the European governments , least of all the Spanish Government , cannot look the other way in response to this situation .
Realpolitik must not be an excuse for turning a blind eye .
They must request clarification regarding these serious events and ask Morocco and the Polisario to resume discussions as soon as possible in order to arrive at a peaceful agreement on the basis of the United Nations resolutions .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to say to Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra that , ahead of resolving the conflict between Plato and the truth , perhaps we needed a little more time before coming up with this resolution , for at least two reasons .
Firstly , we could have collected all the information to help guarantee that Parliament would take a more solid stance and , secondly , a series of meetings and hearings had got under way in the relevant committees Parliament took the legitimate decision to move ahead immediately , In any case , this does not diminish the requirement for these hearings and the need to keep the negotiations with Morocco open .
I therefore believe that , after the vote , it is a good idea to apply our efforts in three specific directions : establishing a new leading role for Europe , with its diplomacy and neighbourhood policies ; contributing to a positive outcome to the negotiations opened by the United Nations ; and , finally , using all parliamentary instruments - beginning with the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the mixed committee - to ensure that the meeting goes ahead and helps find solutions .
I think it would be helpful to work determinedly towards these specific objectives .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner , who has clearly shown himself this evening to be on the side of appeasement .
Yes , we had to condemn the violence on both sides .
Yes , we needed to call for a lasting solution to this conflict , which has been going on now for over 30 years .
And yes , obviously , we needed to address the importance of press freedom , the cornerstone of any democratic country .
That being said , I still regret the lack of balance in this text on certain issues .
For instance , I would have liked mention to have been made of the fate of Mustapha Salma , the Polisario Front dissident kidnapped for having dared to call for dialogue .
Human rights are mentioned , of course , but not for everybody , which is regrettable .
In this conflict , it is not just a question of innocents on one side and guilty on the other .
There are responsibilities , albeit unequal , on both sides of this conflict , which has lasted over 30 years .
Above all - and this is essential - all parties share responsibility now for finding a just , realistic and sustainable solution , and when I say all parties , I mean Morocco , I mean the Polisario Front and also Algeria , a key symbolic player that is only mentioned in the final words of our resolution .
To conclude , I would just like to say , Madam President , that I fully support the proposals to continue this constructive dialogue as put forward by Mr Panzeri .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , amongst friends one can speak frankly and tell things as they are .
Hence , we are telling Morocco that it must do much more to resolve the Western Sahara situation .
The European Union cannot continue , and could not continue , to pretend that it is all nothing , because we risk committing a serious error .
We risk telling those who have chosen peace , like the Sahrawi people did through the Polisario Front , that they have chosen wrongly .
Those who do not send suicide bombers , who do not carry out attacks , and who trust only in international organisations do not make the news .
For these people the powers of the world do not come together .
Madam President , that is not right , because the Sahrawi are a courageous but mild-mannered people , they live their religion in the right way and their women have important roles in society .
The Sahrawi are fighting for their land , for which their love is as infinite as their desert ; and they are fighting for their identity , and it is not right that they are left to themselves .
The vote we have striven for tomorrow in this part-session is an important sign that the European Union is working to take a decisive role in the destiny of this area of land .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I welcome the clear words chosen by Mr Piebalgs .
It is important for the European Parliament to show clearly where it stands and also to condemn the brutality that has taken place there .
It has taken us a long time to hold the debate on Western Sahara in the European Parliament , and I think that we have been too hesitant in our actions and that we act only after there have been fatalities there .
I am pleased that we will be able to adopt a resolution tomorrow with all parties , which will perhaps not go as far as one or other of the groups would like , but it represents a broad consensus and is a clear signal to Morocco and to the population of Western Sahara that the European Parliament stands by its fundamental values .
As chair of the Intergroup , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to all of its members , who have ensured that Western Sahara has remained , and will continue to remain , on the agenda .
I am certain that , together with Mr Piebalgs and Baroness Ashton , we must remain committed to Western Sahara .
( PT ) Madam President , the brutal attack on the peaceful protest of the Sahrawi camp has stuck a serious blow to the negotiations under the auspices of the UN .
It reminded me of the worst times in East Timor : talks being held in the UN while the people were being attacked in order to thwart them .
Spain could be an advocate for the former colony that it abandoned , as Portugal was for self-determination in East Timor , but it is not , as it does not wish to compromise its commercial and other interests in Morocco .
It is now known that Madrid and the UN were warned of the attack .
It is but a short step from negligence to complicity .
France bears particular responsibility for encouraging Morocco to continue with the occupation .
As for the European Union , the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy only spoke of the attack weeks after it had happened , and did so in an extremely brief , irrelevant statement .
In this resolution Parliament is calling out to the European Union , demanding an international independent enquiry into the events and the identification of the dead , missing and prisoners , demanding unrestricted access to the international press , humanitarian organisations and observers , demanding that the UN monitor human rights in Western Sahara and demanding the immediate release of all Sahrawis detained in Morocco or in the occupied territory of Western Sahara .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have only one regret in this Chamber this evening , and that is that we are only discussing the Sahrawi people because the Moroccans have invaded the camp outside Laâyoune , and that is a shame for democracy in this Parliament .
Parliament should have found the will to discuss this issue of its own accord , as it has been rotting on international negotiating tables for 30 years .
This is the most significant political fact .
We were forced into it by acts of violence , not because we autonomously decided to guarantee human rights .
What is the fact that a referendum for self-determination should be held there , if not a question of respect for human rights ?
Precisely because Morocco is our friend , because Morocco is the strong party in the relationship , we must forcefully request that it is no longer possible to postpone this desire and follow up with all consequent actions .
We must seek to create the conditions so that the aim of the UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara ( MINURSO ) is not only to realise the conditions for a referendum which is constantly being postponed .
We must try to use all the means at the disposal of the European Union to bring this event about and ensure that the referendum does justice to a people 's 30 years of suffering .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , leaving aside this afternoon 's debate and the resolution which we will consider tomorrow , let us get back to the main issue , which I did not really hear mentioned during the debate just now .
A real national cause for Morocco , let us not forget that this major political issue is a diplomatic challenge for Morocco 's relations with the countries of Africa and the Maghreb , primarily Algeria .
Secondly , it is an economic challenge as this issue hinders the formation of a prosperous and stable Maghreb .
It is also a security challenge due to the activism of the al-qaeda terrorist organisation in Islamic Maghreb , and subsequently , it is a humanitarian challenge for the Sahrawi people in question , particularly those in the Tindouf camps , who cannot get out .
We must get back to what matters .
What matters is resolution 1920 , adopted unanimously by the UN , which requests that we be able to put the issue of autonomy proposed by Morocco on the table and which also calls for family visits between Western Sahara and the Tindouf camps .
So there , in essence , are the challenges we believe important .
As suggested by our colleague , Mr Panzeri , dialogue needs to be reopened with all parties , in particular with the Moroccan authorities in the weeks that follow , which will be done , as there are plans for the foreign affairs minister to appear before us on 1 December .
( ES ) Madam President , on 18 November , in the Spanish Parliament , the Minister Mrs Jiménez stressed that the opinion of the International Court of Justice in The Hague was that decolonisation has not yet taken place and that Western Sahara cannot be assimilated into Morocco .
There have been 35 years of illegal suffering and occupation .
The camp is the epitome of the distance between Morocco and the Saharan people , no matter how many settlers and soldiers they have introduced into the area from which they expelled thousands of genuine inhabitants .
Morocco is repressing with hatred what it knows to be a different people .
Soon there will be colonial trials such as the one that took place on 5 November in Casablanca , where foreign and European observers were beaten .
Let us prevent the destruction of a noble , heroic people group that is a friend of Europe .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , such a serious event as that which has taken place in recent weeks to the detriment of the Sahrawi people cannot go unpunished and therefore the European Parliament is duty-bound and required to intervene .
On the other hand , there is no doubt - as Mr Salafranca Sanchéz-Neyra rightly said - that over time the people of Morocco have made a series of important contributions to Africa , which mean that we can consider them not only friends , but particularly close to the positions held by the European Union .
Without prejudice to the penalty , which we are duty-bound to apply and is absolutely essential , a new path of negotiations should be associated with this , as already launched in the joint committee , which really allows fundamental rights to be protected , since they cannot continue to be violated as they have been , ahead of the United Nations throwing full light on the issue we are talking about today , in order to throw light on a violation of fundamental rights which really must be penalised .
( BG ) Madam President , I , too , wish to congratulate Commissioner Piebalgs for the exceptionally balanced , even presentation of the European Commission 's attitude to the events in Western Sahara .
I believe that we are at risk of doing more harm than good with this resolution because no attention is being paid to the efforts which Morocco is making to achieve a lasting , just solution to the Western Sahara conflict .
I would like to say that many international organisations are still there , conducting their investigations into what happened .
I believe that the best forum for dialogue with Morocco is the EU-Morocco Joint Parliamentary Committee .
I think that support needs to be given to the efforts to find a mutually acceptable solution under the auspices of the United Nations , rather than making biased statements .
( PL ) Madam President , I cannot emphasise too strongly that the situation in Western Sahara is rightly the cause of our concern .
We , in this Chamber , know very well that the conflict , which has been going on there for many years , may have effects in territories which are much further away .
There are people there who have no hope , who are being both repressed and humiliated .
In a situation like this , the people who have been humiliated can often constitute a natural base for terrorist activity .
They can be receptive to terrorist indoctrination , and Western Sahara may become a place from which terrorism is exported .
Therefore , the European Union should condemn all cases of violations of the law , but I think that greater effort should be made to help UN forces , so that they can be still more effective in ensuring security in the area .
( FR ) Madam President , on 8 November , the Moroccan authorities used violence in dismantling the camp set up near Laâyoune , in Western Sahara , resulting in deaths and numerous injuries .
I am absolutely outraged that a Member State , in this instance France , should object to the request for a UN fact-finding mission looking into these events .
Uganda 's proposal at the UN Security Council meeting on 16 November was however both legitimate and desirable .
It is all very well for France to hide behind the lack of decision on the part of the Security Council when it has abused its weight of veto power to prevent any light being shed on these incidents .
Would the truth be so hard to face ?
Europe , which likes to think itself exemplary in protecting human rights , must demand an independent and transparent fact-finding mission , under the aegis of the United Nations , and an extended mandate for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara ( MINURSO ) .
More generally , we are counting on Baroness Ashton for a fair and lasting solution to be brought to this unacceptable situation for the Sahrawi people .
( FR ) Madam President , like my fellow Members , I deplore the loss of life in this conflict .
However , I would like to say that the proposed text is unbalanced and I regret that the vote on this resolution has been rushed .
It would have been better to wait for the results of the investigations to have a proper discussion on solid foundations and to enable fellow Members to gain a true idea of what is really happening .
Indeed this could be seen as a way of influencing UN negotiations on the future of Western Sahara .
I must say that this worries me at a time when the Euro-Mediterranean policy is being relaunched .
It will take time to establish the facts and to know who is responsible for what .
As far as I am concerned , this is essential for the stability of this highly sensitive region and for the wellbeing of its people .
Madam President , I will also talk today about the upsetting developments in Western Sahara .
As we have been reading in our newspapers , there have been violent confrontations in refugee camps , where the bulk of the Western Saharan population have been confined since the Moroccan invasion of the 1970s .
To invade their country is one thing , but to confine a large percentage of the population in refugee camps is another .
The Western Sahara in Exile movement has courageously brought this situation to the world 's attention .
The UN Security Council has examined this latest violent episode , but stopped short of calling for an independent investigation .
It is a safe bet that the Moroccan authorities will be less than impartial if the investigation is left up to them .
The Moroccan authorities cannot even decide how many people were killed in the raid at the camp in Laâyoune .
Given the proximity of Western Sahara to Europe , and its potential to destabilize the sensitive North African region , this could escalate if things are not done soon .
I strongly believe that there should be an independent investigation and I call on the UN Security Council to launch one .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by pointing out that I did not believe it right to give our opinion so early on with a vote on the events that took place in Laâyoune on 8 November , when we do not have all the facts at our disposal to give us the necessary hindsight and objectivity .
Nevertheless , given these conditions , I am relieved to see that we have reached a relatively balanced and measured joint resolution which takes into account the concept of human rights and which does not unduly condemn either party , even though some points are questionable .
In any case , the most important thing I think is not to inflame the situation further so that investigations and negotiations can be conducted in an atmosphere of calm , and so I think it wise not to be drawn into challenging the privileged status of a neighbouring partner country on the basis of partial and often contradictory reports .
( DE ) Madam President , Morocco 's desire to suppress reports of the incidents in Western Sahara does not show the country in a good light .
When the Gaza aid flotilla was attacked there was an immediate international outcry .
However , when a protest camp was cleared in the occupied Western Sahara , with people being killed in the process , and the town in question was declared a no-go zone , even for journalists , there was a lack of combined dynamic action from the international community .
Of course , it was only to be expected that , in view of the intractable situation , the liberation movement would at some point no longer feel bound by the ceasefire .
This was also linked to a referendum on Western Sahara - a referendum the participants of which could never actually be agreed on .
Meanwhile , more and more Moroccans settled there .
In my opinion , these incidents must be fully investigated .
The European Union should act as a neutral mediator and try to bring both parties in the dispute to the table once again .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the compromise reached for the resolution .
As coordinator for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament in the Committee on Fisheries , I am also interested in the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
It is good that we are calling for the resolution for international law to be respected in connection with the exploitation of resources in Western Sahara .
Unfortunately , most Members of this House are not aware that there is an opinion issued by Parliament 's legal service which states that the current fisheries agreement with Morocco contravenes international law if it is not demonstrated that the people of Western Sahara benefit from the agreement .
There is currently no demonstration of this and the European Commission has therefore put negotiations concerning renewal of the agreement on hold .
I very much hope that a diplomatic solution can be found here .
However , it has to be clear to us that we cannot ignore international law on account of economic interests .
( DE ) Madam President , I , too , am very pleased that we finally have a resolution on the conflict in Western Sahara in this House .
I think this should have happened a lot sooner on other grounds , not only after the occurrence of these atrocious incidents in the Gdaim Izyk camp .
I really do not understand why Morocco is not prepared to allow an independent inquiry .
If it has nothing to hide , the inquiry should be carried out .
So why is it not being done ?
I very much hope that this resolution will be adopted in Parliament tomorrow - of course that does not mean that there should not be dialogue with Morocco .
Next week , the Moroccan and Algerian foreign ministers , as well as the Polisario Front , are invited to attend a meeting of the Committee of Foreign Affairs .
I hope they will come and engage in a discussion with us .
However , I do not think the suggestion to postpone the resolution is a sensible one , because , as the European Parliament , it is important for us to respect and support the principle of compliance with human rights , as well as the principle of a people 's right to self-determination - in this case for the Sahrawi .
I visited the camps close to Tindouf for the first time 23 years ago .
Since then , this people has been fighting to finally be able to observe its own law and to hold a referendum that is fair and just .
I am therefore pleased that this resolution is now on the table and that tomorrow it will hopefully actually be adopted , too .
( FR ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to say that it is true that we could have debated longer and come up with a different text .
At the same time , however , the text was given more or less the same time that is usually devoted to emergency resolutions .
Our Moroccan partners should therefore be told that this is , in fact , the consensus reached by the various political groups .
I believe that it is a stage of this dialogue .
Probably for the first time , I support the proposal made by Mr Panzeri for continued dialogue within the parliamentary committee on certain matters that bind us to our Moroccan colleagues .
It is a recently created committee which can be supported - why not ? - by a group of friends from Morocco , because there are a lot of them here .
I am also really looking forward to dialogue with the Moroccan Foreign Affairs Minster .
He has announced that he will address the Committee on Foreign Affairs next week .
This will present another opportunity to continue this dialogue .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , after very closely following the debate , I would like to stick to my initial statement .
I believe that it is very balanced and very correct .
I would just repeat the last sentence .
The United Nations Secretary-General has the support of the EU in achieving a just , lasting and mutually-acceptable political solution which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara , in agreement with the Security Council resolutions .
I would definitely encourage both sides to support the efforts of the United Nations .
Seven motions for resolutions have been tabled to wind up the debate .
That brings the debate to a close .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 00 and resumed at 21 : 00 )
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Looking carefully at the images available on the Internet , one can measure the level of violence used against the Moroccan law enforcement authorities .
The scenes witnessed at both the Gdaim Izyk camp and on the road to Laâyoune are evidence of the deadly acts of violence against the Moroccan security services .
Not even the emergency vehicles were spared .
The reality is very far removed from what the propaganda would have us believe .
Our Parliament therefore needs to show restraint and use discretion rather than unduly laying the blame on the Moroccan authorities and holding them fully responsible for this situation .
The latest violent events linked to the dispute between Morocco and the Polisario Front over the Western Sahara require greater attention due to the negative effects they could have on stability in the region .
The clearing of the camp at Laâyoune seems to have resulted in about a dozen deaths , more than 700 wounded , 150 missing and 160 arrested by the Moroccan authorities and is believed to have led to the killing of a Spanish citizen of Sahrawi origins , Baby Hamday Buyema .
We must not leave the Sahrawi people all alone , but we need to finish off the negotiations conducted under the aegis of the United Nations , in accordance with the principles of The Universal Declaration of Human Rights , particularly Article 2 .
The European Union must intervene and urge the Moroccan Government to avoid further bloodshed and release those Sahrawi who have been detained illegally .
The resumption of informal talks between the parties , which took place on 7 and 8 November 2010 , must represent the first sign that a fair solution can been peacefully accepted by the parties .
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Ukraine ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Commission on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on Ukraine .
I would first like to give the floor to Commissioner De Gucht on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Baroness Ashton .
Mr President , I have great pleasure this evening in debating the situation in Ukraine on behalf of Cathy Ashton , High Representative and Vice-President , who regrets her absence here today .
Today marks an important day for Ukraine with its OSCE Chairmanship for 2013 having been declared this morning .
It is a privilege , but also a responsibility and it will give Ukraine the opportunity to live up to expectations , which are certainly high .
I want to dwell now on our bilateral relations , marked last Monday by a summit at the Château Val Duchesse in Brussels , attended by President Yanukovych , as well as by Presidents Van Rompuy and Barroso .
Cathy Ashton took part in the discussion on international issues .
I was also there to take stock of the prospects for establishing , in the near future , a deep and comprehensive free trade area with a high level of ambition .
Our discussions were sincere , and I am confident that the summit has put a relationship that deserves to be more extensive and more tangible on the right track .
The two most important outcomes of the summit are the adoption of the action plan on the free movement of persons and the signing of the protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement enabling Ukraine to take part in EU programmes .
Other items on the agenda were the internal situation in Ukraine , current negotiations on the future Association Agreement and the reform process .
Ukraine is part of our neighbourhood .
We are therefore trying to embrace its proximity , and Ukraine 's neighbourhood is not standing still , either , if you think about the NATO summit this weekend and today 's conclusion of bilateral negotiations in Brussels , where I was just a few hours ago , enabling the EU to support Russia 's accession to the WTO .
Let us get back to the summit .
The current government has undertaken a number of important economic reforms , which we have welcomed .
Firstly , there is the public procurement law , which should play an important role in the fight against corruption .
Agreements have been entered into with the IMF and important reforms have been introduced in the key energy sector .
The Ukrainian Government has been fairly successful in stabilising the situation in the country .
This is obviously very important .
Nevertheless , we are concerned by continued reports of a corrosion of fundamental freedoms and democratic principles in Ukraine .
Of particular concern are grievances voiced regarding freedom of the media and freedom of assembly and of association .
Furthermore , as you know , the Ukrainian Constitutional Court has recently overturned the 2004 constitution , which was adopted during the Orange Revolution .
So it is the 1996 constitution , which gives increased power to the President , which once again applies .
This very controversial decision is evidence that an open and participative constitutional reform process is needed in Ukraine .
This process should be aimed at establishing a sustainable system of checks and balances in line with European standards .
This subject was also raised in your resolution in February .
Another very recent decision taken by the Constitutional Court , which is open to various interpretations , is the duration of the current parliament 's mandate .
Whereas the 1996 constitution , which is currently in force , provides for a four-year mandate , the Court has ruled that the current parliament 's powers will only expire after five years , as it was elected during the period covered by the 2004 constitution .
This decision conveys the ' à la carte ' approach which is increasingly being adopted by the current administration .
Once again , Ukraine sorely needs an open and participative constitutional reform process , not decisions made according to circumstances .
In recent years , the level of political freedom has been very high in Ukraine , with election after election being recognised by credible bodies as conforming to international standards .
It is therefore regrettable to note that the latest municipal elections held on 31 October were criticised by most observers .
Although those criticisms concerned only technical and procedural aspects , it was still a step backwards .
Democratic values and principles along with human rights are fundamental principles for EU Member States .
They are principles on which there can be no compromise , all the more so as we are talking here about a key partner .
Shared values for a common future : this is the challenge of the future association between Ukraine and the EU .
As we did at the summit last Monday and for as long as problems persist , we must continue to send a very clear message regarding respect for fundamental values .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to offer my sincere thanks for the statement that has been given here on behalf of the High Representative , and to which I actually have very little to add .
I believe that we can safely say that reforms and greater stability have been decided on , including for reasons relating to parliamentary stability , and that is to be welcomed , but we must also note that although the last parliamentary elections were fair and just , the local elections were not , because they were changed and the opposition did not have an equal opportunity to draw up lists everywhere .
I believe we must also take note of the fact that the head of the secret service also has a top supervisory role in the constitutional court and that judges are being replaced there in order to overturn the constitution of the Orange Revolution .
These are facts .
I would therefore like to express my thanks for the statement that the issues of common values and of fundamental rights play a crucial role .
The European Perspective for Ukraine is , of course , also an important issue .
On the other hand , I am pleased that vital progress was made on important matters at the summit on Monday .
The words of criticism that I have just expressed should not be dependent , or be made dependent , on what happens in this phase with regard to visa facilities .
It is good and important for us to make progress in this area .
It is important that we make progress with regard to the deepened Free Trade Area , which will bring Ukraine closer to the European internal market , and make it clear that not only the political but also the economic perspective of Ukraine lies in Europe .
It does not make any sense to adopt a Russian economic system without having Russian raw materials .
The European market will then be of much greater interest to Ukraine and that should also improve with the Association Agreement .
However , I think that we should be clear in our minds that this is not only in the interests of Ukraine but it is also in our own interests and that we should attach importance to ensuring that the external and internal development of Turkey progresses in a way that satisfies our common interests here .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , my group 's philosophy on Ukraine-European Union relations today could be expressed by the following paraphrase of a famous speech : do not ask what Ukraine could do for the European Union , but ask what the European could do for Ukraine , in order to have in Ukraine a reliable pillar of the European Union project .
To this end , the European Union approach on Ukraine should be balanced , fair , fact-based and strategic .
I believe that these criteria were met by the results of the recent summit , and I would like to thank the Commissioner for expressing our approach in this way .
' Balanced ' means asking for improvements and at the same time offering assistance .
' Fair ' means avoiding taking sides in internal political controversies and using the same standards when evaluating the actions of parties wearing the colour we like and those wearing the colour we do not like .
' Fact-based ' means deciding to trust in evidence and not mere allegations , rumours and prejudices .
' Strategic ' means promoting policies which could allow Ukraine to become organically integrated in the European Union project and not policies which are meant to use Ukraine in our confrontation with its neighbours .
The compromise resolution we are supposed to be adopting following today 's debate is not a perfect but a decent example of such an approach .
I have to deplore a few mistakes in the printing of the text .
We must ask all political players in Ukraine to avoid presenting this resolution as a victory of one against another .
In fact , this resolution is meant to send to all Ukrainian political forces the message that it is high time for them to unite behind a minimum national agenda and to deliver the long-awaited reforms , policies and political results which would assure a better life for the people and a better opportunity for the country , with the aim of European integration .
There is no need for internationalisation of the internal controversies in Ukraine .
Let us all accomplish our duties both here and there , and the future will reward all of us .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is interesting to see that Ukraine is so often on our agenda .
I hope this signifies progress in our relationship .
I tend to believe that , with pragmatism and respect on both sides , understanding differences but finding common interests , we can build on common projects and achieve an honest partnership .
I appreciate the recent statements of the Ukrainian leadership , which I hope now are putting aside some fears that Ukraine is moving away from a European future .
On the other hand , any debate on Ukraine has a tendency to become a war between the European political families of the opposition and government political parties of Ukraine .
I think this does not help , because it is not about who is better - government or opposition - or who is better supported by the Europeans , it is about Ukrainian citizens ' democratic future , and about Ukrainians having a strong , democratic and prosperous country .
The summit that took place this week achieved good results in fostering access to EU programmes and in the negotiations on the association agreement .
I am particularly happy to see long-awaited progress towards a free trade area .
Of course , much remains to be done , in terms both of economic and institutional reforms , and the steps taken should be consolidated .
No exemptions should be allowed to be made under the public procurement law , which was adopted earlier this year - not even for the European football championship .
While a new tax code is a good step towards improving the fiscal environment , this should not become a burden , especially on SMEs , which play such an important role in any healthy economy .
But let me be clear .
This is not about us telling Ukraine what to do , and it is not about what Ukraine needs to do for us .
It is primarily about what Ukraine needs to do for itself , because both institutional and economic reforms are a prerequisite for a prosperous democratic future , and this is in the Ukrainian citizens ' best interest .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in recent days , large protests have been taking place in Kiev , Lugansk , Kharkov and many other large and small towns in Ukraine .
Tens or hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian citizens are taking to the street .
They are protesting against tax laws that they consider to be unfair .
If our resolution is directed at anyone , then in this context it should , in my opinion , be the Ukrainian citizens , who with this protest are guaranteeing that Ukraine 's development as a democracy continues .
Our resolution , which expresses concerns over the erosion of a democracy , is of course directed at the government and the authorities , particularly in connection with these protests , in particular the interior authorities of Ukraine , to urge them to allow these protests to continue .
Hundreds of thousands , perhaps millions , of people are expected to be in Kiev tomorrow .
I must admit that I am very anxiously following developments here and I am not without concerns about what might happen .
So far , so good - touch wood .
In the last few days , the government has shown that the freedom of assembly is operating .
I very much hope that that will continue to be the case .
I think it was very important for us to make this a cross-group resolution .
It would be a grave mistake for the development of Ukraine if in future one side of this House should side with the Party of Regions and the other with Yulia Tymoshenko 's party .
That would not help the democratic development of Ukraine .
I hope that this resolution will be taken seriously - even if we adopt it after the summit - particularly in view of the large protests and people 's concerns about the effects of the IMF reform , and that we follow what is happening now in Kiev and Ukraine in general very closely .
Thank you for your attention and I hope that we - including the Commission - will continue to show solidarity in our work together with this country , which is so close to us as Europeans .
Mr President , in the European Parliament , we have had several weeks of fascinating debate on Ukrainian affairs .
I think this has been a very good thing .
The results of our proceedings are being followed with great interest in Ukraine - greater than in many countries of the European Union .
Let us , therefore , treat our resolution as a letter , not to one or other party , but as a letter to Ukrainians , in which we will say sincerely that we are watching with interest what is happening , and that we are neighbours who are ready to open the door to Ukraine and who want more contact with the country 's citizens .
I would like to thank Mrs Harms very much for her splendid words .
She always senses so very well what needs to be said at such moments .
Let us speak sincerely about the elections , which did not satisfy us .
Many features of the elections were of a standard which left much to be desired .
It did not prove possible to maintain the good trend of the previous elections , but let us say , too , that there is still a chance for Ukraine and that we want to help Ukraine in this .
Therefore , let us say what good things are happening there , and that not only in the area of economics , but also in the area of politics and above all in relation to every Ukrainian the door to Europe is open , and that it is good that such a signal has come this week from the European Union-Ukraine Summit .
It is a good coincidence that we are talking , today , about the fact that the resolution is not for one or other party in Ukraine .
It is for Ukrainians , and we are adopting it together .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , whenever Ukraine is mentioned , the average EU citizen thinks of the boxer Klitschko , easily defeating his opponents .
In economic terms , however , Ukraine has a similarly important weight and a number of EU and Balkan countries are dependent on transport routes supplying them with Central Asian and Siberian oil and natural gas through Ukrainian territory .
It is clearly the most important player out of the Eastern Partnership countries .
I therefore welcome the improved relations with Russia and the results of the EU-Ukraine summit .
In many EU countries , Ukrainians make up a significant portion of the foreign workers , and mutual trade between Ukraine and the EU is showing dynamic growth .
The main problems of the country are the same problems facing many EU countries : corruption , an unfavourable visa regime and mutually incompatible legislation .
It should be mentioned that , according to observers , the municipal elections passed off without major technical shortcomings .
The resolution proposed across the political spectrum represents a balanced compromise , and although I might have reservations over some of the details , the GUE / NGL Group supports it .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the many , sometimes incredible , irregularities in the local and regional elections in Ukraine on 31 October must be a red flag for the European Union .
To give just a couple of examples : the massive-scale , uncontrolled printing of additional ballot papers in many regions and the photographing of ballot papers , and what about the massive pressure on officials , teachers , doctors and professors to refrain from standing for opposition parties ?
The European Union - and you can do this - should be taking a firm stance against this bad , undemocratic overture to the 2012 Ukrainian parliamentary elections ; maintaining our own political values in the face of authoritarian tendencies in Ukraine .
If not , we risk our credibility among the top elites in the country and , in particular , among the reform-minded and democratic forces .
Fortunately your clear speech , Commissioner , gives no cause for concern on this score .
( DE ) Mr President , we all know that Ukraine is one of the EU 's largest neighbouring states and that it has a considerable amount of potential for the future .
Therefore , it is certainly an extremely important partner for the EU .
However , from a political point of view it seems noticeably to be distancing itself from the EU .
It was , of course , not without reason that the pro-Russian fraction was successful in the last local elections .
That probably also represented a defeat for the European Union .
The EU is therefore clearly losing its attraction for Ukrainians .
Ordinary citizens in Ukraine would probably like to be European , but not necessarily part of the European Union .
The EU is gradually giving away its trump cards here by acting rather like an arrogant superpower .
The Ukrainians , however , would no doubt like to be regarded as equal partners , by the EU as well as by Russia .
Therefore , let us not merely look down on the Ukrainians from a lofty height as if their highest goal could only possibly be accession to the EU .
Let us give them the chance to develop their own identity over the coming years and then to decide whether they want to draw closer to the EU or perhaps would prefer to remain independent .
( DE ) Mr President , there is huge potential for cooperation between the EU and Ukraine .
That was evident at the summit .
The Action Plan towards visa liberalisation and the Association Agreement are just two examples that demonstrate this .
In this compromise resolution - and this is evident from the aspects from which this resolution is put together - we have also highlighted the potentially positive aspects .
However , I would like to quote an English proverb , which says that the proof of the pudding is in the eating .
Whether the reform package and reform laws will actually be implemented in practice remains to be seen .
The Commissioner mentioned the Law on Public Procurement .
A major exception to this has just been adopted .
All procurements in connection with the European Football Championship have been excluded from the scope of this law .
I can already very well imagine who will grow wonderfully rich as a result of this .
Thus , this is an example of the principle being held in high esteem , but things looking very different in practice .
I would like to expressly thank the Commissioner for expressing concern about freedom of the press , freedom of assembly and freedom of expression and also clearly stating that the local elections represent a backward step .
At least that was how it was expressed in the German translation .
That is also the view of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , and we have also expressed that view very clearly .
If Mr Severin is claiming that there is no need to internationalise internal conflicts , that to me is a nicer way of putting what was previously referred to as the principle of non-interference in internal affairs .
There has been too much of this , and this should not therefore be the principle that guides our actions in respect of Ukraine .
Precisely because we want to bring this country closer to Europe , it must also allow itself to be measured by European standards .
For that reason , Mrs Harms is right in what she said , namely that we must now remain in very close contact with Ukraine and ensure that what has been achieved there in terms of democracy and human rights is not called into question once again by a backward-looking policy .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us be frank .
Unfortunately , the Orange Revolution , and I would like to emphasise the word ' unfortunately ' here , has not achieved what it should have done .
This is because of the dispute between Mrs Tymoshenko and Mr Yushchenko , among other things .
Mr Yushchenko is now saying that Mrs Tymoshenko is exactly the same as Mr Yanukovych , which is interesting .
Sadly , the local elections have not lived up to our expectations .
They did not comply with European standards and this has now also become clear to the people of Ukraine .
Let us be honest , what Mr Severin meant was something quite different , Mr Gahler .
You should talk to Mrs Tymoshenko in the same way as we do to our friends in the Ukrainian Party of Regions , in other words , you should encourage her to take the European route .
Let us leave the oligarchs behind us and move towards a democratic state .
Do not attempt to interrupt the work of Parliament and we will definitely exert pressure to ensure that European legal standards are met .
Mrs Harms is sitting in the middle .
Although this is not always the position taken by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , we can agree on what Mrs Harms has said .
Let us give this country a helping hand , on the basis of European standards and a European legal system .
This is important on all sides .
It is our policy and we will continue with it until we get somewhere .
This is why we were critical of the fact that the elections did not go well .
Make sure that Mrs Tymoshenko helps to set up a constructive opposition .
Advise Mrs Tymoshenko in the same way as we did Mr Yanukovych .

( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I will start with the words of Mr Severin , who said a very important thing , namely that we should try to think what we can do for Ukraine , and not what the Ukrainians can do for us .
I would like to thank Mr Severin for those words , because this is , indeed , what we should do .
Yes , those elections were not conducted in the way we wanted .
Things happened there which should not have happened .
However , I agree with Mrs Harms , who says that what we should do is not to look for support from one or other party , but to look at what the Ukrainians want and what we want .
Therefore , the integration of Ukraine with European structures , and let us say this clearly - membership of the European Union - is in the interest of the European Union and also of the Ukrainians themselves .
In my opinion , this raising of the standards expected of the Ukrainians is a little dishonest .
This is because in this Chamber there are those who are very magnanimous towards their strategic partners on questions of human rights , freedom of speech and freedom of the press .
Meanwhile , they are very substantially raising and increasing the standard expected of our friends from Ukraine .
We need to exercise moderation , here .
The Ukrainians deserve our cooperation , our words of support and - as Mr Swoboda has said - this is regardless of whether it is this or that camp .
The same thing sometimes happens here - certain divisions lose significance because the issue itself is more important than the divisions .
That issue is the closest possible cooperation between the European Union and Ukraine .
Mr President , I know Ukraine from visits to Kiev and the Crimea and collect Ukrainian artists such as Tetenko and Shishko .
The Ukrainians are a good , generous , warm-hearted people , but politically I would counsel great care .
Ukraine is a country divided between a pro-western west and a Russian-facing east .
It is also a big player , with 45 million citizens , and Russia sees the country as very much in its backyard .
I have toured the Russian fleet in Sevastopol , on the Crimean peninsula .
The Russians will jealously guard access to the Black Sea from there .
Any talk of Ukraine joining NATO would be a sharp kick to the Russian Bear .
A clumsy diplomatic approach by Baroness Ashton could exacerbate tensions at a difficult time , whilst the cost of forcing Ukraine into the EU in terms of farming subsidies , regional aid and mass migration would be prohibitive .
Better to help in other ways and keep Ukraine as a proud , independent , non-EU nation .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we all agree that due to its large geographical size and population , Ukraine is of strategic and perhaps even of key significance to the European Union .
I do , however , find two issues missing from the report .
One of them is a mention of minorities in the Ukraine .
As we all know , only around 65-70 % of Ukraine 's population is Ukrainian , even if we include the Ruthenian population .
There is a fairly large Russian minority living there , as well as many Hungarians , Tatars and Romanians .
I strongly suggest that this be included in the report and that our concerns regarding minorities be voiced in our demands .
It is also worth mentioning the need to support local education , namely minority education and the use of minority languages , and the fact that local monuments of the Subcarpathian Hungarian minority have been vandalised .
The other issue is that I regret that we have not spoken out more emphatically against the fraud committed during the local government elections .
I hereby call on the EU to ask Ukraine to provide clarification on these two issues .
( PL ) Mr President , this week is a good one for EU-Ukraine relations .
First , during the summit on Monday , we jointly established a road map for the deregulation of visa traffic .
Next , tomorrow , we are going to vote on what I think is a good European Parliament resolution which opens up possibilities for further cooperation and a strengthening of cooperation between the European Union and Ukraine .
It opens up such a possibility , and at the same time ends a very important discussion which had been taking place on this subject in the European Parliament .
It is a good thing that we have reached a compromise and that we are speaking in agreement .
We are unanimous in what we are saying , not to particular political groups in Ukraine , not to the ruling group of President Yanukovych or the opposition of Mrs Tymoshenko , but we are talking first and foremost to Ukrainians themselves .
We want Ukraine to reform in a way which will , in the future , enable it to become a part of the European Union .
This is extremely important .
It is important to judge the work of the Ukrainian Government on its merits and on the basis of its actions .
It needs to be said that this is , firstly , the first government for many years which has begun to introduce reforms in cooperation with the International Monetary Fund , and it can be seen , today , that these reforms are having a beneficial effect on the economy - it can be seen clearly that there is a chance the period of stagnation which has been in evidence in recent years in Ukraine will come to an end .
On the other hand , Ukraine itself is saying that it wants to become a part of the European Union , which is why it is giving us the right to evaluate it in accordance with European standards .
This is why we must , of course , deal with questions concerning the irregularities which occurred during the recent elections .
( PL ) Mr President , we are talking , today , in a different atmosphere than that of a month ago .
Emotions have subsided .
The words we have included in the motion for a resolution are more appropriate to the real situation .
It is good that Parliament is trying to speak as one , although these words are at times inept and sometimes reveal great incompetence .
What is this resolution about ?
It is , in fact , about the quality of democracy , and about how much the European Parliament wants democracy in Ukraine to be of a high quality .
The resolution is directed to both sides of the ' blue-orange ' divide .
Over the past five years in Ukraine , the situation has been one in which first the ' orange ' party won , then the ' blue ' party , then the ' orange ' party won again , and now the ' blue ' party is in government .
I would like the ' blue ' group - President Yanukovych , Prime Minister Azarov , the Party of the Regions - to hear from this House that they are responsible for protecting the great heritage of Independence Square , the great heritage of what several million people demanded in Independence Square several years ago .
They are responsible , because it is they who hold power .
I also want these words to be heard by Yulia Tymoshenko , who is responsible for the opposition 's image .
I would like the great opposition leader - Yulia Tymoshenko - to understand that when in opposition it is not enough just to demand power .
It is necessary to have an alternative for the country , and to show people this alternative and interest them in it so that they understand .
If the ' blue ' and the ' orange ' groups understand that they are in power for a while and then are in opposition for a while , and that in fact Ukraine needs the same care , the same imagination and the same courage all the time , we will have achieved a great success , because we will have helped them in this .
To my fellow member from the Czech Republic - it is not Victor Klitschko , but Vitali Klitschko who has been giving the Americans a pounding in German boxing rings .
There are two Klitschkos .
The fact that Ukraine has produced two such boxers shows what a great country it is .
Mr President , one of the most important results of the collapse of the Soviet Union was the creation of an independent Ukraine .
It is a country which can be seen as a future member of the European Community .
I can only welcome the fact that President Yanukovych and the new parliament have confirmed their aspirations to join Europe , because a genuinely independent and democratic Ukraine , free of corruption and a fear of power structures and oligarchs , and a Ukraine which is firmly based on the rule of law is , and will be , an irreplaceable factor of stability for the whole continent .
Without a genuinely democratic Ukraine , it is hard to imagine a genuinely democratic Russia .
Yesterday marked six years since the start of the Orange Revolution .
Sadly , the huge potential of that change has been wasted .
However , thanks to the victory of democratic protesters in December 2004 , the credibility of multi-party elections and the freedom of the press was established .
In its draft resolution , the European Parliament expresses concern over the increasing number of reports that democratic freedoms and rights , including the freedom of the media , have been under threat and that security services have started to intervene in the democratic activities of citizens once again .
I would like to send an important message to the new government , which is that Europe is open to all fields of cooperation , but the price of that cooperation can never be to ignore the curbing of basic freedoms .
As true friends of Ukraine , we need more than ever to be frank , friendly and consistent in asserting our values .
It is regrettable that , six years on , the new elites still cannot accept the Orange Revolution as a genuine expression of popular will .
Coming to terms with the causes and results of that revolution can only improve the integration of Ukrainian society .
( PL ) Mr President , I do not want to speak about what we have to do for Ukraine or what Ukraine has to do for us , I want to talk about what Ukraine has to do for itself , because its fate is , in fact , in its own hands .
On the one hand , Ukraine declares a desire for integration with the European Union , but on the other hand , we continue to receive numerous reports of violations of civil liberties there .
In the last few days , the European Parliament has received an appeal from journalists at the Ukrainian television station TVi , who complain of political pressure and constant surveillance .
There is a similar problem at the commercial TV station Channel 5 .
On the other hand , independent analytical centres in Ukraine have reported recently that out of 69 planned reforms , only four have been made .
During recent discussions in the European Parliament , some Members were of the opinion that criticising undemocratic behaviour discourages both the European Commission and the Ukrainian authorities from seeking closer relations between Ukraine and the European Union , so it is better not to condemn the Ukrainian authorities , but to encourage them to undertake reforms .
However , I think the European Parliament should , above all , guard democratic values and call attention to the need for the rule of law .
A realistic policy , a policy of pressure , incentives and negotiations should be pursued by governments , while the European Parliament should condemn the violation of democratic freedoms and persuade the European Commission to use the tools which are available to the Union for this purpose , by which I mean programmes for promoting democracy .
I am pleased that as a result of Monday 's EU-Ukraine Summit , a protocol has been signed which will give Ukraine access to certain EU programmes , and that action has been taken over lifting the visa requirement .
However , progress on reform and democracy are in the hands of Ukraine .
( PL ) Mr President , during the October part-session , Commissioner Füle stressed that relations with Ukraine should be looked at from the point of view of three events , namely EU-Ukraine meetings at ministerial level , the local elections and the EU-Ukraine Summit .
I am particularly disturbed by the local elections , which I had the opportunity to observe together with my fellow Member Mr Kowal .
Unfortunately , the introduction of changes to electoral law three months before the elections and the repeal of the Constitution of 2004 may suggest that Ukrainian citizens do not have a sense of the certainty and permanence of the law .
In addition , the infringements which occurred during the elections themselves may be a cause of doubt as to whether democratic standards were upheld .
The fight against corruption and increasing transparency in the work of the public administration should also be an important element of reform .
I would like , however , to express the hope that the resolution will be an encouragement to Ukraine to continue the path , which has now begun , of economic and institutional reforms .
( LT ) Mr President , Parliament 's compromise resolution on Ukraine is crucial for the people of Ukraine , but let us not forget that it is also very significant for the people of the European Union , because Ukraine is an important partner of ours , especially in implementing the European Neighbourhood Policy with Eastern Europe .
Therefore it is really very important for us to continue to strive for close cooperation , in particular in the field of visa requirements .
Thus both the Commission and the Council must draft an action plan as soon as possible on establishing a visa free regime .
We must also agree on the free trade agreement soon .
In order to ensure long-term political stability both within the country and with neighbouring countries , it is doubtless very important for Ukraine to implement constitutional reforms , but we - the European Union and its institutions - must understand that this requires time and we must not always criticise , but help Ukraine integrate into our family .
( ET ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Ukraine is predictably unpredictable .
I am very pleased that this assessment given by the European Policy Centre is starting to fade .
I am very pleased that the Ukrainian Government has managed to stabilise the situation .
It is good that unemployment is also falling and that the economy is growing .
Ukraine is interested in cooperating with the European Union , but the interest is mutual .
The European Union also has an interest in the existence of democratic rule on its borders .
Today we can reproach Ukraine for the situation with regard to human rights and fundamental rights .
We are frightened by corruption and its entanglement with politics .
Ukraine knows , however , that the European Union will make no concessions on this issue .
Here we must create real cooperation .
Finally , I cannot finish without saying that the decision of this House last month to postpone the adoption of the report was a wise one .
Tomorrow we will be adopting a comprehensive and balanced report from which Ukraine will truly benefit .
( BG ) Mr President , I was a member of Parliament 's delegation which visited Ukraine .
Quite frankly , I returned with mixed feelings .
While there , we saw protests and numerous disturbances .
However , we also saw some positive signs .
I welcome the decision made by the Constitutional Court concerning the parliamentary term of office because it removes a major obstacle blocking the path to stability .
Fellow Members , nearly 1 million people of Bulgarian origin live in Ukraine .
This means 1 million potential ambassadors for the European idea in Ukraine who have nothing to do with and are not guilty of involvement in oligarchic power games .
We must find a way , as part of the visa policy , to ensure that these people , who with their ancestors have been cut off from their homeland for more than 300 years , have the opportunity to travel freely to Bulgaria and export our European ideals from there to Ukraine .
( LT ) Mr President , not so long ago , Ukraine was doubtless ahead of our other Eastern neighbours , in terms of the application of European standards , economic and legal reforms and the internal political process .
Of course , recent events in this country are worrying , and so I feel that we really must express to our partner Ukraine our concern over those ills that we see , in particular the powers that have been given to Ukraine 's security service , and the measures that the security service has taken , attempting to intimidate non-governmental organisations and control Ukraine 's press .
At the same time , I would like to say something else .
We should support the process of Ukraine 's European integration .
We can use a carrot and stick policy , but there must be more carrot .
We should bring Ukraine closer to the European Union and not push it further away .
I believe that Ukraine 's membership of the European Union is also our strategic objective , and so we must find suitable means of achieving that objective .
( LV ) Mr President , I have a question for all Members .
Why did we need this resolution on Ukraine at this time ?
To help Ukraine 's new government or to interfere in the internal affairs of that country in advance of the local elections and prevent them from improving the situation in the country by themselves ?
To interfere in advance of the local elections , it would appear .
On the sly , a text was drawn up containing the opinion that everything in Ukraine is going very badly .
However , those people who want to portray the real situation in Ukraine in a different light are mistaken .
From now on , we should first reflect the facts properly and more broadly , and write only afterwards .
We must be very serious in our conclusions , for we shall surely reap what we sow . Thank you .
( RO ) Mr President , one important point in today 's debate has been the criticism concerning the transparency and integrity of the local elections held on 31 October .
It has been justifiably levelled at the government 's increased influence over the media , the political role of the secret services and the adoption of a new electoral law which puts the opposition parties at a disadvantage .
Ukraine remains a key partner for the EU .
In this respect , I welcome the EU 's involvement in the process of reform and democratisation , reconfirmed during Monday 's summit .
The partnership with Ukraine is also natural for Romania , given the important role they play in the Black Sea region and the common challenges they face in terms of energy security .
As has already happened for the Republic of Moldova , a local border traffic agreement is expected to be finalised with Ukraine , in accordance with EU regulations .
My country has also voiced its support in favour of launching the EU action plan aimed at visa liberalisation for Ukrainian citizens .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first answer a factual question on the public procurement law that has been put to me by Mrs Vălean .
When the law was passed we welcomed it .
However , subsequent amendments altered the quality of the law .
The Commission is closely following these recent developments and a change for the better is also one of the conditions for disbursement of our budget support in the energy sector .
Apart from that , I very much welcome the across-the-board agreement on what the analysis of the current situation in Ukraine should be .
This is duly reflected in the resolution that will be put to a vote tomorrow .
I really believe that if we , as the European Parliament and the European Union , want to have an influence in this specific matter then having an across-the-board agreement on the principles of such a position is very important .
So I welcome this on behalf of the Commission and on behalf of the High Representative .
Six motions for resolutions have been tabled to wind up the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I wish to recall that any country is entitled to become a member of the EU , as stipulated by Article 49 of the Treaties of the Union .
It is precisely because Ukraine wishes to become a member of the EU one day that I am deeply concerned by the way in which the local elections passed off recently in this country .
The elections were not free , fair or democratic .
The legislative amendment made shortly before the ballot , as well as the fact that the Party of Regions was ' pushed ' to the top of the electoral lists in 85 % of cases through the late registration of the opposition parties , along with other obstacles preventing fair representation for opposition parties raise a question mark over the nature of the political system .
Just as the US Government has also highlighted , the local elections were obviously below the standard of the presidential elections in January .
To demonstrate their commitment to democratic values , Ukraine 's leaders must adopt electoral legislation which complies with international standards .
The complicated nature of the situation in the country of our eastern neighbour is demonstrated by the very intensive discussion which took place recently in this Chamber .
It is certain that we cannot ignore the irregularities to which we were witnesses before and after the recent local elections , for these irregularities mean that Ukraine still does not come up to what we regard as the European standard in terms of political culture .
However , we cannot fail to notice the positive effects of the changes which are taking place in Ukraine and , in particular , the effort being put into making economic reforms - things which were confirmed , too , by the recent EU-Ukraine Summit .
It is this compromise which should become the position of Parliament .
Human rights , social and environmental standards in International Trade agreements - International Trade Policy in the context of Climate Change imperatives - Corporate social responsibility in international trade agreements ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports on the subject of international trade :
by Mrs Saïfi , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on human rights , social and environmental standards in international trade agreements ;
by Mr Jadot , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on international trade policy in the context of climate change imperatives ;
by Mr Désir , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on corporate social responsibility in international trade agreements .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the subject of this report has provoked debate within the international community .
Developing countries think that developed countries invoke human rights clauses to establish a form of disguised protectionism , whereas developed countries denounce the social and environmental dumping of emerging countries .
I wanted to adopt a positive approach by showing how social and environmental standards and commercial interests can be mutually supportive if all countries are on a level playing field .
The EU must exert its influence in international trade to initiate a change .
It would be acting in accordance with its founding texts , which state that the EU should contribute in particular to sustainable development , free and fair trade and the protection of human rights .
To my mind , it must act simultaneously at multilateral , bilateral and unilateral level .
At multilateral level , the EU must encourage international organisations , in particular the World Trade Organisation , to take social and environmental standards more into account .
At the same time , these international organisations should work together more .
That is why , in particular , I propose that the International Labour Organisation should be granted official observer status in the WTO .
As for the environment , I believe that priority should be given to improving access to green goods and technologies , as not only do they promote new forms of employment policies , they also provide new growth opportunities for high-performing European businesses working in this field .
Consideration must also be given to setting up a genuine World Environmental Organisation to which cases of environmental dumping could be referred .
The bilateral level is the one at which the EU can really set an example .
While I am pleased that the ' new-generation ' free trade agreements contain a binding human rights clause , I would like it if this were also extended to the chapter on sustainable development .
Furthermore , the European Commission negotiates these agreements .
It should ensure that they include a set of social and environmental standards to be respected by all the EU 's trading partners .
Depending on the degree of economic , social and environmental development in the country concerned , these basic standards could be supplemented by additional conventions , on a case by case basis .
This gradual and flexible approach would allow for fairer dealings with our various trade partners and would be more equitable for all .
Above all , there needs to be greater monitoring of the implementation of bilateral agreements .
I therefore propose that impact assessments be carried out before , during and after the negotiations and that they no longer cover just sustainable development but also look at the issue of human rights .
Lastly , I have great hopes that things will happen quickly at unilateral level , since the generalised system of preferences should be reformed quite soon .
As you know , the GSP requires the ratification of some 30 international conventions on human and labour rights , environmental protection and good governance .
While these conventions have been widely ratified , in practice they have been poorly implemented , and it is on this point that we should focus our efforts .
The Commission must launch investigations , or even remove preferences if there are a number of signs leading it to believe that conventions are not being implemented .
To conclude , some of these actions can be taken now , but attitudes will not change overnight .
The EU must take gradual action at all levels to achieve fairer and more equitable trade relations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , just as the European Union is trying to redefine its trade policy after the Treaty of Lisbon , while at the same time trying to reconcile it with its industrial policy , the fact that this Parliament is simultaneously debating three reports that address issues ultimately falling within the same political and public debate on ' what is trade and how can it be reconciled with social , environmental and human rights issues ? ' is to be welcomed .
In fact , we are ultimately in a state of permanent schizophrenia : everywhere , companies are relocating , social rights are being called into question , environmental degradation is increasing and , at the same time , we are negotiating free trade agreements , we are negotiating within the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) a whole series of measures which , unfortunately , are totally out of step with the public debate in which our citizens are trying to engage .
How can we explain to our public today that a football entering the European market produced under decent working conditions , where the environment is respected , and a football produced by child labour or in a country where trade unions are prohibited is the same football ?
We cannot explain this to our public .
Our responsibility today is therefore to integrate these environmental and social issues into trade .
Regarding my report more specifically , with respect to trade there are currently a number of European countries whose imports of products largely offset the reductions in their own emissions .
A third of Europe 's emissions are not produced in Europe but correspond to imported goods .
It is therefore essential to integrate the climate issue into our trade policies .
How can we explain to our public that , at the same time as concluding a free trade agreement which will potentially lead to deforestation , we are going to Cancún to negotiate a Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation ( REDD ) agreement aimed at providing financial compensation for non-deforestation in the countries of the South ?
It is therefore essential to reconcile these different issues .
When we drafted this report - and I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs from the various groups - we tried to be as constructive as possible .
I hope this will be reflected in the vote tomorrow .
We also tried to put an end to black or white debates .
We no longer say that trade liberalisation and combating climate change will destroy 100 % of our industries in Europe , where , in a way , we do not care , because the climate issue must take precedence .
When we worked on the issue of carbon leakage , for example , we always tried to specify which sector of activity might be put at risk and which tools could be developed to protect that sector .
The same is true for the laws governing the framework for the anti-dumping discussion at the WTO .
The same is true for production processes and methods .
On all these issues , we tried , with the other groups , to come up with proposals to move things forward , and I believe that we have come up with concrete proposals that are commensurate with our ambitions , with the mandate of the European Commission and of all the European institutions .
I would just say once again that I hope that the cooperative , constructive spirit in which we drafted this report will be reflected in the vote tomorrow and , once again , I would like to thank all my colleagues for the work they have done .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to begin by thanking my colleagues in the Committee on International Trade and , in particular , the shadow rapporteurs from the various groups for their cooperation in the drafting of this third report on a related topic .
Today , we are able , thanks to this cooperation , to present a set of innovative , concrete proposals to move corporate social responsibility forward within the framework of EU trade policy .
After the international crisis and the economic and social damage it caused , and after the debates it prompted , the expectations voiced by the public and the political expectations for lessons to be learnt , our common conviction is that Europe 's trade policy must contribute more than ever to the objectives of regulating globalisation and , in particular , to its social and environmental objectives .
This regulation concerns the States and their economies , but it is clear that the main economic players are undertakings and , in particular , multinational corporations : they are the main players in world trade .
They are the ones that have benefited most from market liberalisation , not only in terms of gaining access to customers , but also in order to externalise part of their production and to diversify their supply arrangements , often by drawing on countries where production costs are low and , above all , where social and environmental rules are applied less rigorously .
The liberalisation of trade has been accompanied by fierce competition among countries seeking to attract foreign investors and by stiffer competition between undertakings .
All too often this has led to unacceptable abuses in relation to working conditions , and to human rights violations and environmental damage .
From the Bhopal disaster at the subsidiary of a chemical multinational in India , which claimed thousands of victims and for which the parent company has still not been punished to this day , to the behaviour of oil and mining companies in Africa , in Burma , and in many other countries , which is destroying their environment and reducing their workers to the rank of slaves ; and from child labour in Asian textile factories to the murder of trade unionists on agricultural holdings in Central America , the examples are legion .
And they are all the more unacceptable given that they often concern undertakings from industrialised countries , their subsidiaries and their supply chain , including European undertakings .
This gave rise , many years ago , to a debate and a campaign which , I might add , was supported on several occasions within this Parliament through the adoption of resolutions on corporate social and environmental responsibility .
The progress made in corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) is not yet on a par with the debate on social standards in trade agreements , the subject of the report by Mrs Saïfi .
This is understandable , because trade agreements concern legal rules that are binding among the States , whereas corporate social responsibility concerns voluntary commitments by undertakings .
At the same time , however , it is paradoxical , because CSR and the social and environmental clauses pull in the same direction , namely , towards globalisation which is more respectful of human rights and the environment and which is conducive to sustainable development .
We therefore propose to incorporate CSR into trade agreements and , specifically , to incorporate a corporate social responsibility clause into the chapters on sustainable development , especially of free trade agreements ( FTA ) , with a number of clear and verifiable commitments by undertakings .
First , there must be a reciprocal commitment between the European Union and its partners to encourage undertakings to enter into CSR commitments and to verify them : the establishment of contact points not only to foster the provision of information but also to receive complaints from trade unionists and civil society ; a requirement for corporations to publish their balance sheets regularly , which will reinforce transparency ; a reporting requirement ; and a requirement for undertakings to show due diligence and to take preventive measures .
Finally , we propose that , in the event of serious breaches of the principles underpinning CSR and also of the violation of social rights and social and environmental laws , there should be mechanisms ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I would like to ask everyone for their forbearance , but there are some things which simply should not be allowed to happen .
You have a speaking time of four minutes .
Despite my interruption , you spoke for more than four-and-a-half minutes .
I draw a rough line for every Member of this House .
I attempt to be as fair as possible , but in the middle of your speech you said : ' I am keeping an eye on the clock ' .
If we want to have more lively debates , this does not necessarily mean that we must read our speeches more quickly .
You should not only be thinking about your French voters - and that applies to all the Members , who should not only be considering their own electorate - because all the citizens of the European Union can access the interpretation of speeches via the website .
If the interpreters cannot follow what is being said , the people in the rest of Europe will not be able to understand your speech , because it was read too quickly .
Therefore , everyone should keep to their speaking time and not break into the speaking time of other Members , because this is ultimately deducted from the catch-the-eye procedure .
Mr President , this is the second time that I have sat in this Chamber and seen the President interrupt one of the speakers on the basis that they are speaking too quickly .
I do not know how often you speak yourself , but you should understand that such an interruption has the consequence of completely wrecking the speech .
Now , I happen to disagree entirely with what Mr Désir said , but I think that , really , the interpreters are paid employees and if they cannot keep up , that is their problem .
It is not for the President to interrupt in the way that you have just done .
It certainly is my job to interrupt .
You can pay a one-hundred-metre runner EUR 1 million to run the one-hundred-metre race in 10 seconds .
However , even if you pay him EUR 100 million , he will not manage to do it in five seconds .
I am obliged to interrupt Members if they speak too quickly .
I have been a Member of this House for 13 years and I know very well that when the interpreters can no longer keep up , they press a button and a bulb on my desk lights up .
You are very welcome to have a look at it .
It is labelled ' slow down ' .
I have already experienced this in the committees .
At some point , the interpreters say that they are going to stop working .
If a Member then complains , the whole thing comes to a grinding halt and the speaker cannot go on speaking .
( Heckling )
Mrs Berès , I am doing what you also do in your committee , which is to explain the situation when a point of order is raised .
( Heckling )
It is precisely the same thing .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me assure you that if ever I were to run the 100 metres , it would take me at least 15 seconds , so there is no major problem with me - at least not in that respect .
First , I would like to thank the rapporteurs and the INTA Committee for these reports , which raise important issues concerning the contribution of the European Union 's trade policy towards the achievement of some of the fundamental objectives of public policy : respect for human rights , the pursuit of economic welfare and social justice , the achievement of sustainable growth and respect for the environment and particularly the climate system .
You will understand that , in the short time I have at my disposal today , it is impossible to go into the details of each one . But allow me to make a few general considerations .
The three reports have many points in common .
They all address policy coherence and , more particularly , the need for trade policy to be conducted in the framework of the EU 's overall objectives , in particular its economic , social and environmental objectives .
I could not agree more with the goal of fully using all the instruments at our disposal to achieve these aims .
At the same time , it should be stressed that effective action must rely on those instruments that are most suitable to address each issue .
I see trade policy as one of the key factors in promoting and safeguarding the European Union 's social model , its values and its principles , and I am aware that there are high expectations in this respect . But we must bear in mind that not all problems can necessarily be solved through trade policy .
Other policies may offer key elements or even better options for effective solutions .
We must also be aware that balancing different interests is at the core of political action .
So there will always be choices to be made .
Challenges will also be different , depending on whether we are considering autonomous instruments such as GSP , bilateral agreements or multilateral agreements .
Ms Saïfi 's report on human rights , social and environmental standards in trade agreements recognises that each of those dimensions offers different possibilities .
In general , international cooperation has the potential to trigger more effective action .
On the other hand , it takes two to tango .
We have to take account of what is acceptable to our trade partners - and at what price .
Especially when it comes to multilateral settings , achieving consensus can become very hard .
The EU has a general interest in improving international governance , including through increased coherence between actions in different fora : the WTO , the ILO , the international climate negotiations , and so on .
The three reports outline several possible directions of work in this respect .
We need to be pragmatic and be able to discern between those practical steps likely to prove successful in the short term and those steps more likely to produce an effect in the longer-term objectives .
We need to give ourselves the scope to think ahead and think big .
On the other hand , the Commission wants trade policy and our actions in trade bodies to have an impact and lead to results .
This also applies to our bilateral deals .
The provisions in our free trade agreements are not there to become mere declarations of good intentions .
They must be ' implementable ' .
Turning to Mr Jadot 's report on climate change , I would like to highlight the need to ensure that any options are indeed capable of effectively reducing the risk of carbon leakage and of being applied at reasonable cost .
We all know , for instance , that options such as border measures raise a number of issues : how to measure , how to monitor , and so on .
The truth is that we need to exercise caution and assess all relevant issues before precipitating conclusions .
That said , the EU should definitely continue to look into all feasible options .
As regards Mr Désir 's report on corporate social responsibility , I note the statement that ' Commission initiatives should focus on supporting rather than regulating CSR activities ' .
There is , however , a fine line to be drawn between supporting , regulating and enforcing - a line that the rapporteur has skilfully explored but that embodies a great number of political and practical considerations .
Indeed , CSR cannot replace states or exempt them from their responsibility in enforcing their laws - just as state bodies are not there to enforce corporate policies as such .
It is useful to note that many of these issues are being considered in the update of the OECD guidelines for multinational enterprises due for adoption in 2011 .
This is one example of the useful work being carried out and in which we are actively engaged .
The reports under consideration today include very specific orientations on possible avenues for increasing the scope , effectiveness , consistency and transparency of our actions as regards social and environmental provisions in FTAs , including provisions on CSR or climate change issues .
Needless to say , the Commission will continue to consider these orientations .
In line with the caveats that I have already spelled out , you should anticipate important reservations on several points - as well as wholehearted agreement on others .
We will have plenty of opportunities , for instance under next year 's GSP review , to discuss these issues further in the following months or years , including in the context of upcoming legislative or consent procedures .
The European Commission is willing to examine - together with the European Parliament - suitable , effective and workable means to ensure that trade policy duly reflects societal concerns .
The guiding principle should be careful , analytical policymaking on the basis of forward-looking objectives but also of realistic expectations .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Mr President , should Europe 's trade policy simply be about obtaining maximum economic advantage , or should it be used to underpin and promote our wider goals : sustainable environment policy , fight against climate change , our social model , the promotion of human rights and democratic values ?
The three speakers before me - the three rapporteurs - have all confirmed that the answer to that should be in the affirmative and , I am pleased to say , so has the Commissioner .
Indeed , already in our actions we do put human rights , environmental protection and labour standards in our bilateral trade agreements . But the question is : do we do it in a way that allows us to ensure proper application and compliance with these standards ?
The Subcommittee on Human Rights of this Parliament has serious doubts about our effectiveness so far .
In the case of future trade agreements , we would like to ensure that , before any agreement is initialled , an FTA is subject to a human rights impact assessment to make sure that there are not only economic benefits from the agreement , but human rights gains from any such agreement .
We believe that the system for suspending free trade agreements for abuse of human rights must be made more transparent and accessible , and I acknowledge the fact that Mr De Gucht in the Korea FTA has started to go down that route .
We believe that in relation to GSP + , beneficiaries must be subjected to consistent and fairer benchmarking to make sure that their application of environmental , social and human standards remains at a high level and consistent .

Mrs Saïfi , Mr Désir and Mr Jadot have all made it very clear that trade must not be viewed as an end in itself but must be part of a wider global strategy to promote a fairer , safer and healthier planet .


Mr President , I am pleased that Mr De Gucht , Mr Désir and Mrs Saïfi understand very well that if we are to have equal trade conditions , then standards - and I mean standards in a broad sense , including human rights and social and environmental standards - must undergo extensive harmonisation .
These standards are an extremely important matter , not only for world trade , but also for cooperation on development , and even more importantly , for the pursuit of values which we call fundamental values .
The Committee on Development has tabled several remarks about the Saïfi report .
We regret , for example , that the European Union does not have an overall approach to the way in which businesses meet human rights obligations .
This allows some firms and Member States to ignore these standards .
We insist on compliance with the fundamental standards of the International Labour Organisation as a preliminary condition for entering into trade agreements .
Mr President , I should like to begin , if I may , on behalf of the Committee on Development , by repeating a number of key ideas .
I would like to reiterate that it is the most vulnerable populations , including indigenous peoples , who are affected by climate change , and so their participation in policymaking , especially trade policy , is essential .
Next , I would like to reiterate that EU trade policies must be consistent with combating climate change and poverty .
We are asking for the insertion of environmental clauses in all the trade agreements of the EU and the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , a review of the clean development mechanisms , a real transfer of technology and the combating of biopiracy .
Last but not least , since 20 % of emissions are due to transport , we must move towards short distribution channels , first and foremost in agriculture , which will lead to the creation of jobs in our own countries as well as in developing countries and to a reduction in our emissions .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we subscribe to the logic of the report drafted by Mr Désir within the Committee on International Trade .
In our committee , as elsewhere , one of the most hotly debated issues is that of the purpose of corporate social responsibility .
Is it an end in itself or should it lead to laws once it has been applied by many undertakings ?
This debate is not clear cut ; it encourages us to develop our thinking with regard to corporate governance and to reconcile the two debates .
Within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs we think that social responsibility is essential if we want to combat tax evasion and undeclared work through trade agreements .
We also think that , among the stakeholders that are key to raising the profile of corporate social responsibility , trade unions , social dialogue and European works councils must be fully involved , because they make a quite essential contribution .
We also think that , to ensure that these tools are fully utilised , the United Nations Human Rights Council , in its ' Protect , Respect and Remedy ' initiative , has a vital role , and we must take advantage of this .
We also think that corporate social responsibility is a tool of competitiveness , which must be explored .
However , when , once again , consensus has been reached , when corporate social responsibility has been defined through standards that are finally generally accepted , it should be able to succeed , without becoming a substitute for labour regulations or collective agreements .
Finally , we think that corporate social responsibility , including trade agreements , must be dynamic and must be able to adapt to new sectors to be covered .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - Mr President , as this Parliament 's rapporteur on corporate social responsibility for over three parliamentary terms now , I strongly welcome my colleague , Harlem Désir 's initiative on trade and CSR .
Companies often say they should mainstream CSR , and this initiative reflects that public policy should do so too .
I very much hope that Commissioner De Gucht will reflect its recommendations in the new trade policy communication .
In recent years , my own work has increasingly involved representing European interests in advancing global CSR mechanisms .
Therefore , as a friend of the OECD guidelines - in my view now the foremost international CSR standard , and also one signed up to by governments - I strongly support paragraph 25 , that future EU trade agreements should specifically cite the guidelines .
The Commission officially operates national contact points under those guidelines , and I hope this commitment will also be reviewed .
As a consultee of Professor John Ruggie on business and human rights , I endorse the requirement in recital Q of the report for companies to undertake due diligence and congratulate the previous Swedish Presidency for putting full support for the UN Special Representatives ' recommendations into the Council conclusions .
The Commissioner should particularly read Ruggie 's strong criticism of governmental failures to respect human rights considerations as the Commission develops its new competence on investment .
As a member of the advisory board of the Global Reporting Initiative , can I endorse the objective of transparency in paragraph 15 , but also ask that the imminent public consultation by the Commission on non-financial disclosure moves decisively towards the principle of integrated reporting on financial , social , environmental and human rights impacts by companies .
I would like to remind you about this once again .
This time I have refrained from interrupting the Member shortly before the end of his speaking time .
However , just as he stopped speaking , the interpreters said : ' He really is speaking too quickly .
We are sorry . '
I would like to ask the Members to keep to a normal speaking speed .
Mr President , Mr Wieland , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate all three rapporteurs on their reports .
I think that the discussions and negotiations about these three reports were a very good example of how we can reach a common approach in Parliament on important subjects like these .
I would like to focus primarily on one point .
I have the impression that in these three reports we have spoken in great detail about the contribution of trade policy to the three areas of policy addressed in the reports .
In the case of Mr Désir 's report , which is about companies , Mrs Saïfi 's report , which is about human rights and environmental standards , and Mr Jadot 's report , which is about climate change , we have examined very closely what trade policy can contribute to these other policy areas .
However , I often wonder what these individual areas of policy themselves achieve .
Are we imposing a sufficiently strong obligation on the environmental and social policymakers and on policymakers in other areas to do their homework on their own subjects ?
In order to ensure that we do not misunderstand one another , I should say that I think we all agree on the objectives .
However , sometimes I am concerned that we are overloading trade policy , when other areas of policy increasingly often do not do their homework .
One example of this is the environmental policymakers in Copenhagen who did not succeed in finding a solution in the field of climate change policy .
The result of this was to overload trade policy with the responsibility for making up for all these shortcomings .
I would be very grateful if we could pay serious consideration here in Parliament over the next few weeks and months to the contribution that other areas of policy could make to trade policy in this respect .
Therefore , I would like to hear us saying in future ' trade and ... ' and not always discussing everything else and then also trade .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am sure that your services often explain to you that certain necessary measures for climate change cannot be taken and applied .
However , the threat of climate change is so huge that the question is not what will be applied , but how we can find ways of addressing this problem , how we can find ways of applying the necessary measures .
One solution being discussed in terms of the contribution of commerce to climate change is border tax adjustments , a tax on imports from countries which do not take the same measures as us in terms of climate change .
We also need to examine disincentives to the trade in such goods .
Water is a local resource and yet countries such as France and Belgium are , at the same time , among the biggest European exporters and the biggest European importers of water .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank the three rapporteurs , Mrs Saïfi , Mr Désir and Mr Jadot , for the good job they have done on their respective reports .

I welcome the call to produce legally binding clauses on human rights standards in international trade agreements and support the idea of focusing greater attention on their implementation .
I want to focus particular attention on compliance with labour laws , and especially on women and children in the countries the European Union trades with .
Both the generalised system of preferences and GSP + are effective instruments for encouraging democratic values in partner countries .
However , a closer link needs to be established between human rights clauses and GSP + .
Coordination should be stepped up between the World Trade Organisation , on the one hand , and the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the International Labour Organisation , on the other hand .
This is why I believe that the ILO must be granted official observer status in the World Trade Organisation .
Last but not least , as representatives of Europe 's citizens , we should be informed in detail about international trade agreement negotiations , in keeping with the new powers enjoyed by the European Parliament under the Treaty of Lisbon .
With regard to Yannick Jadot 's report , we must , of course , promote ' green ' trade .
However , we should once again be extremely vigilant when identifying goods which are defined as ' green ' .
Similarly , we must place greater emphasis on promoting environmentally sound renewable energy sources , as opposed to subsidising fossil fuels .
Setting a fair environmental price in accordance with global climate protection standards is another important point in the report , which I welcome .
As there is no prospect in the near future of reaching a multilateral climate agreement , it is important to work at European level on devising a mechanism for restricting carbon dioxide emissions .
I think that both biofuels and biomass must be included among the mandatory sustainability criteria , given the contradictory impact they have on the environment .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members once again and I hope that these reports will really have an important impact on international agreement negotiations .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I was the Green / EFA shadow for both the Saïfi and the Désir reports .
We welcome these as important steps forward to secure better human rights and social and environmental standards in the countries that are our trading partners .
If those countries want to sell on the lucrative EU markets , we should encourage them to adopt decent and sustainable standards at home .
Securing improvement through mandatory clauses and requirements in trade agreements is one way to achieve this .
Mrs Saïfi , who did an excellent job as rapporteur , discusses constructively the different levels and aspects of human rights , and environmental and social standards at differing levels .
We agree with Ms Saïfi 's suggestion that a world environment organisation be formed and that the ILO status should be strengthened .
We liked the sustainable development chapter in FTAs but wish those standards to be binding , not voluntary .
Similarly , the GSP schemes should be given proper teeth and be enforceable .
But we could not agree with the rapporteur that the human rights clause in the FTA with Colombia was satisfactory .
In fact we thought that was a meaningless , formulaic human rights clause that makes a mockery of the aspirations of this House in that regard .
Turning to Mr Désir 's report , we could not agree more with him when he names the transnational corporations as a source of negative effects on the environment and on our social standards .
They have profited from trade liberalisation and they have exploited cheap labour - and , all too often , cheap materials - but failed to adequately redistribute the wealth they have created at others ' expense .
We have successfully amended both reports , and will be supporting both of them when it comes to the vote .
In closing , I would very quickly stress that more needs to be done in specifying the human rights and social responsibilities we want to prioritise .
We should do so in terms of obligatory requirements and not rely on voluntary codes .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Saïfi has produced a sound report .
Purely commercial interests must never be at the expense of concern for our fellow human beings in other countries , particularly in developing countries .
I am including in this countries where Christians and other religious minorities are persecuted for their beliefs .
The EU has trade relations with Pakistan , for example .
We are now seeking to give that country additional trade advantages to help it back on its feet after the floods .
Let us use our trade relations to denounce the religious persecution and the blasphemy legislation in Pakistan .
I would also mention the negotiations between the European Union and India in this regard .
Europe must not give in to pressure by India to leave non-trade issues out of the new trade agreement .
Human rights and child labour cannot be regarded separately from trade and investment .
I call upon the Commission and my fellow Members to adopt a firm stance on this , in accordance with the European Parliament 's resolution of March 2009 .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr De Gucht , ladies and gentlemen , there is a good reason why we are discussing these three reports in a joint debate .
I would like to thank the three rapporteurs for their excellent work .
All of the reports make it clear that all the groups in the European Parliament want to put EU trade policy into a broader context .
The times of tough , one-sided external economic aid should now be over .
Therefore , today 's discussion is taking place at a highly appropriate time , because we are holding a debate on the basis of the trade strategy presented by Mr De Gucht , which should include a number of proposals and considerations and also specific projects .
Protecting the climate , the environment and human dignity , together with eliminating poverty throughout the world , have been recognised and acknowledged as joint tasks for all of mankind .
These tasks are much more important than conventional trade interests .
However , it is essential that these objectives are incorporated into modern trade policy .
Increasing social prosperity , as defined by the human development index , and the rule of law are in the best interests of the European economy .
They will enable it to network successfully with other economies .
These things are covered to a certain extent by corporate social responsibility , but they cannot be implemented without a national framework .
I would like to emphasise that my group would like to have seen some of the points addressed in the three reports being taken further .
Although we welcome the fact that companies are living up to their social responsibilities on their own initiative , it is a fact that thousands of people throughout the world discover every day that their rights at best exist only on paper and are simply ignored in their day-to-day working life .
The conditions in subcontracting companies and suppliers , including in the production of raw materials , are often appalling .
This is demonstrated by the films about child labour in the chocolate production industry .
In order to have a sustainable , uninterrupted supply of raw materials and energy , as described in your strategy , Mr De Gucht , we must take these aspects of the three reports into account .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , trade delivers mutual prosperity , and I emphasise the word ' mutual ' .
It follows , therefore , that trade policy should almost never be burdened with a political agenda .
Now , on a personal level I have great respect for the rapporteurs of these three reports , but the philosophy which underpins the reports has been put forward at many elections and mostly voted down .
What we are seeing is an attempt to manipulate the trade policy of the European Union - which , unfortunately , the UK is bound by for the moment - in order to implement by stealth a largely Socialist agenda that has been consistently rejected .
At a political level , the machinations of the rapporteurs are rather impressive .
But , as a democrat , I have to say no and that is why we will be voting no tomorrow .
( NL ) Mr President , the causes and effects of climate change are based on a theory , but it seems to have more the nature of a religious conviction .
Nevertheless , everything is subordinated to this religion , as can be seen by reading this report on international trade .
It is a veritable climate diplomacy that is being proposed ; that is , the European Union is happy to do business , but only under strict climate-neutral conditions - just the way the European Union likes it - as though these trading partners would like nothing better than to apply themselves without delay to the development of a single market .
After all , export means transport , and more transport is very bad for global CO2 emissions .
Well , Europe will really help the developing countries with this - particularly countries that depend on the export of competing agricultural products , for example .
What has this got to do with the European Union ?
Mr President , the document shows a lack of economic understanding .
I should like to quote from the report by Mr Jadot , paragraph 57 : ' regrets that a significant part of international trade consists of homogeneous products which could just as easily be produced locally ' .
End of quote .
What economic genius thought that up ?
Anyone with even a modicum of economic education will be familiar with the economic principle that specialisation and trade are the very driving force behind economic growth .
The naive reasoning in this report would be disastrous to the global economy .
It is no wonder that the majority of citizens and businesses can do without European climate targets .
Yet Europe is persisting and drawing up the umpteenth series of absurd climate targets .
Emerging economies such as China and India do not care about these and will reap profit from Europe 's self-imposed restrictions .
Who will ultimately pay the price for the pursuit of Europe 's Utopia ?
It will be the citizens and businesses .

( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Désir for very good cooperation on the report on corporate social responsibility in international trade agreements .
I was shadow rapporteur from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for this report .
Corporate social responsibility has for some time now been present in debate about international trade , and this is seen in the reference to the principles of social responsibility in the trade agreements recently negotiated by the Union with countries such as South Korea , Colombia and Peru .
I am pleased that with this report Parliament has underscored the need to continue to extend the use of these references , which in the report it calls corporate social responsibility clauses .
I am certain that including such clauses in international agreements will contribute to greater recognisability of instruments of corporate social responsibility and to promoting and encouraging businesses themselves to apply them more extensively .
For we should not forget that the proper functioning of these instruments depends to a large extent on the will of businesses themselves , since it is businesses which decide to go beyond the limits of legally binding standards .
Ladies and gentlemen , during my recent visit to India , I asked the business people whom I had the opportunity to meet about what they are doing in the area of corporate social responsibility .
All of them gave very specific examples of measures they are taking in this area .
This fills me , personally , with very great optimism .
I hope the Désir report will be a new voice on measures taken by the Union and will contribute to ever more extensive application of the standards of corporate social responsibility .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Yannick Jadot for the ambitious proposals he has put forward in this report and especially for the readiness to reach a compromise with all the political groups which tabled amendments .
We must admit that there have been key moments when the European Union has had the opportunity to speak with one voice .
Copenhagen was one of those when the whole planet was expecting the European Union to assume the leading role in the battle against climate change and pull cautious states along in the same direction .
Unfortunately , expectations were not realised and the disappointment was directly proportional to this .
The conclusion which can be drawn is that there was a lack of consensus within the Union .
There are national governments which are really not prepared to take on substantial commitments in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
One definite explanation for this could be the economic and financial crisis which has dampened their enthusiasm for committing to devising an ambitious climate policy .
However , the battle against climate change both locally and globally must be a matter of constant concern for all countries in the world .
It is not only about the future of subsequent generations being jeopardised , but also about global justice .
It is not fair that developing countries are left to pay for the cost of global warming , while the industrialised countries engage in thinking pragmatically about their own needs .
Real North-South solidarity is required .
This is why I regard the Cancún Summit as an opportunity to go further than an operational agreement .
Cancún must signify a global , legally binding agreement , which will help maintain global warming below two degrees Celsius .
A verification procedure is also required which is more clearly defined than the one established in Copenhagen .
In addition , the European Union 's sole efforts to combat climate change cannot guarantee the success of an agreement in the period after 2012 .
We must successfully persuade other parties as well to assume more ambitious commitments for reducing gas emissions , including greenhouse gases .
Last but not least , I would like to touch on the relationship between international trade and climate change .
Trade is an important instrument for transferring technology to developing countries .
Therefore , the barriers to green trade must be removed .
This could take the form of removing the rates for green products , at least within the World Trade Organisation .
At the same time , we must be aware of the split caused globally by the current trade system with regard to work and production based on transport .
This is why I am ending with a plea to encourage local production in the European Union .
Mr President , I would point out to the Commissioner that the concept and practice of corporate social responsibility has spread rapidly through the business sector during the last decade .
Who can object to such basic values as companies treating their employees well and respecting human rights and the environment ?
Yet up till now , the link between trade and corporate social responsibility has been tenuous at best , and arguments abound .
International trade is governed by agreements between states , but should CSR be a binding commitment to which those undertakings must sign up ?
Or may they comply on a voluntary basis ?
European citizens are becoming more aware .
So many recent disasters - not least the BP oil spill - have shown that the standards and ethics under which our European companies operate abroad must be monitored .
Ordinary Europeans are no longer willing to welcome and support an expansion in international trade purely on economic grounds .
When trade destroys the natural environment and lowers the living standards of local populations , we say enough is enough .
Only governments can set standards which ensure that those who behave in an ethical and transparent way are not undercut by those who do not .
The European Union must encourage businesses to adopt and to report on CSR obligations in all their business activities , both at home and abroad .
Without this , CSR risks remaining little more than an exercise in public relations for a few multinational companies .
I welcome this own-initiative report , which calls on the Commission to bring CSR into the heart of the EU 's international trade agreements .
We must guarantee that respect for sustainable development and labour rights remains equally important in the pursuit of the European Union 's commercial interests abroad .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , in defending rampant free-marketism , in orchestrating the commercial disarmament of the Union , has played to the full its servile role as an instrument serving very specific interests , which are harmful to European employees .
Free , undistorted competition is a myth that destroys jobs and lives .
Indeed , if competition is free then all forms of dumping are possible , starting with tax , social , monetary and environmental dumping .
Competition is necessarily distorted .
To find a way out of this situation , which kills industrial employment and plunges employees and their families into destitution , there must be strict control of capital movements by Member States , tax havens must be destroyed , the sectors essential to life - energy , water , medicines , agriculture and training - must be removed from the field of commerce and , above all , environmental and social criteria guaranteeing equality in commercial activity and the rights of employees must be defined and enforced .
( DE ) Mr President , the European Union has a major responsibility for human rights , social standards and safeguarding the environment in its current and future trade relations .
These standards form an important basis for the discussions on free trade agreements .
The EU should set an example in all its negotiations and call for fair employment conditions and the sustainable use of resources .
In this context , I would like to highlight , in particular , the current Mercosur negotiations and those with India .
Does the European Union really want to import cheap products which have been manufactured using child labour and which involve the destruction of natural resources ?
Our objective must be to ensure good working conditions and good wages in these countries , instead of quick profits .
The European Commission must continue to incorporate clear standards in future trade agreements and to include them in international negotiations .
However , these standards are not just about the ethical considerations and the values which the EU represents , but also about equal treatment for producers both inside and outside Europe .
Other important factors are the growing demand from European consumers for products and the traceability of production methods .
Against this background , I would like to look last of all at Mr Jadot 's report .
Paragraph 48 is highly critical of the common agricultural model .
However , this model guarantees a secure supply of high quality food .
The report refers to its apparent negative impacts on climate change .
I would like to make it quite clear that the priority here is food security for our 500 million citizens .
The EU must remain self-sufficient as far as its food supply is concerned and should not become dependent on imports .
This would be a disaster .
I have a strong obligation to the citizens of the EU and , therefore , I cannot support this passage in the report .
( CS ) Mr President , I am very closely involved in the new strategy on international trade .
As a member of the INTA Committee in the previous period , I patiently called for our trade policy to be an instrument supporting fair competition , and a key to the maintenance of European values and commercial interests on the global market .
Pressure to increase social and environmental standards is the way to eliminate unfairness and unequal conditions in international trade competition .
For six years I have been calling for all trade agreements to have human rights clauses , compliance with which would be a condition for a preferential policy .
Finally , the European Parliament is today asking the Commission through this report to submit a draft regulation prohibiting the importation into the EU of goods produced through the use of modern forms of slavery and forced labour , and in countries where basic human rights standards are violated .
This must apply both to ACP countries and to China .
I would like to express my thanks and sincere congratulations to my colleague Mrs Saïfi for this document , which provides an example of the fact that Parliament is making progress
( SK ) Mr President , the opportunities afforded by the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon make possible the long-awaited establishment of a balance between commercial law and human rights .
I firmly believe that the European Union , in the interests of upholding its credibility and integrity , must make active use of this opportunity , and start to act consistently over human rights , both in its internal and its external policies .
I would like to emphasise the request for the Commission to conclude agreements containing clauses on democracy , human rights and compliance with social , health and environmental standards , and at the same time to ensure the effective monitoring of compliance with , and implementation of , these standards in practice .
Special attention should be paid in agreements on commercial aspects of intellectual property rights to ensuring the protection of the right to health , which is closely connected with the actual right to life .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Saïfi for a very bold and consistent text .
( SV ) Mr President , I think that we can summarise these three reports by saying that we are moving from viewing people as tools to be used for trade to viewing trade as a tool to be used for people .
We want to move away from a logic in which a euro profit from trade is matched by two euros lost on the environment or in social costs .
The reports also contain many specific proposals , for example Mrs Saïfi 's excellent proposal for a world organisation for the environment , or the proposal for increased power for the International Labour Organisation or border charges as a means of reducing unfair competition and emissions that are harmful to the climate , as well as the proposal for consultation with the local community before investments are made .
These , Commissioner , are not merely good intentions that you should take note of .
Rather , we now want to see the concrete results of our demands .
We want to see legislation when this is necessary .
We want to see changes to its implementation when necessary , and we want to see the Commission take the initiative in international negotiations in order to improve the rules .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my party , Jobbik - The Movement for a Better Hungary , attaches profound importance to environmental protection and the restoration of ecological balance .
We are convinced that Europe is faced not only with an economic crunch and recession but also with an environmental crisis .
In this regard we consider it extremely important to create self-governance in the food and light industries in the European Union .
Nobody understands why the EU has to import vast amounts of garlic and peppers from China and chicken from Brazil when these products could be produced locally .
This is why we say that we need local self-governance in the food and light industries .
It is our responsibility here in the European Parliament to protect European farmers , SMEs and our own citizens , giving them the opportunity to obtain clean , high quality food from local farmers .
We also believe that it is crucial to introduce the mandatory adoption of environmentally friendly technologies to the largest extent possible .
Mr President , competition is the life of trade .
Obviously , to have competition you must be able to compete , and some of the arrangements we have with third countries disadvantage our own producers .
Elisabeth Köstinger referred to Mercosur , and it is certainly true that many agricultural and fisheries products coming into the EU are produced at a far inferior standard than those which we demand from within .
That certainly must be addressed .
Having said that , on a positive note , some of the agreements we have had in recent times are very good , such as the free trade agreement with Korea .
We need more of that .
I think most people would agree that it would benefit us and it would benefit them .
I would ask the Commissioner whether there are any plans to engage in an economic partnership agreement with Japan .
The Copenhagen Economic Study has shown that we would gain EUR 33 billion and Japan would gain EUR 18 billion by such an arrangement .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think this has been a very rich debate .
While the philosophy behind the three reports is similar , the details , ideas and responses we have shared today cannot be addressed adequately in the short time at my disposal .
Some ideas are workable , others less so , because we operate in a legal , an institutional and a political framework , both as a Union of 27 Member States and as a member of the WTO .
I will try to highlight what I believe to be the salient considerations for each report .
Unfortunately I cannot be exhaustive .
On the Saïfi report , a number of you have raised the possibility of ILO observer status in the WTO .
My starting point is that there is definitely much scope for improved international governance and better coordination between international organisations .
My next consideration is that , in order to leverage trade policy to achieve a better social and environmental outcome , we need to set feasible objectives .
Structural changes take a long time to implement and , if we are realistic about the WTO membership coming round to a ' trade and ... ' agenda , this is a long-term endeavour .
Let me add that , with regard to the proposal in the Saïfi report that there should be a human rights assessment of free trade agreements ( FTAs ) , I believe this should happen throughout the negotiations .
I would be rather sceptical about having a special period between the end of the negotiations and the initialling of the agreement .
This was also discussed this morning in another context , but I think we should stick to the procedure in the Treaty of Lisbon which makes it very clear that it is up to the Commission to initial such agreements ; after that , the ratification procedure starts and the Council signs , which is their way of ratifying ; then the European Parliament has the right and the duty to ratify by vote .
With regard to the idea of having a human rights assessment before the initialling - let us call it a kind of pre-condition - I would not be positive about this .
On the other hand , I think the actual idea of assessing the human rights impact of an agreement makes sense , and I am positive on that .
Specific questions have also been put , for example on child labour .
You know that we are currently negotiating a free trade agreement with India , where the whole matter of sustainability also has to be addressed .
India is very sceptical about such a sustainability chapter in the agreement , but we insist - and we will continue to insist - that such a chapter has its place , and I think that ultimately it will be included .
I would simply like to ask that , later on when you will have to discuss this , you take into account the fact that the ideas of individual third countries on such a sustainability chapter may concern not only the content of it but also the philosophy of certain third countries on this issue .
With respect to the Jadot report , I have heard calls for a climate chapter in each bilateral agreement .
I am all for environmental sustainability because the future does not belong to us .
Where I think we must be careful , however , is in recognising that the many elements which need to come into play to provide a satisfactory response to the climate change challenge - from emission caps to financing - cannot be translated into provisions in our trade agreements .
I think there is a wider forum for that and , provided that there is an agreement in the wider forum , then of course such an agreement has to be reflected in the bilateral free trade agreements .
Whether it is also possible in the development round that we have just discussed , the Doha Round , is much more questionable because there is certainly not agreement among all the participants in this multilateral process to have a climate chapter in the final outcome .
However , our position will be that we are in favour of this .
Lastly , on Mr Désir 's report , I think this comes at a very timely moment , given that a new Commission communication on corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) is in preparation .
The Commission and the members of the OECD are actively contributing to updating the current OECD benchmarks in time for the OECD ministerial meeting in May 2011 .
In all our CSR-related activities , we will carefully consider various options for promoting responsible behaviour by European companies , irrespective of their place of operation , and with special regard to feasibility and consequences .
Let me add that this is not only a matter of trade , or of bilateral and multilateral trade agreements .
In the United States , legislation was recently adopted whereby multinational companies - and not only those with their operations in the United States but also those with their registered offices there - are required to be responsible and to produce certification of their financial operations and transactions with respect to raw materials .
I think it is a very laudable initiative which is , in fact , completely outside bilateral agreements .
Most of these operations concerning raw materials are not covered by bilateral agreements , they are simply financial and industrial operations by multinational companies , but if they have their registered offices in the United States , then the United States can take action vis-à-vis such companies .
I think it would be a very good idea for us to consider doing exactly the same with respect to European companies that are active mostly in Third World countries , and then to extend the same approach to countries like Canada and Australia , so that we would ultimately encompass the majority of these kinds of industrial activities and extractive industries in the world .
I think this would be a considerable contribution to development in sustainable conditions .
In short , congratulations for the three reports .
I am certainly willing to continue the discussion on these subjects with you in the coming months and years .
Mr President , there is too little time , Commissioner , to reopen a debate on the reply you have just given us .
We will therefore continue the discussion , as you said .
I should like to begin by thanking all the speakers , particularly the shadow rapporteurs , as well as my colleagues Mr Jadot and Mr Désir for our cooperation .
The subjects were similar and complementary , and that enabled us to exchange ideas .
It also enabled us to demonstrate a consistency of approach in our work : to make trade and commerce less impervious to concepts of human rights , labour law and environmental law .
As I pointed out earlier , it will take time , as you said , Commissioner , for mindsets to change , but we cannot wait for them to change on their own .
Therefore , if we implement some of the measures proposed in the various reports we have presented to you this evening , we will gradually move towards a fairer and greener economy .
The European Union must initiate this change and set an example to its trade partners .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank Commissioner De Gucht for his answers and for his proposal for work .
I have taken note of his reply on the climate chapter , and I hope that we will also manage to work on the remaining aspects and make proposals that will result in concrete action being taken and certain elements being included in the trade agreements .
Finally , the fact that the trade negotiations at the World Trade Organisation , which are undoubtedly very complex , have broken down also offers the European Union various opportunities to integrate more innovative elements into bilateral agreements and to try to construct new types of trade agreements which further integrate the EU 's objectives with regard to the environment , climate , human rights or social rights .
This is therefore , in a sense , an opportunity .
I believe it is a very strong request , and if these reports receive broad support tomorrow , this will indeed be - and I want to believe it will be - an extremely important signal from the European Parliament to the Commission and to the Council .
I would like to reply to Mrs Stassen , who has left , regarding the economy .
Books on the economy have continued to be written after the 19th century .
We can therefore see that the challenges concerning the way in which to integrate social and environmental issues into production costs are an important factor in terms of defining the reality of comparative advantages .
Similarly , Mrs Muscardini , you will always have my support when it comes to defending the food sovereignty of the European Union .
Moreover , if you are prepared , with me and others , to combat the Blair House Agreement , which is , after all , the main obstacle to real food sovereignty , to real food security today in Europe , you will have my support .
Thank you , therefore , to all my colleagues , and to you , Commissioner , for your openness towards concrete work and concrete action with a view to the agreements that will soon be negotiated and concluded .
Mr President , as you can see , I had two minutes left .
You knew this , so , if you had a time issue earlier , you could have deducted the time from this part of my speech , which could have been shorter .
I should especially like to thank my colleagues and the Commissioner for his reply .
What has been striking in this debate is the very broad consensus extending beyond the differences between groups .
This is , however , qualified by the need to genuinely take greater account of the social and environmental dimensions in trade policy , in the agreements we negotiate .
When you cut me off for your very interesting speech , which I am sure our fellow citizens throughout the Union will have found fascinating , I simply wanted to raise a point that the Commissioner himself raised , which is that corporate social responsibility cannot - he is absolutely right - replace compliance with the law and the responsibilities of the Member States .
Furthermore , Mr De Gucht is also right when he says that , at this very moment , within the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) , and also within the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , as a result of Professor Ruggie 's report , which Mr Howitt mentioned , new steps have been proposed with regard to the responsibility of multinational companies , not only in relation to mining but also in many other areas of responsibility - especially as regards their foreign subsidiaries - within their spheres of influence or throughout their supply chains .
Judicial cooperation will also ensure that a parent company cannot evade its responsibilities in relation to the action of one of its subsidiaries or of a subcontractor , when it has infringed environmental or social rules .
All of this is absolutely critical .
I simply believe , though I admit it will be difficult , that we must establish a link with trade agreements .
There are already a small number of references to corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) in the agreement with Korea and in the agreements with Latin American countries .
I believe that , through the dialogue we have begun today with the Commission , we must continue to ensure that our CSR objectives and our sustainable development objectives are consistent with each other in international trade agreements .
Thank you very much , Mr Désir .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , 25 November 2010 , at 12 : 00 .
Anti-dumping cases - state of play and prospects ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on anti-dumping cases - state of play and prospects by Daniel Caspary , Cristiana Muscardini , Tokia Saïfi , Georgios Papastamkos , Kader Arif , Bernd Lange , Gianluca Susta , Metin Kazak , Niccolò Rinaldi , Marielle De Sarnez , Yannick Jadot , Carl Schlyter , Helmut Scholz , Robert Sturdy , Syed Kamall , Jan Zahradil , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left and the European Conservatives and Reformists - B7-0562 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , anti-dumping measures play an important role in the world .
For us in the European Parliament , and I believe I can speak for the majority of Members here , this is not about protectionism , but about a sensible use of the anti-dumping instrument .
We must be able to defend ourselves if other countries distort competition using state subsidies .
We must be able to defend ourselves if companies dump products onto the market , in other words , if they sell products at less than the cost of producing them , in order to force their competitors out of the market and to gain an illegitimate advantage .
I would like to look at one point in particular .
I would be interested in answers to the following questions from the Commission .
Does the Commission have any experience or any feedback from the Council on the extent to which foreign governments are involved in these activities ?
Are there cases where governments in whose countries specific companies are based attempt to influence the decisions made in the Committee on Anti-Dumping Practices ?
Have there been reactions or perhaps even attempts to exert influence which have led to a difference in the results of votes ?
I would be interested in finding out about this , because companies have come to me in the past with their concerns .
My second point is that on several occasions companies have approached me and asked me to make contact with the Commission and to prevent anti-dumping investigations from taking place in certain cases .
If you impose an anti-dumping duty , this will have a negative impact on European companies doing business in other areas , such as Asia . I would be interested to know what the Commission 's feeling is in this respect .
What is the current state of affairs ?
Are there cases of this kind ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to challenge the Commissioner to clarify as fully as possible the position of the Commission on trade defence instruments , which include anti-dumping measures .
The fact is that in a recent communication the Commission said that open trade depends on fair competition between national and foreign producers , and added : ' we protect EU production from international trade distortions or disruptions , by applying trade defence instruments in compliance with [ World Trade Organisation ] rules ' .
That is all well and good .
However , besides a good legal basis there also needs to be an effective and predictable decision-making mechanism so that these objectives can be achieved .
My question is as follows : could it be that the Council 's recent proposal on Member States controlling the Commission 's implementing acts , which include trade defence measures , correspond to this wish for a guarantee that trade defence measures are actually undertaken ?
I recall that this decision by the Council provides for exemptions from the general committee rules , which means that it is possible to make difficult , if not block , delay and , at the very least , politicise decision making on this matter , which is the Commission 's responsibility .
My second question concerns the following : in this communication the Commission also mentions that it is going to analyse the way in which to proceed with the updating and modernisation of our trade-defence instruments , along with the relevance of doing so .
My concern is this : If the Commission does not fight this proposal by the Council on the procedure of deciding upon trade-defence measures , can it give us any guarantee that when it comes to the issue of reviewing them , it will resist the Member States which are interested in undermining and weakening the application of trade-defence measures ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are only a few of us here this evening to talk about anti-dumping , which is , however , an issue we speak about a great deal in our own countries .
I believe that there is no issue in international trade that business people , small and medium-sized enterprises , trade unions and consumers care more about than dumping .
Dealing with dumping is basically a daily task for a large part of our productive economy .
The Commission is working hard and is certainly doing its duty when it comes to anti-dumping initiatives , but we are calling for action based on the following principles .
Firstly , transparency of action , full transparency of procedures , of the evaluation criteria adopted and their results , and then communications and a communications strategy , because the actions taken on anti-dumping by the European Commission can serve to reassure our business people and workers .
Secondly , there is space for the exercise of discretion in anti-dumping procedures .
This is common sense , but sometimes I have the impression that too much discretion is exercised in the decisions that are taken .
Thirdly , following the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament must be better integrated , involved and informed .
It seems to me that there the Commission is labouring somewhat to recognise Parliament 's role in international trade - even though much effort has been made , for which we are grateful to the Commissioner - and Parliament certainly needs to have a stronger voice on anti-dumping as well .
Lastly , there is the question of dialogue with society .
Once again , perhaps , the Commission still has much to do on this issue .
Parliament cannot merely sit and listen to the players in society , including in anti-dumping matters .
In this respect , the Commission should probably take note of the new requirements with respect to the exclusive powers on international trade recognised to it by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Lastly , it is clear to us that anti-dumping must be part of a coherent commercial strategy and an integrated policy based on the criteria of honesty and openness .
Bearing this in mind , Europe will be able to move forward with its head held high .
Mr President , we can now see the consequences here .
It is a shame that the Commission did not take the opportunity to reform the Trade Defence Instruments in 2007 when we were talking about Global Europe , which was perhaps the original intention .
When it comes to the question of the Treaty of Lisbon and which decision-making procedure we should have , perhaps none of those that exist really fit our purposes properly .
However , we Greens actually have no problem with the question of implementation , provided the rules are clear , transparent and fair .
I would like to emphasise that , in this context , it is also important not only to safeguard the interests of producers , but also to include the interests of consumers and the actual purpose itself , just as Mr Caspary said , namely to put a stop to dumping below the actual costs .
In this regard , however , I would like to stress that the actual costs must include environmental dumping .
Obtaining an economic advantage by circumventing environmental legislation is just like obtaining another form of subsidy besides economic dumping , but in the form of the environment .
It must be possible to include it when we look at the dumping issue .
We talked previously about trade policy as an instrument for achieving other goals .
In this case , it may even be more effective to use anti-dumping measures to prevent carbon dioxide leakage within the Emissions Trading System , for example .
In the current system there is a long list of hundreds of business sectors , covering tens of thousands of companies , with four different criteria for when they are to be granted exemption from the ETS or receive free allocation .
In this case it is , of course , much easier to instigate anti-dumping proceedings when a European company is affected by unfair competition on account of a lack of environmental responsibility in other countries .

Mr President , Mr De Gucht , ladies and gentlemen , we have already discussed in the previous debate the need to put trade policy into a broader context and to comply with , protect and implement international law .
One of the legal frameworks which the European Union and its Member States form part of is the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
However , my group has been critical of its shortcomings right from the beginning and particularly in this respect .
The Commission is under an obligation to protect European companies and their employees from unfair competition using the anti-dumping instruments permitted by the WTO .
In concrete terms , this is about selling products below cost .
We are calling on you to expand the definition of production costs and to apply this definition multilaterally , because social dumping and environmental dumping , as other speakers have already emphasised , cause production costs to fall .
The result is unfair competitive pressure on European companies , which may even put their survival at risk .
We are threatened by a global downward spiral , which we cannot and will not accept .
Against this background , we must continue to work on defining objective criteria for the use of the instruments , because they currently have the reputation among countries both outside and inside the European Union of being arbitrary .
One reason for this is the lack of a functioning appeal body .
Some small and medium-sized businesses inside the EU are complaining that their interests are seen as less important than those of larger companies when the anti-dumping instruments are used .
This applies particularly to the global division of labour for manufacturing firms in Europe .
These companies are questioning whether the Commission still has a clear overview of the consequences of the measures it imposes .
I would like the Commission to address this using the specific example of case AD549 , with the keyword being the European Saint-Gobain group .
The Commission 's decision on this company may well help to support it , but from our perspective it also puts many jobs in small and medium-sized manufacturing companies at risk .
My question to you , Mr De Gucht , is : Were adequate investigations carried out , were there appropriate opportunities to object , were these opportunities used and were the small and medium-sized companies given enough information about the procedures ?

author . - Mr President , I would say this to the Commissioner : since the start of the economic downturn , the Commission has repeatedly promised not to turn to protectionist policies but to embrace liberalisation - which you yourself have been very much in favour of - create opportunities for European businesses and make a more attractive opportunity in Europe for investment .
While I agree that anti-dumping measures must be used where they are necessary , the problem is , of course , whether you use them as a protectionist measure .
The sheer number of anti-dumping investigations at the moment would suggest that they are being so used .
On this matter , Commissioner , I beg to differ with you on a particular problem in Belgium with an electronic company about which I spoke to you only about three or four weeks ago .
In actual fact they have come to an agreement and they have sorted it out themselves , yet you have not dropped the anti-dumping legislation against that particular company .
It was a Chinese company and a Belgian electronic company .
They have sorted it out and are actually working together specifically to provide job opportunities in the European Union .
I will give you another example .
We have a situation within the United Kingdom - and , for that matter , Europe - over fibreglass , which has an import duty at the moment of ( and I stand to be corrected on this ) 43.6 % .
This is a useful product used right across the United Kingdom and Europe for the manufacture of a number of products .
Finally , Commissioner , let me remind you that it was not you , not your predecessor but the predecessor of your predecessor who put in place anti-dumping legislation on fertiliser .
Regarding agricultural products , at the moment we are deeply worried about the cost of production , supply and security of food .
Yet the actual costs of fertiliser - because you have put in place anti-dumping legislation - have risen by 173 % .
Why is this happening ?
We must open up our markets .
I trust you , of all people , implicitly to actually get rid of this protectionism across Europe .
I look forward to hearing your answers .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am happy that the European Parliament shares our view that the defence of EU production against international trade distortions should be considered as a necessary component of an open and fair trade strategy .
I share your view that trade defence instrument ( TDI ) decisions must continue to be founded on technical and factual elements , and I am confident we have one of the most effective and fairest trade defence systems in the world .
I am aware that , in anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigations , there are many interests at stake and that some stakeholders attempt to influence the decision .
Nevertheless , I can confirm that the decision-making process is effective , transparent and based on factual evidence and thorough analysis .
I acknowledge that third parties have recently tried to influence our decision making by pressuring industries or , indeed , Member States and companies operating in these third countries .
I strongly condemn such actions .
In this context , the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon provides an opportunity to address this problem .
I would like to assure you that the number of TDI cases remains stable over the medium and long term : so , in response to Mr Sturdy , no , it is not going up .
We have managed to avoid any significant increase which could have happened as a result of the world recession , and have ensured that the anti-dumping instrument would not be used for protectionist purposes .
Most statistics show that the number of cases in the EU remains lower than in our main trading partners .
China remains , by and large , the main source of unfair trade ( around 35 % of cases launched by the EU are against China ) .
I am determined to take action where necessary , and this includes anti-subsidy action .
Mr Sturdy also put a question with respect to a recent case , the so-called ' modem case ' , where the Commission had , in fact , looked at three aspects : the dumping , the subsidisation and also the safeguards .
The dumping and the subsidisation were investigated on the basis of complaints by the company concerned and , according to the basic regulations , complainants can withdraw their complaints .
EU law stipulates that , where a case is withdrawn , the proceedings can be terminated unless such termination would not be in the Community interests .
We are currently examining the implications of the withdrawals .
It should be pointed out that the Commission has accepted such withdrawals in the past and has consequently terminated investigations without taking measures .
On the third case , concerning the safeguards , this is , in fact , a complaint initiated by the government concerned in the case - the Belgian Government - so that is a somewhat different procedure .
The company concerned ( Option NV ) has now informed the Commission that it has asked the Belgian Government to withdraw the request for the imposition of safeguard measures , but the Belgian Government has not yet informed the Commission whether it will comply with Option 's request , so we are waiting for the Belgian Government to take a decision on its position .
That is precisely what has happened in this case .
Now , continuing on the broader issues , trade defence instruments are there for good reasons .
In the absence of international competition rules and other rules associated with properly functioning markets , trade defence instruments are the only possible means of protecting our industry against unfairly traded goods .
We seek to use these rules in the most efficient way for our industries .
The existence of time limits ensures quick action for the industry and predictability for exporters .
I intend to keep our instruments effective and fair , for the benefit of all the economic operators concerned .
The international rules on trade defence are being renegotiated in the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
The EU position there is clear : we want to maintain the effectiveness of our instruments while protecting our business against protectionist actions by others .
These WTO negotiations , as well as changes brought about by the Treaty of Lisbon , are important in relation to any review of our rules that we would wish to undertake .
As regards SMEs , trade defence instruments indeed represent a challenge for SMEs , in terms of both costs and complexity .
There is a need to reduce the administrative burden for SMEs in trade defence investigations .
This is why I have commissioned a study to look at the specific difficulties that SMEs face when dealing with TDIs , and at possible solutions to alleviate these difficulties .
Regarding the institutional aspects , you will have noted that the comitology proposal submitted by the Commission in March provides for Parliament to be fully informed as to the committee proceedings .
The Commission will also provide information on the proposed measures on which the committees are asked to deliver an opinion , the final measures and the final adoption by the Commission .
At any time , Parliament can obtain further information on request .
In this context , let me confirm that the Commission is effectively ready to make a proposal on the alignment of the trade defence instruments with the new system of control of delegated and implementing acts ( this is the so-called ' trade omnibus ' ) .
However , as you are aware , there is significant discussion between the institutions on the overall issue of implementing acts .
The Commission is carefully following the discussion and gauging , on the basis of contacts with the other institutions , when such a proposal should be adopted by the Commission .
However , let me be clear that the only issue is that of when the proposal will be made , not whether it will be made .
There was also the specific question by Mr Moreira on the comitology .
There , I would like to be very clear .
I see no argument whatsoever in the Treaty of Lisbon for having special treatment for comitology when it concerns trade , and we will not agree to that .
Of course , the decision is in the hands of Parliament and the Council , although the Commission could also have a role to play , as , ultimately , could the European Court of Justice .
Introducing a different majority - because that is what it really comes down to - for overruling the Commission on questions of trade is not acceptable to us , and it is certainly not acceptable to me .
Finally , regarding the use of trade defence instruments by third countries , we have indeed observed an increase since the beginning of the economic crisis .
I would like to assure you that we follow trade defence actions by third countries closely , and we take action when necessary - including intense monitoring , effective support for EU exporters affected and , indeed , the initiation of dispute-settlement procedures at the WTO .
In many cases the Commission 's actions lead to the termination of the investigation without the imposition of measures .
In other cases , these interventions often result in lesser measures being imposed on the EU exporters concerned .
There was also a question about possible forms of retaliation towards third countries in respect of pressures exerted on European companies .
We have received petitions on this matter from European companies but we do not disclose their names , in order to protect them .
For example , in a recent case involving China , China attacked the dispute settlement in the WTO and the panel supported us , but we have not made public the names of the companies concerned , and I think this was also to protect the companies .
Two final questions were on whether we are going to review the trade defence instruments .
We are not , because I truly believe it is not necessary .
There is an enormous amount of work to be done on trade in the coming years , and I must say that I do not want to reopen certain discussions through such a review process .
I would consider doing so only once the Doha Round is over .
There was also a specific question by the Green member .
Mr Schlyter , your question is an interesting one , I must say , because , as you most probably know , these anti-dumping cases are introduced by companies .
They are taken on the basis of a complaint by a company .
So if a company were to raise the issue that you put forward concerning carbon leakage , then the Commission would , of course , investigate and see whether the case ought to result in measures being imposed . But the issue is certainly not beyond the scope of the arguments that we consider .
We consider the arguments that are put forward by the companies concerned , so if a company were to put this before us then we would certainly look into the matter .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , anti-dumping represents one of the most incisive instruments for defending commercial decency in the European Union in order to compete fairly on the market .
It needs clear and enforceable rules within the new comitology .
The Treaty of Lisbon clearly states that the Commission is responsible for executive acts .
The Council and Parliament have the power to monitor the work of the Commission .
The compromise under examination today removes the role assigned to Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon and could therefore create a new democratic deficit within the institutions .
In detail , we do not understand and we reject the proposal to apply differential treatment to anti-dumping measures , which introduces elements of discretional decision making , politicisation and legal uncertainty to proceedings , which should instead aim to protect the legitimate interests of businesses damaged by practices of unfair competition .
At a time of serious economic crisis like the present , it seems unreasonable and masochistic to make the conclusion of anti-dumping procedures complicated and perhaps impractical .
Indeed , that would be the result of the current proposal if it were not amended .
We appeal to the Member States ' sense of responsibility , as well as to that of the Commission , since their common interest must be to guarantee greater development .
Development is only possible in the presence of rules that prevent market distortion , respect institutional roles and make procedures swift .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , over recent years the number of anti-dumping procedures applied by the European Commission has increased .
This is a sign of the increase in unfair practices operated by other countries against European businesses .
Despite the economic and financial crisis , some 332 protectionist measures have been adopted by our international partners over the last two years .
We believe in free but fair international trade which is based on sharing rules which are the same for everyone .
It is important to safeguard the effectiveness of Europe 's instruments of commercial protection , which are used to correct illegal situations .
I am profoundly concerned about the effects that the current attempts to reform comitology may have on the effectiveness of these instruments .
Leaving space for political and diplomatic negotiations to decide on the application of anti-dumping measures risks perverting a process that should instead remain based on concrete , objective information .
Mr President , I would like to return to what my colleague , Mr Sturdy , was talking about here .
Anti-dumping is a good servant but a bad master .
Just as it serves to protect European companies and the European economy from unfair competition and unfair commercial practices , so can it be abused in the interests of protectionism , unfortunately , to close European markets to imports from third countries .
I therefore call on the Commission , and I call on you , Commissioner , not to allow such a development , and for us to warn against anti-dumping measures being abused in the interests of protectionism and in the interests of closing the European market and European economy to the rest of the world .
In my opinion , this would not benefit us , and , in my opinion , a closed fortress Europe would benefit no one and , in my opinion , history always shows that if Europe is open and cooperates with the rest of the world , then it only benefits from this .
Please bear this in mind .
( DE ) Mr President , cheap labour and social dumping are methods which are used very frequently in developing and emerging countries .
The problem of anti-dumping shows how important it is to call for environmental and social standards , in particular , and also trade protection measures during negotiations on free trade agreements with third countries .
European companies in all areas of manufacturing must not be put at a disadvantage because of their high quality standards , which , of course , are reflected in their prices .
The developments during the current Mercosur negotiations are causing me great concern in this respect .
We must not open the door to social dumping , but instead we must incorporate a sustainable approach into trade agreements .
Dumping is a major problem in the agricultural industry , in particular when it results in the disappearance of small , independent farms which are replaced by agricultural contractors .
In this context , I would like to highlight the own-initiative report on trade relations between the EU and Latin America .
This report clearly explains the concerns of the European Union on social , environmental and production standards .
I would like to thank the Members who raised this important question with the Commission .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this will be a very short reply .
I still have to answer the question put by Mr Scholz on the Saint-Gobain glass fibre case .
Anti-dumping duties can make supplies more expensive - including for SMEs .
The Commission is calculating this potential impact under the public interest test .
SMEs can participate in the proceedings .
We have an SME helpline to make cooperation easier .
However , in this case , the impact is small because China has only 14 % of the EU market .
Regarding the question put by Mr Zahradil on the use of the trade defence instrument as a protectionist tool and the risk of this happening , the only factor that influences the number of cases is the number of complaints received by the Commission and the quality of the evidence provided .
The Commission 's trade defence policy is a rules-based system in line with WTO rules .
If a complaint is filed and there is sufficient substantiating evidence that dumping is taking place , then the Commission has no other choice than to open an investigation .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
In order to protect the European economy , it is necessary to introduce effective restrictions on the process used to lobby on behalf of products which originate in third countries .
These products are very often made using materials which contain substances which are harmful both to the environment and to consumers .
A conspicuous example are children 's toys - dangerous ingredients contained in the paints or plastic parts can cause health problems , and poor workmanship can cause an accident which ends up with a visit to hospital .
It is in precisely this way , of course - by using cheap materials and not paying attention to workmanship - that it is possible to achieve low retail prices and to flood markets .
We must rigorously increase control over production of imported articles and ensure effective enforcement of the legislation which governs the introduction of cheap products from third countries to the European market .
Trade protection instruments must be effective and must guarantee that all our businesses have fair conditions of competition .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23 : 55 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 00 )
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women and peace and security ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
European Ombudsman 's activity report for 2009 - Special Report from the European Ombudsman to the European Parliament following the draft recommendation to the European Commission in Complaint 676 / 2008 / RT ( According to Rule 205 ( 2 ) , 1st part ) - 26th Annual Report on Monitoring the Application of European Union Law ( 2008 ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the reports on the European Ombudsman and the Application of European Union Law :
the report by Mrs Nedelcheva , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2009 ( 2010 / 2059 ( INI ) ) ;
the report by Mrs Paliadeli , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the Special Report by the European Ombudsman following his draft recommendation to the European Commission in complaint 676 / 2008 RT ; and
the report by Mrs Lichtenberger , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the 26th Annual Report on Monitoring the Application of European Union Law ( 2008 ) - .

Mr President , Mr Diamandouros , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we can see the mission of the European Ombudsman as involving two objectives .
First of all , there is the legal objective , which entails ensuring that the European institutions show respect for the fundamental right of good administration .
Ensuring respect for this right is the very essence of the Ombudsman 's function .
We are now at a key moment in the sense that the Treaty of Lisbon , which now includes the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , makes this right legally binding in Article 41 .
The Ombudsman therefore now has a legal basis , and one which I would say has been strengthened , to carry out his activities properly .
To achieve this objective of full respect for good administration , the Ombudsman must be inflexible when it comes to the institutions .
The special reports are a tool which comes into its own here .
They allow the Ombudsman to point out cases of blatant bad administration when all means of resolving disputes have been exhausted .
The Porsche affair is very significant in this regard .
Here , I would like to praise the determination , if I may say so , of Mr Diamandouros , in his efforts to obtain the information that he is completely entitled to request .
The second objective is moral in nature .
For the Ombudsman , it involves promoting a culture of service , which is not explicitly mentioned in the treaties , but which certainly forms part of the commitments that apply to the institutions .
In order to ensure that such a culture of service is established , two things are necessary .
First of all , the Ombudsman must continue to encourage amicable solutions , as he has already been doing for several years .
I will say again that 56 % of complaints received are resolved amicably .
He must then continue his efforts with respect to communication , so that European citizens are informed of their rights , as well as the existing procedures for ensuring that these rights are respected .
With regard to this , the introduction of an interactive guide is an important step forward , and I believe that many of our citizens are grateful to you for that .
So , the summary of the Ombudsman 's activities in 2009 is an entirely positive one , and that is what I tried to reflect in my report .
However , I also included a number of recommendations .
First , I think it is essential to strengthen links with the national parliaments and national ombudsmen .
Taking action in Brussels without making sure that there is a link at national level means that it is much less effective .
That is why I am asking the European Ombudsman to give more encouragement to national ombudsmen to hold regular exchanges of views with their national parliaments , modelled on the exchanges held between the European Ombudsman and ourselves in the European Parliament .
The European Network of Ombudsmen is an important tool to this end .
I think that sharing information and good practices is essential in this regard .
I want to say again here how important it is to introduce a common intranet portal for ombudsmen to exchange all this information .
Mr President , the citizen must be at the heart of our concerns .
Transparency , proximity , good administration , a culture of service - those are the watchwords .
This proximity also relates to our institution , however .
That is why I would like to praise Mr Diamandouros once again for devoting so much effort to maintaining a constant link with the European Parliament and , in particular , with the Committee on Petitions .
As I underlined in my report , I believe that it would be very beneficial for our two institutions and , beyond that , for European citizens if we had more exchanges when the Ombudsman carries out an own-initiative inquiry .
Thus far , Mr Diamandouros has got down very well to his task of calling the institutions to order when they wander down the tortuous path of opacity and bad administration .
Mr Diamandouros , I wish you all the best , and I am very much looking forward to reading your annual report for 2010 .
Mr President , in March 2007 , an environmental organisation asked for correspondence between the European Commission and the automobile industry to be disclosed during the course of consultations on the preparation of a legislative proposal on carbon dioxide emissions .
Eight months later , the Commission granted access to 16 of 19 letters , refusing - without legal justification - to disclose three letters from Porsche .
The environmental organisation took recourse to the European Ombudsman , who prepared a draft recommendation addressed to the Commission a month later , asking it to reply within three months , in accordance with Article 288 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The Commission requested five extensions , only to state - in June 2009 - that it was not in a position , a year after the Ombudsman 's draft recommendation , to disclose the correspondence with this particular automobile manufacturer , due to continuing consultations with it .
Up to October 2010 , the Ombudsman had no information at his disposal .
This unwarranted delay resulted in a special report to the European Parliament , charging the Commission with refusing to cooperate honestly and in good faith and , at the same time , pointing out the danger in undermining the facility for the two institutions to supervise the Commission .
As a result of this special report from the Ombudsman which Parliament is being called upon to pass today , the first on the subject of maladministration , the letters from this particular automobile manufacturer were disclosed , fifteen months after the Ombudsman 's initial request .
Between September 2008 and February 2010 , the Commission arrived at a decision which had been suggested to it in the Ombudsman 's draft recommendation fifteen months earlier .
At the same time , it was proven that that this specific automobile manufacturer had ultimately agreed to the - albeit partial - disclosure of its letters .
It is clear from the foregoing that the Commission was , of course , obliged to take account of the relative article of the European Parliament regulation requiring the institutions to refuse access to documents if their disclosure would undermine the protection of the commercial interests of private individuals or legal entities .
However , given that the Ombudsman 's office checked the letters and found that they did not contain information that would damage the commercial interests of this particular automobile manufacturer , the Commission should have immediately disclosed at least some of them , in line with the Ombudsman 's suggestion .
If , however , it had reservations in interpreting the draft recommendation , it was obliged , in order to justify its decisions , to submit equally strong legal assessments confirming the possibility that the automobile manufacturer in question might take recourse to the courts on the basis of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 of the European Parliament .
I have no wish to comment here on the total silence which the automobile manufacturer in question has maintained in response to the Commission 's request .
However , I do consider it unacceptable for the supreme executive body of the European Union to use the refusal , a refusal which is almost dismissive of the European institutions on the part of a private company , to decline to respond to such a request as an argument , especially as its letters contain no information which might activate the application of the relevant article of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 of the European Parliament and give cause to take the Commission to court .
Mr President , my report on the implementation of Community law is of the utmost importance here in the European Parliament .
Here in the European Parliament , we have a process of legislation which , although highly complex , is one of the most transparent when compared to national parliaments .
I would point out that I have been a member of a national assembly , so I know what I am talking about .
This lengthy process involving the governments of the Member States , as well as the European Parliament , produces results that are often only evident once implemented in national legislation .
However , if implementation in the various national parliaments does not take place or is inefficient , then we , the Members of this House , Parliament itself , and the European Union as a whole , are faced with a major credibility problem .
I consider this a very serious issue .
As Members of the European Parliament , we are constantly being confronted by citizens who tell us about the shortcomings of the system .
The Commission regularly receives complaints from citizens about how national law is implemented .
I would just like to mention a couple of examples : Let us consider the refuse crisis in Naples .
This is a recurring problem , which we are witnessing not for the first or second time , but for the third time .
Yet we find that the European directives on waste disposal , for example , have not been implemented .
The Commission has intervened here , but this intervention has not succeeded in having the principles of waste disposal we in Europe believe to be critically important implemented at national level .
Let us consider my own country , Austria .
Here , the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive has been poorly implemented .
One case , involving the closure of a ski resort , clearly shows that there are enormous problems here .
Another example can be found in the area of transport , where it is stipulated that Member States must respect rest time for drivers in traffic management and where controls are required to ensure compliance .
The shocking lack of controls in this sector is resulting in an increasing number of accidents due to driver fatigue .
In this context , it should be stated that we must avoid frustrating our citizens in their concern to see Community law implemented .
They must be given timely information about legislation and they should be able to rely on the fact that the process will take place in a transparent manner .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , urgently need a procedure to enable us to receive this feedback from our citizens , while still respecting confidentiality requirements .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , whether you are prepared to endorse the procedure we propose in our report .
This would constitute a significant step forward in the direction of transparency , openness and clarity in the European process .
Finally , I would like again to emphasise : if we lose our credibility because we fail to pay sufficient attention to the implementation of Community law in European Member States , this will lead to a credibility problem for the European Union as a whole .
Ombudsman . - Mr President , honourable Members , thank you for this opportunity to address you .
I wish to thank the Committee on Petitions , and especially the chair , Mrs Mazzoni .
They continue to offer me valuable support and advice , as evidenced by the excellent reports submitted to this Chamber by Mrs Nedelcheva and Mrs Paliadeli , whom I thank warmly for their kind words .
Parliament and the Ombudsman both work to ensure that citizens and residents of the EU can enjoy their rights to the full , but we do so in different ways .
The Ombudsman 's mandate is more limited .
I only deal with complaints against EU institutions , whilst you can also examine what Member States are doing .
Furthermore , Parliament as a sovereign political body can deal with petitions that request changes in the law , or new laws .
In contrast , my role is to help uncover maladministration and to attempt to put it right .
Unlike court rulings , an Ombudsman 's decisions are not legally binding .
I can only use the power of persuasion to convince the EU institutions to follow my recommendations , or to achieve friendly solutions which can satisfy both sides .
Where EU institutions refuse to follow my recommendations , it is of fundamental importance that the Ombudsman can turn to Parliament to seek its support , and I am naturally very grateful that Parliament continues to do so , as evidenced by the Nedelcheva and Paliadeli reports .
This is the first annual report presented to you since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I will continue to work in close cooperation with Parliament in order to further our common goal of providing European citizens with the maximum possible benefits from their rights under the treaty , acting always in accordance with my mandate as an independent and impartial investigator of alleged maladministration - an independence and impartiality which applies equally to the complainant as well as to the institution complained against .
In 2009 , my office closed 318 inquires , 70 % of which were completed within one year .
55 % were completed within three months .
On average , inquiries took nine months to complete , which was well within my standard goal of completing inquiries within one year .
I am pleased to note that , in 2009 , 56 % of all investigations were either settled by the institution or resulted in a friendly solution .
This represents a large improvement over 2008 , when the percentage was 36 % .
In 35 cases , I issued a critical remark .
This is a significant improvement compared to 2008 , when I issued 44 critical remarks , or even 2007 , when I issued 55 .
The sustained reduction is good news , but this is still too many .
Honourable Members , I make efforts to help every complainant who turns to the Ombudsman , even in cases where the complaint is not within my mandate .
In 2009 , I received a total of 2 392 such complaints , a 6 % decline compared to 2008 .
This decline is encouraging news .
Reducing the number of inadmissible complaints has been a long-standing request of Parliament .
I attribute this result at least in part to the fact that more citizens are finding the right address to turn to the first time around .
In January 2009 , I launched an interactive guide on my new website , which is accessible in all 23 EU languages .
This guide aims to direct complainants to the body best placed to help them , whether it be my own services , the services of national or regional ombudsmen in the Member States , or problem-solving mechanisms such as the cross-border online network Solvit .
During 2009 , the guide was used by more than 26 000 people .
It is very important for citizens to be guided to the most appropriate complaint-handling body from the outset and to be spared the frustrations and delays associated with having to identify the right institution on their own .
This also means that complaints are resolved more promptly and effectively , thus ensuring that citizens can fully enjoy their rights under EU law and also that EU law is properly implemented .
Over the last three years , I have also made strenuous efforts to raise awareness about the services I can offer to businesses , associations , NGOs , regional authorities and other target groups , that is , anybody who is involved in EU projects or programmes and who has direct dealings with the EU administration .
To further ensure awareness of the Ombudsman 's work , I stepped up cooperation during 2009 with other information and problem-solving networks such as Europe Direct and Solvit .
I also intensified my efforts to reach out to potential complainants by organising a range of public events ; all these outreach activities , combined with the solid results obtained for complainants , resulted in median coverage of the Ombudsman 's work increasing by 85 % .
The number of enquiries opened , based on complaints received in 2009 , rose from 293 to 335 .
This increase must be at least partly attributed to outreach activities .
I have also continued my efforts to improve the quality of information provided to citizens and potential complainants concerning their rights under EU law through the European network of Ombudsmen which greatly helps to facilitate the rapid transfer of complaints to the competent Ombudsman or similar body .
Furthermore , I continued to strive to make certain that EU institutions adopt a citizen-centred approach in all their activities .
This is a task that must be tackled in tandem with the institutions .
To promote this goal with respect to the Commission , I am in close contact with the Vice-President of the Commission responsible for relations with the Ombudsman , Commissioner Šefčovič , who I thank for his presence here today , and I am grateful for his close cooperation and support to date .
The most common allegation I examined in 2009 was lack of transparency .
This arose in 36 % of all enquiries .
It is with a certain degree of concern that I note the continuing high percentage of such complaints .
An accountable and transparent EU administration is surely key to building citizens ' trust .
I also regret the lengthy delays by the Commission in responding to access to document cases .
The most outrageous case is dealt with in Mrs Paliadeli 's report which makes clear that Parliament expects substantial improvement from the Commission in this regard .
The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty was the key event of 2009 .
The treaty makes new promises to citizens concerning fundamental rights , enhanced transparency and greater opportunities for participation in the Union 's policy making .
It also makes the Charter of Fundamental Rights , including the right to good administration , legally binding .
Reform of the Financial Regulation offers an additional excellent opportunity to put the fundamental right to good administration into practice .
I believe that the relevant rules should provide guidance to officials as to how they should ensure both sound financial management and good administration .
Honourable Members , I developed and recently adopted a strategy to cover the whole period of my mandate .
The document containing it was circulated during this past week to your Bureau , the Conference of Presidents and the Committee on Petitions for information .
The strategy is designed to implement the mission statement for my institution which I adopted in 2009 and which reads as follows . ' The European Ombudsman seeks fair outcomes to complaints against European Union institutions , encourages transparency and promotes an administrative culture of service .
He aims to build trust through dialogue , between citizens and the European Union and to foster the highest standards of behaviour in the Union 's institutions ' .
It is within this spirit , Mr President , honourable Members , this spirit of the Commission statement , that I will continue to work in carrying out the mandate which this august body has entrusted me with .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , please bear with me because I will try to respond to our three rapporteurs and the Ombudsman .
I would like to start by thanking Ms Nedelcheva , Ms Paliadeli and Ms Lichtenberger for their reports .
It is very clear that we share the same goals : namely , that administration should be efficient and professional and that European law be respected .
That is the basis on which we intend to discuss these matters and , I am sure , to seek a positive result .
Turning to Mr Diamandouros , I would also like to express my appreciation for his close cooperation with the Commission .
I think this is a special day for him because he can see that his work is also very highly appreciated by the European Parliament .
I can assure you that the communication between us and between our services is very intense .
Hardly a week passes when I do not send a letter of explanation to the Ombudsman and get a response from him .
This is how we try to find the right solutions in our work .
Of course , there are some outstanding issues on which we are working , but I think that is simply proof of our fruitful communication .
I would like to emphasise that the Commission welcomes Ms Nedelcheva 's report , which offers a clear and exhaustive overview of the Ombudsman 's activities for the past year .
In fact , in the Ombudsman 's report on his 2009 activities , the results of his various inquiries are clearly presented , illustrated with examples and classified into categories according to the nature of the cases of maladministration or the institution concerned .
As Mr Diamandouros has already said , in 2009 , the Ombudsman recorded a total of 3 098 complaints , as against 3 406 in 2008 .
This represents a 9 % decrease on the year , but we are fully aware that 56 % of the inquiries were addressed to the Commission .
We are also aware that the most frequent claims for maladministration concern a lack of transparency , including a refusal to provide information , and I am committed to tackling such cases further .
The Commission welcomes the efforts made by the Ombudsman to further reduce the average length of his inquiries to nine months .
The Commission stresses , however , that its own deadlines for internal consultation and for the College of Commissioners to endorse its replies should be taken into consideration by the Ombudsman in his efforts to reduce the time for dealing with a complaint .
Each response is confirmed and endorsed by the College , and it takes some time to reach the College .
It should be noted that the Ombudsman has conducted an intensive information campaign , which has resulted in greater awareness of citizens ' rights and better understanding of his spheres of competence .
In this regard , the Ombudsman tends readily to issue press releases , and these are often published at a stage when the Ombudsman has just sent the Commission a draft recommendation , thus leaving no room for the Commission for defence , since its reply is still ongoing .
In some cases , a friendly solution may be found if the institution offers redress to the complainant .
This solution is freely offered , without involving liability issues or setting a legal precedent .
If a friendly solution cannot be found , the Ombudsman can make recommendations to resolve the case .
If the institution does not accept his recommendations , he can make a special report to Parliament .
In 2009 , there were no special reports sent to Parliament by the Ombudsman .
A special report was sent to Parliament in 2010 regarding a complaint on access to Commission documents .
Relations with the Ombudsman have occasionally given rise to differences of opinion .
This has been the case with inquiries concerning infringement procedures .
The Ombudsman often argues that the Commission has not provided a sufficient explanation of its position , which clearly requires a response from the Commission on the substantive content of its reasoning and comes close to a debate on the merits of the Commission 's line .
However , the Commission has tended to respond at great length to the Ombudsman , setting out in detail , and backing up , the interpretations of the law that have been applied , while adding a disclaimer about differences in interpretation of the law and stressing that the final arbiter is the European Court of Justice .
Given the developments which have occurred in recent years on the registering and treatment of complaints ( the ' EU Pilot ' project ) , as confirmed in its annual report on monitoring the application of EU law in 2009 , the Commission would like , in the near future , to update its Communication of 23 March 2002 on relations with the complainant in respect of infringements of Community law .
I have personally met the Ombudsman and was able to inform him about these developments .
In the field of transparency and access to documents , the Commission thoroughly examines all the complaints addressed to it by the Ombudsman .
One of these cases led the Ombudsman to submit in 2010 a special report to Parliament and this is the subject of Ms Paliadeli 's report .
I regret that this special report was sent shortly after the Commission had taken a final decision in the case .
Nevertheless , I acknowledge that the time taken for reaching this decision was excessive , even if it was due to the failure of the third party to respond to the Commission 's proposal .
I would like to stress that the Commission is fully committed to sincerely cooperating with the Ombudsman .
There is no question of unwillingness to cooperate on the part of the Commission and certainly no intention to obstruct the Ombudsman 's work in any way .
The Commission always strives to cooperate closely with the Ombudsman .
However , some requests for access to documents are particularly complex or voluminous and cannot be handled within normal timeframes .
The Commission handles around 5 000 access requests per year , of which only 15 to 20 lead to complaints to the Ombudsman .
The entry into force of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union has made it possible to start thinking about how to achieve a common approach in order to establish an open , effective and independent European administration .
The Commission therefore considers that an interinstitutional dialogue is needed before presenting any legislative proposal .
A positive outcome here seems possible , and cooperation between the two institutions on the matter should ensure it .
If you will allow me , Mr President , I will also respond to Ms Lichtenberger because she has made a great effort to be here this morning .
I would like to assure her that the Commission attaches great importance to the correct application of EU law and , as you know , this was among the priorities of the Barroso Commission .
Already in our communication ' A Europe of results ' , in 2007 , the Commission committed itself to improving its working methods to ensure the more efficient pursuit of problems arising in the application of EU law , focusing on the issues which cause the most problems for citizens and businesses .
I said in this communication that the annual report represents more of a strategic evaluation of the application of EU law , identifying the main challenges , setting priorities and programming work according to those priorities .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's response to this report .
The following remarks pick up on some of the key issues .
Concerning the provision of information on infringements , the Commission is in the process of implementing the new framework agreement with Parliament .
It is committed to providing Parliament with the information set out in that agreement .
The Commission also looks forward to associating Parliament with its work on the ' Your Europe ' portal to ensure that citizens know where to go to find the information that they seek .
We welcome Parliament 's recognition of the contribution of the EU Pilot project to a properly functioning , citizen-focused European Union , in accordance with the Lisbon Treaty .
This project is designed to ensure that citizens ' concerns and complaints about the application of EU law are followed up , and that is , of course , a major consideration for us .
In doing this work , the Commission has to respect the confidentiality to which the Court of Justice has confirmed that the Member States are entitled concerning the investigation of alleged application issues and potential infringement proceedings .
Therefore , while the Commission provided extensive information in its report adopted in March this year on the functioning of the EU Pilot project , it does not grant access to , or divulge information on , the particular cases being handled under EU Pilot .
At the same time , the Commission recognises the importance of ensuring the timely provision to citizens of a full and clear evaluation of the outcome of work done with the Member States in EU Pilot , and it is committed to ensuring that complainants have an opportunity to comment on the outcome .
On the question of the adoption of the procedural code under Article 298 , the Commission understands that a working group has been set up in Parliament to study the potential scope and content of such an initiative .
The Commission also considers it appropriate to weigh the outcome of initial work on the overall issue before considering any more specific elements .
For the moment , therefore , we reserve our position on all aspects .
The Commission is also preparing to provide up-to-date information on the resources devoted to the application of EU law .
The draft resolution being discussed today covers a wide range of issues and , in its response to the resolution , the Commission will provide additional explanations which would be very difficult to provide today , mainly through lack of time .
Mr President , honourable Members , we are glad to share the common interest in the current application of EU law for the benefit of EU citizens and businesses .
The effective application of EU law is one of the cornerstones of the EU , as a well as a key component of smart regulation .
I would like to apologise to the interpreters for speaking so quickly .
Thank you very much for your patience , and thanks to all of you for your attention .
Yes , I am afraid you did have a slight tendency to accelerate . Thank you .
Mr President , Mr Diamandouros , Commissioner , this is a joint debate we are holding here .
I am speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Committee on Petitions , who unfortunately is ill , and I would like to limit my remarks to Mrs Paliadeli 's report .
This House has often debated and discussed the issue of access to documents and the benefits of transparency and the question of where the line should be drawn between the legitimate rights and interests of the public at large , on the one hand , and the legitimate interests of individuals and companies , on the other .
By the way , Mrs Paliadeli , the shoe can also be on the other foot , namely that information is made available to an NGO and a company or individual then seeks to find out exactly what information has been shared .
We are not considering the question of who is good or bad here , but simply the issue of timeframes and deadlines .
These deadlines must be honoured insofar as they relate to individual citizens and , of course , to the Ombudsman .
This is what you might call a fundamental principle of good administration .
We would expect the Commission , which has shown such an interest in speeding business up , as the Vice-President has already mentioned , to take a closer look at this issue and to effect an improvement .
Mr President , I would like to take the floor as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for the special European Ombudsman 's report .
I wish to begin by emphasising that achieving a consensus among all the political groups facilitated the drafting of the report .
I must mention that not a single amendment was tabled and I would like , at the same time , to congratulate Mrs Paliadeli for this result .
It is worrying that the Commission 's uncooperative behaviour towards the Ombudsman may create a significant lack of trust among citizens in the EU 's institutions .
The absence of good cooperation jeopardises the ability of the Ombudsman and the European Parliament to supervise the Commission effectively .
I also wish to recall the principle of sincere cooperation stipulated in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
It entails the consolidation of relations in good faith between the EU 's institutions .
Unfortunately , the Ombudsman is very often faced with the Commission 's failure to meet deadlines for providing public access to documents .
Another worrying aspect is that the Ombudsman had to compile a special report as a last resort to persuade the Commission to be more cooperative .
Such incidents should no longer be encountered in future .
In this respect , I would like to ask the European Commission to make further efforts to cooperate more efficiently with the Ombudsman .
It must not be overlooked that any time the Commission is not going to assume such a commitment , Parliament will be able to apply sanctions .
The situation revealed in the report creates a systematic problem .
It deprives citizens of one of the key benefits which they expect to gain as a result of the basic right to lodge complaints .
Mr President , I would like to thank all three Members for the reports we are discussing here today in the joint debate , and I would particularly like to talk about Mrs Lichtenberger 's report , as it shows exceptional rigour in my opinion , and I agree with much that it says .
I , too , would therefore like to be a little more critical today , Mr Vice-President .
It can generally be said that the Commission does not , on the whole , tell citizens or Parliament enough about how it monitors the implementation of Community law .
At the same time , the Treaty on European Union clearly establishes an active role for EU citizens , for example , with the European Citizens ' Initiative ( ECI ) .
I am also delighted , Mr Vice-President , that you are here with us today in this debate , as I know that you personally are not only competent but you have an extremely close involvement in the ECI .
Despite this , however , the annual reports of the European Commission on monitoring the application of EU law in their current form do not provide Parliament or the people with enough information on the state of affairs .
The Commission has so far focused too much on the transposition of European law into national law , while greatly neglecting its actual application .
A terse reference to formal proceedings in the case of a Member State which has not yet transposed an EU law at the national level does not tell us or our citizens very much .
We must and we want to learn more about cases where the Commission investigates imprecise or completely defective transpositions .
Only when we are fully informed of such cases will we be able to talk about consistent monitoring of the application of EU law .
As we all surely know , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has certain duties and powers in respect of the Commission .
This includes monitoring and evaluation .
We in the European Parliament have a sincere interest in sensibly evaluating the Commission 's progress in fulfilling your tasks , safeguarding agreements and complying with EU law .
However , we do not have sufficient access to the information on the basis of which the Commission handles breaches of regulations .
This is not a new request , Mr Vice-President .
Back in February , in the resolution on the revised framework agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission , we asked the Commission , and I quote : ' to make available to the European Parliament summary details of all proceedings in matters of breaches of regulations on the basis of an official request , if the European Parliament so desires ' , end quotation .
I would like to make a strong appeal for the Commission to provide this information to us and , through us , to the citizens of the EU .
In conclusion , Mr Vice-President , I have said several times in my speeches that the European Parliament has a sincere interest in assisting the Commission , and even in supporting it against the Council .
We are now making a request to you for the Commission to provide the European Parliament in return with the information we are requesting not only for ourselves , but also for the citizens of the Member States of the European Union .
Mr President , in the Committee on Petitions , in other words , the committee that deals with citizens ' complaints , respect for EU legislation is absolutely key .
Citizens come to us because national or local authorities do not comply with EU legislation , for example , with regard to the protection of human health or the environment .
We need only consider the many complaints we have received concerning the long-standing waste crisis in Campania , despite a clear ruling by the European Court of Justice , and concerning the freezing of funds .
Nothing has really been done to solve this problem .
Both the citizens and the protected environment are suffering .
This is what we called ' fortunate Campania ' - oh dear !
The Commission must immediately utilise all means at its disposal in this regard .
The treaty assigns the Commission a key role .
That is , to monitor the Member States ' compliance with EU legislation .
In the committee , we therefore pay close attention to how the Commission deals with infringements of the rules .
In light of this , I welcome Mrs Lichtenberger 's report .
She makes it absolutely clear that it is not good enough simply to send complaints about the Member States ' infringements back to them for them to resolve themselves .
They are the ones that the complaints are about .
This leaves citizens utterly high and dry .
In this connection , I would like to compliment the European Ombudsman for having carried out a study on his own initiative precisely on the Commission 's new way of dealing with complaints and infringements , particularly the way the Commission records , or perhaps simply does not record , complaints against Member States for disregarding Community law .
The Ombudsman also has the competence to give an opinion on the substance of the matter when the Commission is accused of not having followed up on the infringements , even if , in the final instance , it is , of course , the Court that is to decide the matter .
In any case , it will constitute progress if we now adopt the proposal in Mrs Nedelcheva 's report to have a proper law on EU administration procedures , which we finally have a basis for in Article 298 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is good that the Ombudsman 's annual report shows many signs of improvements , but it is still worrying that over a third of the complaints relate to a lack of transparency and access to documents and information .
In this regard , it is disgraceful that both the Commission and several Member States are trying to protect large lobbyists from the citizens by means of something that clearly looks like abuse of the data protection rules .
One appalling example in this regard is provided by the Ombudsman 's Special Report on Porsche and the correspondence concerning protection of CO2 limits for cars .
Does anyone here believe that a small or medium-sized enterprise was consulted by the Commission concerning access to letters , or that the Commission wanted to delay the case for 15 months for the sake of a small enterprise ?
Of course not !
It was because it was Porsche and , of course , perhaps also because it was Mr Verheugen .
The Ombudsman 's Special Report tells a longer story and I would like to recommend that everyone reads both Mrs Paliadeli 's excellent report and the Ombudsman 's report itself .
It is great entertainment .
It will open your eyes time and again .
The most serious aspect of this case , however , is the Commission 's lack of loyal cooperation with the Ombudsman .
This is an important report .
Parliament needs to come up with a clear statement on this matter .
I would like to thank the Ombudsman and Mrs Paliadeli .
Mr President , the annual report of the Ombudsman is a good example of how we should present our activities to the public .
The report is comprehensible , concise and to the point .
I therefore highly applaud your efforts and the trouble you have gone to , and I would also like to congratulate you personally in this way .
However , I would , at the same time , like to state at this point that I see one systemic problem in the activities of the office of the Ombudsman .
That problem is public awareness .
Let us concede , namely , that the European Union , as an international organisation , is , to a considerable extent , hard to understand , and not only in terms of its grants , but also in the area of its powers , institutions , decision-making processes and adopted policies and legislation .
What I mean by this is that it is hard to understand for the ordinary citizen .
The same applies logically to the office of the Ombudsman as well .
I am quite sure that if we conducted a survey of European citizens regarding the role of the European Ombudsman and his powers and activities , we would unfortunately find that he is perceived as someone far away and , in many cases , people will not even know that he exists .
The facts are relatively clear .
A great majority of the complaints submitted by my fellow countrymen from the Czech Republic did not fall within the remit of the European Ombudsman .
The situation is no different for other Member States .
When we debated the 2008 report in this place , everyone here called for greater public awareness .
Extensive information campaigns were proposed , and website launches were considered .
However , I myself made a trial attempt to post a complaint on your website yesterday .
I have to say that the interactive guide was too complicated and , to tell the truth , incomprehensible to the ordinary citizen .
The actual complaint form is similarly complicated .
It reminds me a little of the tax return forms in the Czech Republic , which ordinary citizens cannot complete without a tax advisor .
To tell the truth , your website discourages citizens from making complaints .
I would therefore like to make an appeal for simplification .
Another thing I consider hugely important is to reduce the time needed for handling cases .
Ultimately , we know that if someone makes a complaint , it is of the utmost importance from the perspective of trust that the complaint be handled as quickly as possible , and that the complainant receives a response as quickly as possible .
Additionally , if a given issue is not within the competence of the body to which the complaint is addressed , the complaint should be referred directly to the national or regional ombudsman that has the relevant powers .
Ladies and gentlemen , too much communication kills off information .
Too much information kills off European citizens .
In my opinion , it should be a priority of the Ombudsman not only to resolve but also to prevent incorrect bureaucratic procedures .
I therefore consider it key for this institution not to be taken advantage of for media campaigns , and for there to be no extension of its powers .
After his election , Ombudsman Diamandouros said : ' I will continue the effort to improve the quality of European Union administration ' .
I would therefore like to ask in conclusion what systemic problem have you specifically managed to improve , and what do you intend to turn your attention to in the coming year .
I wish you every success in finding systemic solutions .
Mr President , my group would like to thank Mrs Nedelcheva for this report , which provides us with a wealth of information from the Committee on Petitions on the work of the European Ombudsman .
It is a very descriptive report covering all activities in 2009 and a large proportion of the complaints , which , incidentally , declined by 9 % compared with the previous year .
More than half of the complaints relate to the European Commission .
I believe that the complaints that have been made to the Ombudsman criticise poor administrative practices , such as a lack of transparency or denying access to documents .
We can be satisfied that a large proportion of these complaints are resolved through the Ombudsman 's handling of them , and that we are therefore going in the right direction .
The objectives for 2010 were summed up in five objectives : openly listening to suggestions in order to identify best practices , working in order to find ways of achieving quicker results , persuading in order to have a better impact on the administrative culture of the institutions , providing timely , useful information that can be accessed quickly and adapting in order to ensure good resource management , efficiency and effectiveness .
I believe that the objectives that were set for 2010 are extremely relevant .
We are faced with the need to update mechanisms that will enable us to resolve cases involving a lack of transparency and information , which are certainly arising .
We have the example of the Paliadeli report , in relation to the case of Porsche , and as Porsche refused , or rather the Commission refused to publish some of the motor company 's letters , Parliament needs to support the Ombudsman and the Ombudsman also needs to rely on the European Parliament in order to acquire better information on these matters .
The recent decision of the Court of Justice of the European Union overturning the Commission 's decision to publish the list of recipients of common agricultural policy aid is very concerning .
In other words , that decision goes against the basic principles of transparency , which should govern everything relating to the European budget , and is a direct attack on the right of Europeans to know who their taxes go to .
I think that this is bad practice which we should seek to resolve through Parliament through the necessary legislative changes .

Mr President , having read the European Ombudsman 's report for 2009 , I feel obliged to praise Mr Diamandouros , because he represents and serves with honour the institution which unites European citizens and makes them feel safe .
It is , of course , the European Ombudsman 's job to ensure that any private individual or legal entity that encounters problems with the institutions of the European Union in terms of abuse of power or any other form of maladministration can take recourse to him .
Having read the report , I realise that the success of the institution and its officers is due to the fact that : firstly , most - the figure is already 70 % - of investigations are completed within one year and over half - in fact 55 % - are completed within three months .
That illustrates how fast the European Ombudsman and his associates act and how smoothly this institution operates .
Secondly , in 80 % of the cases dealt with , the Ombudsman was able to help the interested party resolve the issue one way or another , either by referring them to the competent body or by advising which body they needed to contact in order to resolve their problem quickly .
This proves how efficient this institution is .
We should not overlook the fact that 84 % of petitions were submitted by private individuals and just 16 % were submitted by companies or associations .
This , too , proves the high regard which European citizens who feel that they have been the victim of maladministration have for the institution and its representatives .
I should like to point out that nine of the cases closed in 2009 are examples of best practice .
I must say that I personally was especially pleased by the statement in the introduction to the report that the European Ombudsman intends to help ensure that the European Union can give its citizens the benefits promised to them in the Treaty of Lisbon .
My congratulations therefore to Mr Diamandouros .
( DE ) Mr President , I also once lodged a complaint with the Ombudsman , and , although things did not work out quite so well for me and I was not satisfied with the judgment , nonetheless I would like to compliment the Ombudsman on his work .
I believe it is very important for us here in this House to support the work he does .
In his opening speech , the Ombudsman rightly pointed out that his success or failure largely depends on the actions of the institutions .
If we consider the Porsche case , for example , then the limits of the Ombudsman 's powers and the lack of seriousness with which some institutions regard his recommendations become quite evident .
Of course , it is also necessary for us to put our own house in order , for example , in the case of the purchase of the Altero-Spinelli building , where there have been some enormous irregularities .
The Ombudsman made some clear recommendations and amendments were issued .
However , so far , very little progress has actually been made in Parliament .
The amendments were rejected .
This demonstrates yet again how the House views these recommendations .
What I am getting at is that it is very important for us to put our own house in order and to take the recommendations of the Ombudsman seriously , thereby strengthening his position .
( PL ) Mr President , as is the case every year , the Committee on Legal Affairs is presenting Parliament with its report regarding the European Commission 's report on the application of EU law and , as is the case every year , members of the Committee on Legal Affairs have many reservations as to the substance and the form in which the Commission prepared the report .
There is no doubt that the issue of transposing EU law into national systems is a very serious problem within the Union .
The same regulations are being introduced by various countries at different times which , in certain respects , is , of course , understandable .
However , this should not lead to delays that cause a lack of legal surety and , as a consequence , make it impossible for citizens to exercise their rights .
As our rapporteur correctly points out , delays in transposition as well as the incorrect application of EU law bring with them real costs and lead to a lack of trust in EU institutions among citizens .
For this reason as well , I welcome all of the Commission 's initiatives such as meetings of experts and bilateral dialogue between the Commission and Member States , the aim of which is to resolve these problems as quickly as possible .
I am observing with great interest the EU pilot programme , which is supposed to be a tool enabling a rapid response to all cases of incorrect application or adaptation of EU law to national legislation .
We also emphasise once again the role that national courts play in the practical application and interpretation of EU law .
This role will not be correctly performed , however , if appropriate training is not given , meetings are not held and an EU legal culture is not created .
With regard to our Parliament - and I address my fellow Members - the law that we create , because we are legislators , must be clear and comprehensible , for only when it is understandable can it be transposed easily into national systems and will there be fewer problems associated with it .
( PL ) Mr President , when analysing the report on the European Ombudsman 's activities for 2009 , I was glad to note the further development of cooperation between the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions .
I rate very highly the work of Professor Diamandouros , who has been the Ombudsman since 2003 , as well as his efforts in informing citizens of opportunities available to them to submit complaints about the incorrect functioning of EU administration and his encouragement of citizens to exercise their rights .
Taking into account the fact that that only 23 % of the more than 3 000 complaints registered in 2009 came within the remit of the Ombudsman , he should absolutely continue his activities in the field of information .
Due to his limited competences , he is only able to investigate complaints regarding European Union institutions and bodies .
However , what is important is that everyone who submits to the Ombudsman a complaint that cannot be accepted on formal grounds receives information as to which authority they should turn to in each given case .
It is also important to stress that the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon significantly strengthens the democratic legitimacy of the Ombudsman and expands his remit into foreign policy .
It should also be noted that the Ombudsman is increasingly undertaking action on his own initiative ; for example , regarding delayed payments from the European Union , disability and discrimination .
His actions have also led to the creation of the European Code of Good Administrative Behaviour .
Further good news is the fact that the time required to conduct proceedings has been reduced to nine months .
The high percentage of cases completed in which the institution that a complaint referred to came to an agreement or the case was resolved to the benefit of the complainant also testifies to the effectiveness of the Ombudsman and his good cooperation with other bodies .
This occurred in as many as 56 % of cases in 2009 .
I hope that the Ombudsman , supported by us , Parliament and the other institutions , will continue his work with the same energy and even greater effectiveness than to date .
( FI ) Mr President , my thanks go to the European Ombudsman and his Office for the admirable work that they have done for his Office in difficult circumstances .
Openness , the right of access to information , and the right to good governance are all crucial if the public are to have confidence in the ability of the EU institutions to monitor their rights .
It is worrying that year after year , the greatest administrative flaw in the system is the lack of transparency , and even a refusal to part with information and documents .
In this respect , the Porsche case is very serious .
When the Commission waited 15 months before handing over the documents it was asked for , it was seriously neglecting its duty to cooperate honestly with the Ombudsman .
This attitude on the part of the Commission sapped the confidence of our citizens in the Commission and harmed the EU 's public image .
Now that a Commissioner and the Ombudsman are sitting there quietly next to each other , I think it would be a good idea if they began a confidential and thorough discussion about whether they respect one another 's work and whether they are prepared to cooperate and act in accordance with the EU 's very own basic principles .
I do not want to blame any single Commissioner in connection with this , but the Commission should have a genuine debate on the matter , because the EU 's public image is certainly not so good that we can afford more cases like Porsche again in the future .
The rights of our citizens have to be respected by the Commission , the Council , and obviously Parliament too - by all the EU institutions .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Diamandouros has been a real asset for our citizens and for the European Union and I would like to thank him sincerely for his work .
Of course , it also touches on a sore point , namely , the area where improvements are needed .
The Porsche case has just been mentioned .
As a German citizen , I must say that I am thoroughly ashamed of what has gone on here .
Here we have a German Commissioner and a German car company and correspondence between them .
All correspondence between the Commission and other car manufacturers in Italy , Spain and other countries is published , but not the German correspondence .
The Ombudsman has issued not one , not two , but three reprimands and yet no action has been taken .
Things urgently need to improve .
I would like to emphasise this in the strongest possible terms .
The second thing I would like to say is that when we use the word ' pilots ' , we generally think of a group of professionals who spend their working lives high above the ground .
I am not quite sure how the Commission hit upon the idea of referring to its new project on how to handle the complaints of European citizens as a ' pilot project ' because in essence , it offers nothing new .
Citizens first lodge well-justified complaints in their own country .
No action gets taken there .
Hence , they turn to the Commission .
What does the Commission do ?
It sends the complaint on a return flight to its country of origin and , once again , nothing gets done .
I do not believe that this is an adequate way of dealing with the concerns and complaints of our citizens and I would like to take this opportunity to ask Commissioner Šefčovič , who I hold in very high regard , to state that he either intends to abandon this project or to reconsider how we can ensure that the complaints of our citizens are sent to the place where they will actually be dealt with and that citizens will receive justice and redress .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I do not wish to change this Chamber into a university classroom .
However , as you know , the office of ombudsman was first established in Europe nearly 300 years ago .
For this reason , it is no surprise that we are interested in such matters and devote so much attention to them .
I think that all three reports deserve attention , with only one reservation .
In Mrs Nedelcheva 's report , there is one section that I find alarming .
The worthy and good work carried out by the European Ombudsman notwithstanding , does the office of ombudsman have to cost almost EUR 9 million ?
Is it not possible to limit the almost Byzantine way in which this office functions ?
This is the reason why my group is abstaining from voting on this issue , on this report in particular , although we wish all the best to the Ombudsman , and more specifically to the citizens who submit their complaints to him .

( PT ) Madam President , in the first place , I would like to thank Mr Diamandouros for his work and the report that he has tabled .
The work is certainly rigorous and of good quality , and I would like to thank him for that .
I would like to talk about the issue of quantity , rather than quality , as it is interesting to find out how much the public calls upon these services .
Apparently there are a few thousand complaints , and of these some are not valid .
It is , however , interesting to look at why there are not more complaints .
In other words , this is a case of ' glass half empty or glass half full ' .
I wonder about the extent to which the overly complex and opaque nature of the European institutions themselves and the legislation on which they are based are at the root of the difficult relationship between members of the public and the institutions .
In other words , in order to make a complaint , you need to know your rights , and in order to know your rights you need to know the legislation and the mechanisms required to submit that complaint .
Therefore , rather than making suggestions to you , Mr Diamandouros , I would like to ask you , as Ombudsman , to make suggestions to Parliament , as a legislative chamber , on simplifying the legislative processes and , as far as possible , the EU 's institutional mechanisms .
There is much talk of transparency and clarity , yet simplicity is also a democratic value that we often forget , as it allows wide public access to the institutions .
Mr Diamandouros , at present , I am also part of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , which holds votes at the same time .
I would like to assure you that I will pay attention to their responses on this matter .
Madam President , perhaps the most disgraceful aspect of the Commissioner 's conduct which this report discloses , over and above the appalling treatment meted out to the complainant in this case , is that it was not an isolated case of maladministration .
Indeed , the facts disclosed in this trenchant report go beyond the realms of mere negligence and indolence .
Rather , it is a reasonable conclusion to draw that this sort of behaviour on the part of the Commission is both quite deliberate and nothing less than a calculated course of conduct designed to thwart the hard work of the Ombudsman and to trash the rule of law .
His work is difficult enough without the added problem of a Commission that set out , as the facts here show , to impede at every turn the proper conduct of his office .
There was a time when , if such shabby conduct on the part of public servants was revealed , both functionaries and the minister responsible would fall on their swords .
Instead , I expect we shall see here an arrogant and overweening Commission doing what it does best , thumbing its nose at the public whilst the guilty ones go unpunished .
No wonder the EU has never been so unpopular !
( HU ) Madam President , the Ombudsman 's activity report clearly shows that the lack of transparency in European Union institutions is one of the biggest problems .
Most of the complaints concern the Commission , which is regularly late with its response and thus shakes confidence in EU institutions .
We need to increase transparency by optimising the work of the institutions and by means of more extensive communication , while at the same time ensuring that these measures do not increase expenses .
The EU has already spent an enormous amount on propaganda and self-advertisement .
Moreover , the number of complaints will doubtless continue to grow with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the incomplete or delayed implementation of European legislation by Member States .
In order to prevent this , expanded and harmonised judicial training must be provided for national judges , practising jurists , public and administrative officials .
In addition , we need to inform citizens that infringements of EU law can be challenged before the national courts concerned as well .
In the first half of 2011 , Hungary will hold the rotating Presidency of the European Union , and thus we , Hungarian MEPs , will be charged with a major task , namely , the transposition of legal harmonisation .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Diamandouros , Commissioner , the institution of the Ombudsman has had a very impressive history in Europe .
Taking a concept originally developed in Sweden , ombudsmen have been trying to resolve disputes and problems on an impartial basis for 200 years now .
I believe that the idea of an ombudsman derives from a deep human need for the resolution of disputes by peaceful means .
This report is the fifteenth such report by the Ombudsman for Europe and the seventh by Mr Diamandouros .
This is a record to be proud of and I would like to congratulate Mr Diamandouros .
When he was elected last year , I expressed the hope that the Ombudsman would do his utmost to ensure that the decision-making process within the EU was more transparent and relevant to its citizens and that we would collaborate effectively with the Committee on Petitions .
I think we can safely say that together , we have succeeded in this .
I still see room for improvement in the coordination between the functions and tasks of the Ombudsman and those of the Committee on Petitions .
We are increasingly in receipt of petitions that touch on aspects of the classic right of petition , as well as elements of the Ombudsman 's duties .
I am talking about human rights , property rights and obstacles to economic activity .
It is reasonable and appropriate that we should work together in these areas so that we can tackle the Commission together in a positive sense and get the relevant responses within the required timeframe .
I would also like to welcome the new website with the interactive guidelines that should help ensure that people are made aware of the opportunities available to them to have their voice heard in Europe .
I hope that Mr Diamandouros continues to succeed in his good and important work and that he will manage to introduce improvements wherever possible .
The Committee on Petitions will also continue to do all it can to promote close cooperation with the Ombudsman in the future in the interests of the citizens of the European Union .
( EL ) Madam President , we are debating two very important issues here today .
One is the interests of European citizens ; the second is reconciliation between European citizens and the European institutions .
The three reports by the three rapporteurs , which are truly exceptional , and the activities of the European Ombudsman , make me think of Mr Diamandouros , on behalf of the citizens of Europe , as D 'Artagnan and the three rapporteurs as the three musketeers safeguarding the interests of the citizens of Europe .
It is a real pity that the European Commission is not as involved in this as it should be .
For me , the only positive thing about the Commissioner 's position statement today was the speed of his speech .
If the European Commission acted at the same speed , we would have had no need for this debate .
It is very important for the European citizens to have trust in the European institutions , to see them in a positive light , and to feel that they are working in their interests .
Fifteen month 's delay , as Mrs Paliadeli said in her report - to see three letters from an automobile manufacturer which specialises in fast cars , what an oxymoron .
If it were the interests of a single European citizen , rather than of an automobile manufacturer , that were at stake , would the delay have been so long ?
I wonder .
Be that as it may , I think that we should be honest .
We all need to work together , we need to show confidence in what the Commissioner said , to believe that the Commission is prepared to cooperate with the European Ombudsman , and we all need to work for the interests of the citizens of Europe .
Let us hope that the Commission acts as quickly as the Commissioner spoke .
He certainly gave the interpreters a run for their money .
( ES ) Bon dia , Madam President .
I am sorry that Mr Vidal-Quadras is no longer chairing the sitting , as I am sure that he would have appreciated my speech .
Firstly , I would like to thank the European Ombudsman for his work and encourage him to continue courageously defending the rights of Europeans , which are often threatened by some public authorities .
In this respect , I would like to say that a Valencian cultural association has collected 650 000 signatures in favour of a legislative initiative to guarantee reception of radio and television channels in Catalan .
This is simply a matter of fulfilling Article 12 ( 2 ) of the Council of Europe 's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and the Audiovisual media services without frontiers Directive .
Well , the Spanish Government has refused to take these 650 000 signatures into consideration .
We hope that the European Ombudsman will take them on board and protect the rights of those 650 000 Europeans who are protected by European legislation .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to begin by expressing the opinion that the Commission 's annual reports on monitoring the application of EU law have certain shortcomings , since in their present form , they do not provide the citizen or the affected institutions with the necessary information on the actual situation regarding the application of EU law .
Particularly in cases where the Commission is acting in a matter of a breach caused by the incorrect transposition of EU law , it would be good in future to state at least basic information on the nature and extent of the breach .
The European Parliament has already sought better information on proceedings involving breaches , through a formal request in the resolution of 4 February 2010 .
I regard it as a positive signal from the speech of European Commission Vice-President Šefčovič that the Commission intends to review the possibility of introducing procedural rules for investigations , setting out various aspects of the procedure for breaches of the law , including time limits , the right to a hearing , the obligation to provide reasons and so on .
I firmly believe that close cooperation between the Commission and the European Parliament can lead to a better and more transparent mechanism for monitoring the application of EU law .
( HU ) Madam President , the European Ombudsman is the European Union 's democratic conscience .
Year after year , this institution contributes to strengthening the trust of complainants in European institutions .
I am particularly pleased that with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the EU now oversees compliance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights as well , primarily by ensuring compliance with the right to good administration .
I find the European network of ombudsmen extremely useful , since citizen awareness and the quality of public service in certain Member States , including Romania where I come from , are below the European average .
This is also reflected in the report on the Ombudsman 's activities .
It is for this reason that I ask the Ombudsman to attempt , in future , to collect the complaints submitted to national ombudsmen on the implementation of European law by Member States , as well , since in most cases , citizens come into contact with European law through their own national authorities .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , to start with , I should like to congratulate the European Ombudsman on the exceptional work he has done over this entire period .
My congratulations also to the rapporteurs .
I should like to comment specifically on Mrs Paliadeli 's report .
This really is a shocking affair : the refusal to disclose the full contents of the correspondence between the Commission and Porsche during the preparation of the directive on car emissions .
The issues that this raises are the objectivity of the Commission 's legislative proposals and whether or not the Commission is truly independent of industrial interests .
The report quite rightly proposes that , if the Commission persists in such practices , part of its budget will be blocked .
Parliament will do this , Commissioner , unless you change these practices .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is natural to see a meeting such as this with the European Ombudsman and the Commissioner as having a particularly significant part to play in the current situation in Europe , which is developing dynamically and tangibly in the public interest .
However , since the instruments recently made available by the Treaty of Lisbon grant the citizens legislative initiative , it is now fair to say that Parliament closely identifies with citizens ' demands and expectations .
It is true that the effective application of the law depends primarily on how well the Commission performs , with the Ombudsman 's authoritative support .
It is important to listen to the people 's demands and expectations and to demand that the instruments really are used in the public interest .
We can only welcome the call made in the initiative for a code of procedure .
Information should be provided on the basis of accessibility , consistency and absolute transparency , because we believe that many regions expect the Commission to show greater energy in relation to the objective expressed here .
We must not forget how important the contribution of other European ombudsmen may be in relation to interparliamentary cooperation .
If the national parliaments and the European Parliament must cooperate effectively in the public interest , as indeed they must , there is no doubt that this personal enrichment of professional history and diverse legal cultures must find time in this cooperation for mediation as an effective method of solving problems in the public interest .
( LT ) Madam President , Ombudsman , thank you for your report .
The role of the European Ombudsman is particularly important for helping citizens to clear up problems that have arisen , and for improving the transparency and accountability of the institutions ' work .
The European Ombudsman wants the decisions of the European Union institutions to be accessible to citizens , because citizens must have an opportunity to obtain desired information , so that they can trust the institutions ' ability to defend their rights as regards discrimination , abuse of power by institutions , failure to reply promptly to enquiries and refusal of information .
The Commission is receiving numerous complaints about maladministration .
Therefore , it is important for the Commission to take action to ensure that requests to access documents receive swift responses , because the proper application of European Union legislation has a direct impact on the daily lives of citizens and the implementation of their rights .
Furthermore , inappropriate application of legislation undermines confidence in European Union institutions and leads to additional costs .
( PL ) Madam President , at the outset , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her very good , comprehensive and balanced report , as well as the Ombudsman for his unceasing work in combating maladministration as well as raising administration standards in the European Union .
As the rapporteur correctly pointed out , the last year of the Ombudsman 's work has seen good management and progress in reducing the number of complaints and a shortening of the procedure for investigating complaints .
I think this is also an effect of continuity in holding office .
As can be seen , the selection of Mr Diamandouros was a very good decision .
The Ombudsman , however , must react quicker to the needs of citizens .
For this to be possible , he must cooperate more closely with national ombudsmen .
The function of European Ombudsman is a role that changes with time , but it must present a set of constant and universal values .
I believe that in his coming year of office he will listen more strenuously to the voices of the citizens .
( MT ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mariya Nedelcheva , as well as Mr Diamandouros for all his hard work .
I would particularly like to congratulate him on the fact that he has striven to reduce the waiting time for registered procedures because I believe this is the right step towards bringing the European Union institutions closer to the citizens .
The second point I wanted to make was to underline the great importance of interinstitutional cooperation , as my fellow Members also did .
I believe that our experience with the Ombudsman , especially the current one , reflects the extent of the cooperation that exists between this Chamber , this Parliament and , in particular , the Committee on Petitions , and the Ombudsman 's bureau .
Moreover , I would like to appeal to the Commissioner present , Mr Šefčovič , to follow our lead , as I believe that in the area of citizens ' complaints , the European Commission is not cooperating with the Parliament as much as the Ombudsman is .
We are aware that many citizens complain directly to the European Commission but we do not really have an idea of how many people are complaining to the European Commission , what they are complaining about , and what the ultimate outcome of those complaints is .
On the other hand , we are informed of all complaints that arrive before the Ombudsman , and those that arrive before the Committee on Petitions are known because they are public .
Finally , I would like to pass on a message to the citizens .
Upon reading the report , it will emerge that , proportionately , the higher number of complaints , coincidentally , originate from Malta and Luxembourg .
This is interesting , and I do not think it is simply because the people from Malta and Luxembourg complain rather a lot , but because these citizens are standing up for their rights , and I believe that it is important that they do so .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr Diamandouros , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let us give the People 's Europe a face .
It is the responsibility of all the European institutions to do everything in their power so that citizens are informed of all their means of redress if there are violations of Community law or bad administration by European institutions .
First of all , I would like to praise the work of my colleague , Mrs Nedelcheva , for her report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 2009 .
The European Commission has been the object of most of the Ombudsman 's criticism , often for a lack of information .
The report by my fellow Member , Mrs Paliadeli , whom I would also like to congratulate , is a glaring example .
Next , I would like to thank our European Ombudsman for all the work that has been accomplished , together with his whole team , and for his accessibility and his excellent collaboration with the Committee on Petitions .
This is very important .
His role represents an important safeguard of respect for the principle of transparency and good administration , and it is there that we will obtain genuine protection for our fellow citizens .
Finally , it is time that our fellow citizens were better informed of the means of redress available to them with regard to the European Commission : namely , the European Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions .
In order to do that , we need an Internet portal , certainly , but we need a common one , as we have already requested from you .
This would provide real help to our citizens .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Ombudsman for his work .
He has a very specific job to do , namely maladministration , and therefore it is important that citizens understand what that term means .
Much of what I am about to say does not directly impact on the Ombudsman , but I think it needs to be placed on the record .
Some of the biggest problems and complaints we get are about our own Member States .
Citizens then complain - as Mr Busuttil said - directly to the Commission who , under this pilot scheme , go back to the Member State to try to have the matter resolved when the citizens themselves have failed .
That mechanism is not transparent and needs to be looked at .
We need a discussion on it in this House .
The second issue which arises relates to property purchases and transactions between citizens in different Member States .
We have no remit in this area , but it is a growing concern and we need to address it in some way .
Lastly , the Irish Ombudsman has issued two reports , which our own government have rejected .
It is of deep concern that an Ombudsman in any Member State would have their work literally torn up .
You are aware of that , Mr Ombudsman .
I am glad that you are nodding approvingly .
This must be addressed .
It cannot be allowed to continue .
Madam President , I refer to the third item : Application of European Law .
It could be argued that the only thing worse than clear and transparent European law is ambiguous and uncertain EU law .
The Commission 's ' better regulation and simplification ' agenda seems to be as elusive as the Holy Grail .
The standard of English in some proposed legislation led me at first to the conclusion that it had originated in a southern dialect of Albanian .
However , I discovered at an early stage that most of the worst examples originated in English .
The legislative process does not improve poorly drafted legislation .
Amendments are sent to MEPs at the last possible moment ; votes are split and then reunited ; we have gone into the Chamber confident that we have the latest , most final version of the voting list , only to find that it was superseded during the morning .
Those MEPs in large groups who are content to be lobby fodder for their party leaders do not have to worry .
They simply follow the gesticulations of their party tic-tac men .
However , for conscientious MEPs and those in the non-attached group , it is a nightmare .
( DE ) Madam President , as we know , the European Union has been working for decades to reduce bureaucracy and increase transparency .
However , there is not much sign of this in the European Parliament itself .
On the contrary , one gets the feeling that bureaucratic paperwork seems to grow by the year .
Prior to the hearings for the most recent elections , the word transparency was on everyone 's lips .
Thanks to the authority of their office and the associated rights , Members of Parliament can have their voices heard .
The same cannot be said for the citizens of Europe .
That is why they have the European Ombudsman .
When more than one third of the investigations by the Ombudsman were cases where there was a lack of transparency and when 56 % of all cases were resolved amicably , the importance of the office of the Ombudsman is clearly evident .
To quote the words of the Ombudsman himself : Citizens have a right to know what the EU and its administration are doing .
Perhaps I might expand on this by saying that our citizens also have a right to know how the European Union spends their taxes and where resources are wasted .
It is high time that budgetary control was whipped into shape , so that its reports might even be somewhere near as useful as those of the Ombudsman .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , in my introductory remarks , I talked too fast , so I will try to correct this .
I will not try to impress the Members of Parliament with the speed of my speech but with the commitment which I am very clearly making here that the Commission is very much interested in having the best possible close cooperation with the Ombudsman .
I think Mr Diamandouros knows this .
He knows how closely we cooperate , and I think that the success rate in sorting out the problems of maladministration or other issues that he is investigating is so high because we are cooperating very closely and in a very positive spirit .
Of course , sometimes you have cases with which there are additional problems which need more energy to tackle , and this was clearly true of the case to which most of you have referred .
This was very clearly a situation where the Commission was torn between , on the one hand , the commitment to transparency and the legal obligations stemming from European Court of Justice case-law and , on the other , our commitment to honour professional secrecy .
If we wanted to divulge the information - which was very pertinent in this particular case - we needed the agreement of the third party , which we have spent several months trying unsuccessfully to get .
Only after we made it very clear that we would publish the information anyway and informed the company that they had ten days to lodge a complaint with the European Court of Justice did we reach an agreement .
What would have happened if we had not proceeded according to our legal obligations ?
The complaint would probably have been filed with the European Court of Justice , and maybe we would not have had that information made public even today .
So please bear with us sometimes .
We are really very committed to transparency , but we must always look for a very fine line among the different commitments that we have to respect in these very complex cases .
Nevertheless , I acknowledge - as I said in my introductory remarks - that this delay was long , and that we should probably have pressed the company more .
We should have got their response faster , and I can assure you that the Commission will do its utmost to ensure that we will not replicate this situation in any similar cases - we will not look for ways to drag the process out to 15 months , which was indeed unbearable .
I fully agree with Mrs Paliadeli in this respect .
Regarding the access to information : again , let us just keep the numbers in proportion .
We receive around 5 000 requests per year and we have 80 people working on them .
Some of the files we have to make accessible are this thick .
Many of them are citizens ' requests , but I can tell you that many of them are questions from very distinguished law firms trying to get additional information on very sensitive competition files .
We have to be very careful with this process .
I think we are doing a good job in this respect , because of these 5 000 files , only 15 to 20 end up on the Ombudsman 's desk .
85 % of these requests are granted access at first request , so you can calculate how many thousand files become accessible every year .
We are very serious about this commitment and we will continue to proceed in this way .
Concerning EU transposition and implementation : here , I can assure you that we are seeking very close cooperation with the European Parliament .
We are fully aware that appropriate speedy transposition and correct implementation are things that glue the European Union together .
They are absolutely essential for the good working of the single market .
Therefore , we try to make absolutely sure that , in terms of the implementation and transposition of European law , we are very precise and very strict .
If you will allow me to quote , we already agreed in the framework agreement that :
' In order to ensure better monitoring of the transposition and application of Union law , the Commission and Parliament shall endeavour to include compulsory correlation tables and a binding time limit for transposition , which , in directives , should not normally exceed a period of 2 years .
' In addition to specific reports and the annual report on the application of Union law , the Commission shall make available to Parliament summary information concerning all infringement procedures from the letter of formal notice , including , if so requested by Parliament , on a case-by-case basis and respecting the confidentiality rules , in particular , those acknowledged by the Court of Justice of the European Union , on the issues to which the infringement procedure relates ' .
So there is an additional way in which we can communicate and keep the European Parliament better informed .
If I may ask the assistance of the European Parliament in this particular area , I would like to ask you to insist a little bit more on correlation tables where directives are concerned .
This is always the Commission 's proposal .
We cannot always get it through in the final procedures when the legislator is finalising the negotiations on the Commission 's proposal , but this is possible in Parliament and the Council .
The correlation tables make it much easier for the Commission to police the correct application of European law and to find errors and look for corrections .
In answer to Mr Hefner 's question concerning the EU pilot and why it is so named : this is because , when we started with this new project on creating additional possibilities for the Member States to correct their mistakes themselves more quickly , it was an accepted procedure which was started by a few Member States .
Now , most of them apply it .
We are still in the initial phase .
So far , the results are very positive .
Of course , when we reach the stage when all Member States are using this tool for better and faster application of European law , I am sure we will look for another name , because it will no longer be a pilot project .
To conclude , Madam President , I would like to thank the Members of the European Parliament and , of course , our Ombudsman , for the very satisfactory cooperation , and for a very good debate and the many new ideas which I heard this morning in the debate .
I would just like to remind all of us that , thanks to the Lisbon Treaty , citizens have the right to good administration .
The respect of European law is , of course , key to that - to the EU 's level playing field .
I am sure that , together with the European Parliament and with the Ombudsman , we will achieve it .
Seeing Madam Durant presiding over our session this morning , I would like to highlight one additional element .
This is the fact that we managed to finalise agreement on the joint EU transparency register , which will bring additional light and transparency to lobbying activities and the activities of interest representatives in Brussels .
I think this is also a very important contribution to the increased transparency and higher quality of the EU legislative process .
Ombudsman . - Madam President , first of all , I wish to thank very warmly all the Members who took the time to comment on my report .
I want to thank them for their warm endorsement of the work of the Ombudsman .
I derive a great deal of satisfaction , but also inspiration , from the kind of encouragement I receive from you , and I want to say to you openly that this kind of encouragement also increases the sense of responsibility that I feel is being put on my shoulders for carrying forward efforts to defend the rights of citizens .
I want to thank you very much for that - for your concerns in relation not only to the annual report , but also of course to the special report - and to thank the two rapporteurs who took the time to prepare excellent reports on my annual report and my special report .
( FR ) Allow me , too , to thank Mrs Nedelcheva for her comments .
I particularly want to say to you , Mrs Nedelcheva , that I have taken note of your comments , which have encouraged me to try to engage in dialogue with my national colleagues on the correct application of Community law .
I can assure you that next year , during the next meeting of national ombudsmen in Copenhagen , I will be able to give emphasis to exactly that point .
You therefore have my assurance , and I thank you also for your comments concerning the importance of the interactive guide , which has also already been mentioned by your fellow Members from other parties .
Madam President , allow me now to focus on some of the remarks by Vice-President Šefčovič .
Let me begin with a general remark .
I wish to make it clear to this Chamber that Mr Šefčovič has gone out of his way to try and work very closely with the Ombudsman , and I am very grateful to him for what he has done so far .
I also wish to make it clear to this Chamber that Mr Šefčovič , upon assuming his duties , in effect - these are my words - reversed the position of his predecessor and publicly acknowledged that , when it came to the Porsche situation , the Commission 's response had been unsatisfactory and regrettable .
Therefore , I wish to draw a distinction between the person of the Commissioner and the Commission 's institutional response to this issue , which resulted in my needing - for the first time in 15 years - to feel constrained to submit a report to this body concerning that behaviour .
It behoves me to make this distinction concerning the handling of the situation , and again to thank Mr Šefčovič for his efforts in trying to move forward and to be constructive in this area .
Having said that , let me say a few more things .
Commissioner , I consider the 2002 communication concerning citizens of fundamental importance for the application of good administration of the Union .
If , therefore , the Commission is considering changing this communication , I should very much hope that the Commission will see to it that it consults both the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament before actually changing what is an instrument of fundamental importance for the citizens .
We are very much in agreement - and I am glad that you in fact also mentioned this - that the courts are the highest and the only authority which can take decisions on an authoritative interpretation of the law .
I am very glad that the Commission also acknowledges that .
In terms of draft recommendations , let me just make a small clarification , Commissioner .
A draft recommendation constitutes a finding of maladministration by the Ombudsman .
That does not prevent the institution involved from responding to this particular draft recommendation and rectifying the matter , and I will take that into consideration for closing the case .
Therefore , a press release at the point of having found an instance of maladministration is in no way intended to pre-empt or to prevent an institution from being able to respond , and I want you to have my assurance personally on that .
Finally , as concerns the special report , again a clarification .
The report was submitted because of the excessive delay .
It was not - because I noted your regret - that it was released just after the Commission had released the documents .
The two were unrelated .
It was the great length of the response that prompted the report , and I was very happy to have had the response as I did .
But again , you have adopted a position on that one .
Finally , I hope that there will be an effort to try and deal with the delays .
What I will say about the delays , Commissioner , is that I expect the Commission to be able to abide by the rules concerning delays that it has itself adopted and is trying to abide by .
I will abide by my deadlines in terms of dealing with this kind of situation .
I think this will result in a better outcome .
I shall say two more things .
I want to thank Mr Vlasák - I hope I am pronouncing the name correctly , because my Czech is non-existent - for his remarks , because it gives me the opportunity to say that I am actively looking forward to the possibility of making use of the facilities of the Eurobarometer in order to be able to find out more about what citizens think and feel about the Ombudsman and about the handling of complaints .
I want to thank him for that .
I will do my best to see how the website can become user-friendly .
Let me just assure him that we put it through very many pilot phases and very many target groups , and they all found it very user friendly .
More than 46 000 people have used it so far , and they were guided to the right place the first time around .
I want to assure him that this is what we are doing in order to be able to combat maladministration and that the interactive guide has very much helped reduce maladministration in the institutions as a response to his question .
Two more things .
Ms Geringer de Oedenberg : it may not be easy to grasp that the vast majority of the complaints , whether to the European Ombudsman or the national ombudsman , do indeed deal with EU law .
Therefore , we have the network of ombudsmen that I coordinate in order to be able to send the complaints to the right institution from the very beginning so as to avoid problems .
Focusing only on what lies within the ombudsman 's mandate neglects the fact that the network ensures that the bulk of the complaints go to the right national regional ombudsman concerning EU law and that are dealt with there .
A comment on Mr Migalski 's question .
I can assure him that the Ombudsman 's budget was approved by the Council without any change .
We are very mindful of the constraints , but we are also encouraged by the fact that the major budgetary institution - not only Parliament - has approved it .
Regarding Mr Szegedi 's question , we agree emphatically that the courts of the Member States do not know EU law sufficiently well , and I make a special point in my visits to all the Member States , where I have been many times , of visiting the judiciary to be able to help them move in this particular direction .
Finally - and I will close with this - Mr Sógor also asked for the Ombudsman to be able to receive complaints concerning EU law submitted at national level .
Regrettably , this is not in my mandate .
I would be violating my mandate if I were to accept this task , and I would also be encroaching on the legal responsibilities and mandate of my colleagues in the Member States if I were to do it .
I try to collaborate with them to do it , but I have no authority to receive complaints that concern the application of EU law in the Member States .
( FR ) Madam President , I hope that I have responded to all the comments , and I would like once again to thank all Members for their words of encouragement , and also to congratulate you , Madam President , as the Commissioner has already done , for the important initiative aiming to approve a joint register for Parliament and the Commission .
I am convinced that this will be a very important step forward .


Madam President , Mr Diamandouros , Mr Šefčovič , ladies and gentlemen , I thank you for your contributions , which , I strongly believe , have , on the one hand , clearly shown the importance of the activities of the European Ombudsman and , on the other , the interest that our institution accords to these activities within the European Parliament .
I will make use of this opportunity to thank my colleagues from the Committee on Petitions , who , through their work , are creating a more tangible link between European citizens and the institutions of the Union .
Mr Diamandouros , the year 2009 marked the 15th anniversary of the institution of the European Ombudsman .
It also marked the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
As a result of your election by the European Parliament , an additional legitimacy has been added to your function .
I say ' added ' because , in fact , the legitimacy of your function originates from all those European citizens who have been able to turn to you and who have been able to find a solution thanks to your interventions .
On the other hand , what is more fascinating about the function of the European Ombudsman is that nothing can ever be taken for granted .
The reduction in the number of complaints , the reduction in the time spent on finding a solution , the complaints that have been settled amicably - there are always as many advances as there are needs .
Behind these facts , I think that there are two major challenges that we should not lose sight of : obtaining more transparency in the functioning of the institutions , and having a better dialogue between citizens and the institutions both at a European and at a national level .
I would like to thank you , Mr Diamandouros , and I will conclude by saying that , as a result of your everyday work , we have concrete evidence that it is possible not only to take up these challenges but , above all , to provide adequate and satisfactory answers for citizens .
The task is certainly not an easy one , but with the 2009 annual report and with the commitment that you have just made for the Copenhagen meeting , I believe that we are on the right track .


Madam President , Mr Diamandouros , Commissioner , I consider this specific report by Mr Diamandouros , which I had the honour of presenting to the European Parliament , to be a formal report that does not touch on the substance of the matter ; it touches on the form of the matter .
That is very important for me .
I consider that fifteen months ' delay to its reply and its final decision , successive extensions to the initial deadline and , more importantly , what I consider to be the Commission 's curious decision not to disclose the letter prepared for this particular automobile manufacturer , telling it that it would disclose some of its letters , are serious issues ; the decision not to disclose the letter is a very serious issue .
If , after such a long time - and this is not your fault , Commissioner , you only took over this particular sector recently ; if the Commission had decided to disclose the letter which it had prepared for this particular automobile manufacturer to Mr Diamandouros on 18 February , there would probably have been no special report .
Mr Diamandouros decided to agree to the successive extensions requested by the Commission .
Nonetheless , I consider that , thanks to this delay , thanks to the Commission 's failure to advise Mr Diamandouros , we were able to have a report which records issues which have both form and substance .
I only intend to discuss the substance .
However , the Commission must take serious account of the fact - and I am glad that you said it before I did - that any difficulties which you cause the European Ombudsman in his work harms the unity of the European Union , undermines the trust of its citizens in its institutions and damages the public image of its function .
We want what you said earlier to be a commitment , because we are all jointly responsible .
My thanks in particular to Mr Diamandouros because , thanks to this report , he gave us an opportunity to understand in the European Parliament our power to address issues which we consider to be paramount to European cohesion .
Madam President , please allow me to preface my summary with a word of particular thanks to the Ombudsman .
I believe his work is very valuable and I am aware how important it is to our citizens because his office has become a key point of contact for them .
I would like to come back to what Mr Šefčovič had to say , particularly in relation to the EU pilot project , which has been criticised sharply by a number of Members of Parliament because , as you stated clearly yourself , it offers ' more possibilities for Member States ' but not for citizens .
I believe we need to take a closer look to see if this is really the case , because what we need is greater transparency .
A letter to a complainant stating that we have received his complaint is not enough .
We need greater clarity here , more relevance to our citizens , otherwise we are going to have a credibility problem in the long term .
In addition , of course we need some meaningful penalties when genuine infringements are encountered .
The consequences for Member States , who fail to implement legislation , and who actually even boast about this in their national media , cannot simply be that they merely receive another letter .
We need to take things a step further when it comes to the interests of the citizens of the European Union .
I believe it is of central importance that the 2002 communication should be revised , particularly in relation to the rights of the complainant .
In this context , I would also like to see the rights of Parliament respected .
We need a register of the complaints received in order to offer us some feedback for our legislative work .
I do not need to know who complained to whom about what .
The subject matter of the complaint and the consequences of the complaint would provide important feedback for the entire legislature .
That is what we need .
It is for that reason that I ask you also to take this into account .
We need a clear register that provides us with an insight into the main causes for complaint and what is being called for .
I would like to see this proposal soon .
I would be happy to work together with you on this .
We will be glad to help you with the cross-referencing tables .
I also believe that this is important .
The important issue here is mutuality and this is something I am anxious to uphold .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Thursday , 25 November 2010 , at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The application of European law is vital so that EU citizens can fully enjoy the benefits of the internal market as even the most effective legislation becomes redundant if it is not applied .
With regard to internal market legislation , there is a great deal of progress which can be made , especially in relation to the Services Directive or the directive on the recognition of professional qualifications .
This legislation is admittedly technical , which complicates the application process .
For this reason , cooperation is vital between EU institutions and national administrations .
The internal market information system used for services has proved to be particularly useful .
I believe that we would stand to gain by extending its use to other sectors .
However , I urge the need for Member States to take transposition seriously and avoid delays as far as possible , which results in the internal market operating with its parameters at suboptimal level .
Finally , I urge the need for citizens to be able to resolve their problems relating to the application of European law quickly and at minimum cost .
To achieve this , the SOLVIT resources need to be supplemented , along with active promotion of this instrument for solving problems informally .
Last but not least , priority must be given to devising alternative methods for settling disputes .
in writing . - ( HU ) On the margins of the European Ombudsman 's annual activity report , allow me , as the author of Parliament 's opinion on public access to documents , to say a few words about institutional transparency .
I was pleased that when examining citizens ' complaints registered with the Ombudsman , the author of the report , Mrs Nedelcheva , devoted special attention to the relation between transparency and good administration .
The right to good administration has become legally binding under the terms of the Treaty of Lisbon , and along with that right , it is also important that personal rights are fully respected .
In a recent discussion with Mr Diamandouros , we debated the delicate balance between institutional transparency and data protection .
We specifically addressed the judgment issued in June by the European Court of Justice in the Bavarian Lager case as well , which moved the debates on transparency out of its dead end .
This is very significant because it provides guidelines for cases where a real or perceived common interest is in conflict with personal data protection rights .
I was very pleased that Mr Diamandouros , too , emphasised the basic principle according to which personal data can only be disclosed with the permission of the persons concerned .
I therefore think it important to emphasise that I fully support the efforts aimed at rendering the work of the European Union 's institutions more transparent and establishing a basis for appropriate administrative techniques .
According to the annual report , it is precisely the promotion of this aim that lies at the centre of the activities of the European Ombudsman
I fully support the work of the European Ombudsman .
His pertinacity and principled behaviour has yielded concrete results , because he carries out his task honourably and consistently .
The completely opposite situation has developed in Latvia .
The Latvian Saeima formally elected Romāns Apsītis as Ombudsman .
In actual fact , however , since 1 January 2007 , when Mr Apsītis took office as Ombudsman , he has , in point of fact , never got down to work .
He has , sadly , not noticed that there are some 300 000 people in Latvia who have had their basic civil rights taken away from them .
It appears that the Latvian Government and the Saeima have chosen an ombudsman - Mr Apsītis - who is convenient , silent and devoid of initiative ; someone who is actually blind to serious infringements in Latvian legislation .
I shall remind you that , in accordance with the office he occupies , Mr Apsītis is tasked with the following duties : 1 .
To promote compliance with the principle of equality and the prevention of discrimination .
In Latvia , this exists in the field of education .
2 .
To promote the objective review of legal and other issues within reasonable timescales .
Latvia has already lost around 10 cases in the European Court on this issue .
3 .
To ensure the prevention of deficiencies in questions concerning infringements of human rights .
Around 300 000 people in Latvia , many of whom have lived in Latvia all their lives , have had their basic civil rights taken away from them .
Today in Latvia , the word ' ombudsman ' makes one smile .
If the situation does not change , it could be likened to the word ' clown ' .
Competition horizontal cooperation rules ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Mrs Bowles , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the review of the competition horizontal cooperation rules - B7-0565 / 2010 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , the two block exemption regulations , one of which refers to specialisation agreements and the other to research and development , will expire on 31 December of this year .
The Commission has drawn up two legislative proposals : two proposals for regulations that are before this House to replace the regulations that are now coming to an end .
A lot of water has flowed under the bridge since the initial regulations were adopted .
There have been significant changes in legislation , especially the 2003 modernisation package , crucial legal judgments have been passed in this area and the Commission has learnt quite a lot from practice , which is also an important aspect .
The Commission opened two rounds of consultations with those concerned , which is good practice in the spirit of legislating well and having public support .
The big question now is as follows : what use is it going to make of the responses from those concerned during the consultation ?
Is it going to take notice of them or are these opinions simply going to be thrown in the bin ?
In this context , what Parliament and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs want to know is essentially six things .
What are the suggestions and specific ideas that the stakeholders have put forward that the Commission is going to take into account when it comes to designing and defining these regulations and taking them from ' the muses to the theatre ' ?
Secondly , what does the Commission think about the horizontal agreements that are not covered by the exemption regulations on specialisation or research and development .
What did the stakeholders say in this round of consultations ?
What would be the advantages from the point of view of industry , the real economy and protecting competition , of proposing new regulations to take into account horizontal agreements that are not covered by the two block exemption regulations that we are currently considering ?
Does the Commission intend to draw up new regulations to cover them ?
Yes or no ?
The question is relatively clear .
The third problem that was debated at length in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is the subject of what is known as ' patent ambush ' , which , as the Commissioner is aware , takes place when one of the stakeholder companies that is participating in establishing standards withholds information on the patents that it holds or the patents that it is planning to register in future .
This causes serious damage and inconvenience to those companies that are unaware of that information and commit to acting according to the parameters established .
The question here is relatively specific as this is a case of distortion of competition and barriers in the internal market , which is the cardinal sin in our institution : does the Commission intend to tackle the problem of ' patent ambush ' in the framework of the new draft regulations , or otherwise , does it consider that complementary sector-specific legislation would be necessary to avoid abuse of patent rights ?
Is the Commission committed to ensuring that there is an integrated , consistent legislative framework without internal contradictions between competition rules and sector-specific legislation in the area of intellectual property rights ?
The fourth and fifth questions relate to economic governance or , if you prefer , governance of competition .
We have learnt that we need to try to converge with other competition authorities and , in this respect , it is important to know to what extent the Commission , in drawing up these regulations , has made use of court decisions and the decisions of national and international authorities .
The last question refers to a subject that is a particularly sensitive one for my committee , and I am sure that Mr Schwab will have something to say about it .
It refers to the marketing chain for food products .
It seems obvious that there is inequality in conditions among producers , between farmers , on the one hand , and large chains , on the other .
Does the Commission intend to do something to guarantee equal , fair treatment for the weaker party in this contract ?
These are the questions , Commissioner , that I would like to you to answer as fully , clearly and precisely as possible .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank the honourable Member very much for the question , as this is indeed a very important area of responsibility for the European Union .
Competing companies often work together , for instance , in research and development , production , purchasing , product standardisation and information exchange .
As you know , this can be beneficial to consumers and lead to lower prices , more choice and better products .
These horizontal agreements - we call them horizontal because the cooperating companies are active at the same level in the supply chain - can allow companies to respond to increasing competitive pressures and a changing market place driven by globalisation .
But there is also a risk that this kind of agreement can lead to serious competition problems , for example , where the parties agree to fix prices , share markets or limit output .
The Commission has spent the past two years reviewing the competition guidelines for horizontal agreements , with in-depth assessment and wide consultation .
The new rules , which should be adopted by the end of this year , will be much more detailed , user-friendly and clear , providing better guidance on what kinds of cooperation are allowed .
As always , the Commission has had to strike a careful balance between the needs of different stakeholders .
The two main elements of the new competition rules are on standard-setting and information exchange .
In the responses to the public consultation , around two-thirds of stakeholders commented on standardisation .
A well-functioning system for standard-setting is vital for the European economy as a whole and , in particular , for the information and communication technology sector .
The horizontal guidelines promote a standard-setting system that is transparent and that leads to predictable costs when licensing intellectual property rights .
This requires attempting to find a balance between the sometimes contradictory interests of companies with different business models involved in the standard-setting process .
At one end of the spectrum , you have the pure innovator and , at the other , the pure manufacturer , each with different priorities and needs .
The new rules will make sure both that there are sufficient incentives for further innovation and that the traditional benefits from standardisations are passed on to consumers .
In order for standard-setting agreements to avoid having to be assessed under the competition rules and to fall within the so-called safe harbour - meaning where they are presumed to be in line with the competition rules - there are three general conditions that need to be met .
The first is that a standard-setting organisation needs to have a balanced IPR policy , requiring good-faith disclosure of the relevant IPRs , and a commitment to licensing these on fair , reasonable and non-discriminatory terms .
The second is that the process of standard-setting must be open and transparent so that participation is open to all relevant actors .
The third is that the standard-setting process must also be transparent in a way that ensures that stakeholders are able to inform themselves of upcoming , ongoing and finalised work .
You also mentioned patent ambushes .
Case experience , both in the EU and in the US , shows that patent ambush can be a real problem by preventing industry from making an informed choice on the potential costs of the technologies chosen in the standard .
The Commission approach is to give standard-setting organisations incentives to have clear rules on disclosure of patents .
Although this does not completely remove the risk , it does reduce it .
By contrast , for R & D agreements where there are a limited number of parties - often only two - the public consultation showed that stakeholders considered that there is , in practice , no real problem of patent ambush as the parties have an incentive to bring innovations to market and any potential problems can be solved upfront by contractual means between parties .
Turning to information exchange , this can be pro-competitive when it enables companies to gather general market data that allow them to serve customers better .
However , there are also situations where the exchange of market information can be misused , for instance , when companies use sensitive information to coordinate behaviour .
In response to strong stakeholder demand , the guidelines contain a new chapter setting out general principles for competition assessment of information exchange .
The last question that was raised by Parliament related to the question of purchasing cooperatives .
The Commission has consistently believed that joint purchasing groups amongst small retailers can be beneficial for competition , especially vis-à-vis large suppliers .
The horizontal guidelines have , since 2000 , provided for a positive assessment for this type of cooperation up to certain limits of market share .
Following its review process , the Commission is proposing that for purchasing agreements , as long as the market share of participants is 20 % or less , it will be presumed to be in line with the competition rules .
But the Commission is also aware that international buying alliances among large retailers may have a negative impact on competition , with issues being examined in the context of the Commission 's work on a better functioning food supply .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( LV ) Madam President , Commissioner , none of us likes to pay over the odds for things whose true value we are even unaware of .
Similarly , we do not like to pay too much as a result of a dishonourable deal between businesses .
Competition policy in the European Union has , hitherto , targeted dishonest businesses .
The regulation of horizontal cooperation between businesses is one of the ways in which , to my mind , the Commission is successfully solving the problem of competition where businesses cooperate on matters such as research and development , full exploitation of the volume of production , the distribution of common goods and standardisation .
The attention to the question of standardisation in the new rules on business cooperation is welcome .
It will allow businesses and sectors to make a clear choice with regard to patents that they wish to make use of .
Every standard consists of patents registered by inventors and businesses .
In order to introduce a standard , it is necessary to know what precise technological solution is being offered and what consideration the patent holder wishes to receive for the use of his patent .
That is why we should support a mechanism in which all interested parties in the course of choosing a standard are clearly aware of the advantages and disadvantages of one invention or another and of the price they will pay for using the patent .
We like to make informed choices in our day-to-day lives , and so it is only natural that businesses investing significant funds in the development and manufacture of new technologies with high added value should also wish to make such a choice .
To my mind , these new rules on horizontal cooperation between businesses will at least partly help businesses not to pay excessively for making use of patents . Thank you for your attention .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , competing is not the opposite of cooperating .
There are cooperation agreements between companies competing at the same market level that are competitive and in line with the original source of European Union law .
For reasons of legal security , given the complexity of the subject and the balances that have to be achieved , businesses need to have tools to determine what horizontal agreements infringe the prohibitions laid down in the treaty and restrict competition .
This is a critical time , because the guidelines for horizontal agreements are a decade old and the block exemption regulations for specialisation agreements and innovation and development agreements expire at the end of this year .
The Union must therefore update these instruments without delay , and cannot afford the luxury of a legislative loophole that generates doubts , uncertainties and paralysis in the activities of our businesses .
This would be an intolerable curb on our economy and hugely irresponsible in the context of a crisis that requires initiatives to help restart and boost business .
Moreover , as the timescale for the review is extended to 31 December 2022 , they must equip European industry with measures for dealing with the major changes that are going to take place on the international economic stage in the coming years .
A few months ago , the European Union adopted the Europe 2020 strategy , under the Spanish Presidency , which is a firm commitment to an integrative society based on knowledge and innovation .
The new legislative framework must promote the development of an intelligent , connected economy that is capable of connecting business networks and taking advantage of the synergies between businesses through agreements promoting standardisation , specialisation , research and development to benefit European consumers , but also agreements that contribute towards joint production , purchase , marketing and promoting cooperatives and business groups , especially among small and medium-sized enterprises .
We support the Commission in using this package of initiatives to increase efficiency , promote scientific and technical progress , provide benefits to end consumers and , in short , improve the overall competitiveness and sustainable development of our businesses .



Madam President , many things have been said , in particular by my colleagues Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and Mr Sánchez Presedo , about the liveliness of the discussions that we have had in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and about the need to adopt reports quickly , as Mr Sánchez Presedo has just said , in order to clarify the scope of operations of our businesses .
I will limit myself to two comments which are somewhat more general and political .
Firstly , in all our countries , the crisis has made people withdraw and has given rise to nationalist and protectionist temptations , and we in Parliament are therefore particularly vigilant when it comes to respect for the internal market and its non-fragmentation .
There is a challenge here - I can see some colleagues from the relevant committee are nodding .
This is very important , and we know that Commissioner Barnier is working towards this , in support of Mr Monti 's report .
We in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe truly believe in emulation which stimulates innovation .
However , we must also realise that European businesses are in a global competition , and that , in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises and , above all , for research and development , it is particularly important to build bridges , and we need to ensure that competition does not turn into mutual destruction , to the advantage of businesses in other areas of the world which , in addition , do not always practise very fair competition with respect to their competitors .
For us , it is therefore very important that we manage to find a means of avoiding abuses of the patent while allowing competition and , of course , while respecting property rights , as has been mentioned .
As is often the case , this involves a very delicate balance .
Finally , to conclude , I want to emphasise very strongly that I agree with what Mr García-Margallo y Marfil said about competition in the area of food products .
We have a very strange situation in Europe where we look very thoroughly at competition in certain sectors and much less thoroughly in others .
It is clear that the lack of proportion between the number of producers and the number of purchasers poses problems of competition .
I am therefore delighted , Commissioner , that you have supported what Mr García-Margallo y Marfil said .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , allow me to echo what my fellow Members have said and , above all , to welcome the fact that the European Commission is including the business community , the Member States and the European Parliament in the revision of the rules for horizontal cooperation agreements at an early stage ; after all , the existing group exemption regulations are due to lapse at the end of the year .
I believe that the draft from May 2010 contains some important changes , particularly in the areas of standards and the exchange of information , as already discussed .
Both of these will bring greater legal certainty and clearer rules for businesses , something that is extremely important for compliance .
We have already heard that compliance in the European internal market is a principle that must be followed by all businesses .
Competition and innovation are key elements for our economy , which is why it is important to adapt the 2009 rules to our present situation and to introduce effective mechanisms to promote compliance and the implementation of competition law for businesses and public bodies .
It is for this reason that the parliamentary question was backed by such a large majority in the Committee , something I welcome very much .
I would like to ask something about what you have just said .
The fact is that the purchasing agreements of large , international chain stores can be categorised as horizontal cooperation agreements .
In last year 's communication on the functioning of the food supply chain in Europe , you were highly critical of the power of demand , but now you seem to view this very positively .
You have just said that cooperation among small retailers is something you welcome , provided the purchasing agreements are in the order of up to a 20 % share of the market .
My question to you is : what is the reason for this change in how you view these horizontal purchasing agreements ?
What has motivated this change of heart ?
( RO ) Madam President , first of all , I , too , would like to welcome the European Commission 's proposals on the review of the competition horizontal cooperation rules .
Their aim is to clarify the terms for obtaining exemptions , readjusting restrictions and providing information about intellectual property rights .
The economic and financial crisis has highlighted the need for closer cooperation in these areas and for a common global economic regulatory framework .
We must also assess the possibility of exchanging information on a more frequent and global level about competition , as well as the possibility of establishing global governance in this area .
Streamlining cooperation agreements between competitors promotes innovation and helps boost European companies ' competitiveness .
As a result , I think that an analysis needs to be carried out on the possibilities of introducing , on occasion , block exemption regulations for other horizontal agreement types .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that we can organise competition by introducing uniform rules , which is why I am interested to know what options are available to us in the telecommunications sector , specifically in the area of frequency licensing , to enable us to regulate auctions or so-called beauty contests in telecommunications processes .
After all , the new technologies available with the fourth generation networks will open up a whole new world of possibilities .
When you travel to a different country in Europe , you will find that many of the prices that appear on your phone 's display are the same .
Do you have any plans to further stimulate competition in the roaming sector ?
How do you envisage roaming can be the subject of proper internal market competition and how can you ensure that prices do not jump a thousand-fold when geographical borders are crossed ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very much obliged to the honourable Members for having this debate because it helps us prepare the ground for these very important changes in the legal framework in which our companies will operate in the future .
I very much agree with all those who have been calling for fair competition because only fair competition can lead to fair practice and , of course , to real and not fixed prices .
This is very important for Europe 's citizens : how to create a conducive environment so we can achieve positive results but prevent the possibility , on the market , of fixed prices .
I can assure you that we are looking at all possible ways of achieving a solution under which the prices for the patents would not be too high .
You know very well from the debate on this issue how very difficult that is .
I can tell you that we in the Commission are very unhappy with the delay - we have not been able to find an appropriate solution for the patent for such a long time - because it would definitely create the conditions for a leap forward on how to protect intellectual property rights and on how to improve and make Europe much more competitive when it comes to patent protection on an international level .
Legal certainty and a new legal framework have been two very important issues on which we have been focusing in preparing our proposals .
We have had quite extensive public consultations on this matter .
We had 190 submissions and there were stakeholders from industry , law firms , academies and governments , so we think that when it comes to the final outcome , we will have managed to achieve the appropriate balance .
I am very thankful for the underlining of the importance of EU 2020 , because this is exactly why we need to improve and change the framework in which companies operate , looking into how to create positive , conducive environments so that research and development companies and companies involved in innovation can flourish , and into how these could bring additional added value to European economies , and into how to create the conditions for their staying in Europe and not looking for opportunities to manufacture the products somewhere else .
I can assure you this was one of the elements on which the Commission , and my colleagues , Commissioners Almunia and Barnier in particular , put particular attention in terms of the Single Market Act .
Because with a single market , we now have new opportunities to unlock new potentials , to open new avenues and to create conditions which will be important for really good progress , especially in R & D sectors .

Turning to the concrete questions by Mr Schwab , who pointed out certain differences in the Commission approach to this particular issue of small chain suppliers against large chain companies , we came to the conclusion after a very serious review process and our very extensive consultations with the stakeholders , with the Member States , that the approach we are advocating right now corresponded more closely to the current situation , to the present data we had received , and this was the reason why we are suggesting this line forward .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Thursday , 25 November 2010 , at 12 : 00 .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 : 30 and resumed at 12 : 00 )
Fighting colorectal cancer in the European Union ( written declaration )
Written declaration No 0068 / 2010 , presented by Pavel Poc , Frieda Brepoels , Cristian Silviu Buşoi , Jo Leinen and Alojz Peterle , on fighting colorectal cancer in the European Union , has been signed by more than a majority of Parliament 's component Members .
Therefore , pursuant to Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure , it will be forwarded to its addressees and published , together with the names of its signatories , in the texts adopted for this part-session .
Mr President , I know everybody wants to vote , but I would just like , on behalf of all the co-signatories - Ms Brepoels , Mr Buşoi , Mr Lehne , Mr Peterle and myself - to thank all of you who have supported our written declaration on the fight against colorectal cancer .



We have reached a majority one month before the deadline .
This shows the importance of this issue , and we can promise you that this was not a one-off but part of a larger move targeting the EU and Member States .
Colleagues , thank you for your support .
Camp Achraf ( written declaration )
Written declaration No 0075 / 2010 , presented by Alejo Vidal-Quadras , Stephen Hughes , Kristiina Ojuland , Søren Bo Søndergaard and Struan Stevenson , on Camp Ashraf , has been signed by more than a majority of Parliament 's component Members .
Therefore , pursuant to Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure , it will be forwarded to its addressees and published , together with the names of its signatories , in the texts adopted for this part-session .
Mr President , I , too , would like to thank all the Members who signed Written Declaration No 75 on Camp Ashraf .
This sends a very powerful message to the Iraqi authorities to lift the inhuman siege that they have applied against the 3 400 innocent people in Camp Ashraf over recent months .
I really am grateful that more than half of the Members of this House have signed this declaration .
It was only opened a month ago and that is a very rapid victory .
Thank you very much indeed .
( Applause )
1 .
2011 budget (
2 .
Human rights , social and environmental standards in International Trade agreements (
3 .
European Ombudsman 's activity report for 2009 (
4 .
Special Report from the European Ombudsman to the European Parliament following the draft recommendation to the European Commission in Complaint 676 / 2008 / RT ( According to Rule 205 ( 2 ) , 1st part ) (
5 .
26th Annual Report on Monitoring the Application of European Union Law ( 2008 ) (
6 .
Public service broadcasting in the digital era : the future of the dual system (
rapporteur . - I would like just briefly to mention that I think that it is a very important signal that the Parliament is sending out today : the fact that we want to foster our dual media system with sufficient breathing space for commercial broadcasters and public broadcasters .
In addition , those who thought one year ago that this Parliament cannot agree on a text about guarantees for media pluralism are wrong .
I want to thank especially my colleague , Petra Kammerevert , and , above all , Doris Pack , because she is the mother of this initiative .
7 .
10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women and peace and security (
8 .
The situation in the beekeeping sector ( vote )
9 .
A new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011 - 2020 (
Mr President , on Tuesday of this week , we voted on the Rapkay report , with a compromise on coal mines .
Like it or not , a decision has been made by this Parliament .
If we were to vote now for something different , it would not be well regarded , especially by the Commission .
So I suggest that , in Amendment 1 by the PPE Group , we include the word ' uncompetitive ' to bring it into line with the Rapkay report .
Whatever your individual opinion , the opinion of this Parliament this week should at least be consistent .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to inform the Chamber that the amendment tabled by the rapporteur , Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska , brings our text , and the sense of our text , sufficiently into line with yesterday 's voting on the Rapkay report .
The next part of the oral amendment only weakens the expression and tone of the resolution as regards the use of coal as a source of primary energy in the energy mix in the European Union .
I think there is no need to destroy the consensus that we achieved in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy by adopting the oral amendment .
For this reason , I ask that you vote against this amendment .
10 .
Preparations for Cancún Climate Change Conference ( 29 November-10 December ) (
11 .
Situation in Western Sahara (
12 .
Ukraine (
( DE ) Mr President , one fact has changed since the resolution was drafted .
Ukraine had not been officially named as chair of the OSCE for 2013 at that time .
This is now official and for that reason , I propose the following amendment .
I shall read it out in English :
' Calls on the Ukrainian Government to bring the legislation on media freedom into line with OSCE standards ' .
This part remains unchanged .
The next part should read : ' decisive action in this regard would strengthen Ukraine 's credibility as OSCE Chairmanship-in-Office for 2013 ' .
13 .
International Trade Policy in the context of Climate Change imperatives (
Mr President , we propose changing the end of paragraph 22 by replacing ' prevent ' with ' inform ' , so the final phrase becomes :
' reiterates also Parliament 's request to the Commission and Member States to inform the European Parliament about loans granted by export credit agencies and the European Investment Bank to projects that have a negative impact on the climate ' .
14 .
Corporate social responsibility in international trade agreements (
Mr President , we are proposing a change to the beginning of paragraph 32 in agreement with the shadow rapporteurs .
The first words of this paragraph would become - I will read it in English because we drew it up together in English :
' Calls to explore , within the same forums , the elaboration of an international convention .. ' .
( FR ) , and the rest of the paragraph is unchanged .
15 .
Competition horizontal cooperation rules ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( LT ) Mr President , I voted for this resolution on the ongoing negotiations on the 2011 budget .
The failure of last week 's Parliament-Council Conciliation Committee meeting has caused significant concern throughout the European Union .
It is regrettable that some do not yet feel they need to adhere to the Treaty of Lisbon .
If we are unable to agree on the budget and other related issues by the end of the year , there will be very grave consequences .
The creation of the European External Action Service and the three new institutions to monitor European Union financial institutions would be very difficult if there is a lack of funding .
A shortage of money would also mean that cohesion policy , one of the most important policies in the European Union , would not be implemented properly , not to mention what would happen to the Europe 2020 strategy and the GALILEO programme .
I therefore feel that the constructive and flexible position of the European Parliament demonstrates once again that , faced with the conditions of the financial crisis , the European Parliament really is acting responsibly .

( DE ) Mr President , with regard to the disaster of the budget negotiations for 2011 , I would like to say : firstly , the right to draw up a budget is a central right of any democratic parliament .
Secondly , a parliament that takes itself seriously must exercise this right .
Thirdly , I would like to call on the European Council to respect and accept this self-evident right of the European Parliament .
Fourthly , a process must be found to ensure that the voice of the European Parliament is heard when it comes to budgetary decisions .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this budget and it is , of course , clear that if we in Parliament have budgetary power , we should exercise it .
Now , however , we need to think about how we can act responsibly .
I might say that , in many respects , the budget 's content does not reflect the ideals which we in the European Union share .
I wish that we could go over many things in detail in a way that would highlight the presence of old debris that is no longer relevant and which would embolden us to use the budget to look at this debris again .
Of course , it is also important to ensure that the European Union receives its own funding , thereby enabling it to also carry out the functions that we have together agreed upon and which came our way with the Treaty of Lisbon .
When I suggest that there are some issues on which we should adopt a new perspective , we have old debris , such as support for tobacco farming , and so on , which I do not think any longer count among the functions of the European Union today .
We need to be in the here and now , constructing a budget that will give the European economy a real boost .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for Mrs Saïfi 's report because it has achieved the objective it set itself of specifying how human rights and social and environmental standards should be reinforced in international trade agreements .
That will enable the major international organisations to cooperate more closely to find room in multilateral agreements for social matters .
It would be useful if the World Trade Organisation were reformed to make room for that kind of cooperation , although the ostracism of certain countries would make it difficult to put such a reform into practice .
The human rights clause , in fact , already appears in the most recent international agreements , and that will become standard in future trade agreements .
What is needed , then , is to ensure effective implementation both of the 27 conventions for countries to benefit from the generalised system of preferences ( GSP ) , and of the accompanying measures designed to improve implementation capacity .
Lastly , when the GSP is reformed , it should be focused on the countries most in need .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on the annual report on human rights in the world this year , I can only reiterate the importance of human rights clauses and standards in international trade agreements .
Trade can play an important part in ensuring not only civil and political rights , but also economic and social ones .
Just think about the role that trade-related assistance programmes can play in ensuring development in many poor countries around the world .
We must bear in mind that human rights clauses are included in all the bilateral trade agreements the EU makes and also in its GSP and GSP + regimes with developing countries .
We should make these clauses and conditionality more robust and closely monitor their implementation .
We should consider conducting a human rights assessment of non-EU countries that engage in trade relations with the EU and granting trade preferences to countries that have ratified and effectively implemented key international conventions on sustainable development , social rights and good governance .
Mr President , the purpose of trade is to maximise prosperity and advantage to both participants .
Countries do not trade with one another : businesses and individuals do .
Yet in this report , and in the EU 's trade policy more widely , we see the Commission 's determination to insert into its commercial agreements all sorts of non-commercial criteria : not only those dealing with human rights , environmental standards and so on , but also , and rather more damagingly , those which insist that other parts of the world form themselves into regional commercial blocs in mimicry of the EU .
The whole point of trade is to swap on the back of differences .
There is no purpose in obliging , let us say , the countries of Central America to form a commercial union among themselves in which they are selling one another bananas and coffee and cut flowers .
Nor , for that matter , is there much advantage in having in Europe a bloc of similar industrialised economies , where we have cut ourselves off from the growing markets of the rest of the world .
It is deleterious to the developing nations and to the Anglosphere , and it is particularly disastrous for my country , which has trapped itself in a cramped and declining regional customs union .
( DE ) Mr President , the media play a very special and important role in our democratic society .
They guarantee high quality information and thus make a significant contribution to the functioning of our democracy .
I am convinced that a high quality , well-balanced public media environment also has a positive influence on the standard of the private media .
Both public and private media need each other and have a positive influence on one another .
If we want a well-balanced , informative media environment , we must support independent public broadcasters as the counterparts of private broadcasters .
This is one of the keys to the freedom of the press and without it , there can be no meaningful freedom of expression in our community .

( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report by Mr Belet , contrary to our group 's recommendation , because I myself think that it is very important that we acknowledge the need to safeguard public broadcasting services , including those delivered by national broadcasting companies .
This is a very important issue , and you might say that we have mainly had only good experiences of it in democracies .
It is quite true that we also need commercial channels .
These two different types of service , the commercial and the public service channels , can complement one another .
In my opinion , it is an absolute fundamental right and vital for freedom of expression that there is a public channel which is maintained publicly and which concentrates on producing topical and uptodate information for citizens both in the nation states and across Europe .
I think that this report is excellent and worthy of support , and I hope that it will also be a future trend in all the EU Member States to safeguard public service broadcasting .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the Belet report because it recognises and specifies the fundamental role played by public sector broadcasting in Europe .
I see this as an important step for Parliament , which is clearly stating that public broadcasting needs to remain independent of political power .
This report seems to have been written specially for Italy , where the RAI is now at an advanced stage of decomposition because it has been taken over completely by party politics , to the detriment of the cultural and informational depth of public broadcasting and , hence , of the entire country .
Just look at what happened last week on the programme called ' Vieni via con me ' ( ' Come away with me ' ) .
The Minzolinis and Masis of broadcasting , professionals of public disinformation and their paymasters , are incompatible with the report that Parliament has adopted today .
The European Union should take note and act accordingly .
We want no more party politics on the RAI !
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution .
The European Parliament should celebrate the UN Security Council 's resolution concerning women , peace and security .
A total of 90 % of the victims of war are civilians , most of them women and children .
Rape and sexual slavery are the crude everyday realities of war .
Under the Geneva Convention , rape and sexual slavery are recognised as war crimes and crimes against humanity .
It also needs to be pointed out that rape is a form of genocide and recognised as such by the international community .
It is vitally important that those who commit these crimes are made to answer for their actions .
Women must be involved in the measures taken to try to prevent conflicts and promote crisis management and peace negotiations .
It is also important to make it possible for women to participate in the postwar reconstruction of their own countries .
( LT ) Mr President , I voted for this very important resolution because we cannot ignore the fact that levels of violence against women are increasing .
This can be seen in war and conflict zones in particular .
I agree that proper attention should be paid to the implementation of UNSC Resolution 1325 , the first resolution to address the disproportionate and unique impact of armed conflict on women , at the highest level in the European Union .
This should be an especially important subject in the ongoing review of the EU 's human rights policy when it comes to the elaboration of a comprehensive human rights country strategy and to the evaluation of the EU guidelines on violence against women and girls and those EU guidelines concerning children and armed conflict , as well as combating all forms of discrimination against them .
I support the call to allocate the required funding to fight violence against women and support women 's participation in peace , security and reconciliation-related processes .
( BG ) Mr President , I voted for the resolution on beekeeping and for support for the beekeeping sector because this form of agricultural production is the most specialised agricultural activity carried out .
When we usually think of insects , the associations they conjure up are not particularly pleasant .
Insects are not pleasant creatures , but we have to cohabit with them .
However , this fact merely highlights that bees are the only insects which have been tamed for the purposes of food and agricultural production .
It shows how extremely important they are .
Let us not forget either that , without bees , we would not have a huge proportion of the other produce we have , as they are responsible for pollination .
It is vitally important that the European Parliament ensures time and again that standards are aligned , especially in agriculture , and particularly in the case of beekeeping , between the EU and countries outside the EU .
The Commission must take note of this .

( DA ) Mr President , please allow me to offer my thanks to Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska for her fine cooperation and an excellent report - a report that here in Parliament today has been made even better than it was before by the majority in Parliament taking a stand on the fact that we in Europe should increase our CO2 reduction target from 20 % to 30 % .
That is the precondition for us to become pioneers and not only bring about progress in the area of the environment , but also ensure that we become competitive in the area of green environmental technology .
In this way , we will protect jobs , the economy and the environment at the same time and find simultaneous answers to the major challenges we are facing in Europe .
It has been a good day for Europe with this vote today .
( CS ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on energy strategy , which outlines the directions that future European Union energy policy should take .
I would like to emphasise the role of nuclear energy in the current and future energy mix of the EU , including an implicit recognition of the need to extend the lifetime of existing facilities .
The strategy can be regarded as balanced from the perspective of individual sources , even though it does not once mention what is , in my view , the important role of coal when combusted in modernised power plants .
It is difficult to see how we can increase EU energy security and independence without coal as a stable primary resource capable of responding flexibly to sudden increases in energy demand .
The weak point is the excessively general nature of the report and the absence of accompanying legislation .
The specific and practical form of the strategy will also be hugely influenced by the action plan being drawn up for achieving a low carbon economy by 2050 , which is due to be published at the beginning of next year .
( FI ) Mr President , I also think that this report by Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska is an excellent one .
It is important that it should pilot a European energy strategy for the next 10 years .
It is also excellent that it focuses broad attention on the notion of what security of energy supply is , though also on energy efficiency , and not forgetting energy savings .
They are important issues .
It is , moreover , very important that we invest in research and new applications for different environmental technologies .
Innovations in this field will be greatly needed if we want to build a Europe that is cleaner and less dependent on others for energy .
We therefore mainly have to look to alternative energy forms .
It is true that we need nuclear power as a basic form of energy , but we require new investment in alternative energies .
I hope that we can gradually stop using coal .
I do not want to see a coalblack future for energy in Europe .
( LT ) Mr President , I voted for this report on the European Union energy strategy which covers many important points and issues and in which there is talk of renewable energy , research , innovations , reducing pollution and , of course , increasing energy security .
In particular , I support the European Parliament 's provision that energy networks , even those of a commercial nature , should be governed by transparent intergovernmental agreements which do not affect the interests of the Member States .
The bilateral agreements and projects of some Member States , such as the ' Nord Stream ' gas pipeline , cause distrust not just environmentally , but also in terms of the overall principle of solidarity .
An agreement is reached by two countries , one of which is an EU Member State , but the principle of Member States ' solidarity as laid down in the EU treaties is basically cast aside .
For this reason , I agree that external pipelines and other energy networks entering the territory of the European Union should be governed by transparent intergovernmental agreements , drawn up strictly in accordance with EU legislation .
Such pipelines should be subject to internal market rules , including rules on third party access .
( GA ) Mr President , I was glad to vote for this report , and I wish to commend my colleague and friend Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska on her achievement .
I attended the debate in Parliament but failed to get the attention of the President under the ' catch the eye ' procedure .
I would therefore like to make two points : that the European Union should focus on research , development and innovation ; and that a European network should be established for electricity storage and transmission across the Union .
If we act accordingly , we will make great progress .
Lastly , I wish to say that I was delighted that a large majority of MEPs voted in favour of this report .
( DA ) Mr President , I am , of course , pleased that Parliament has adopted a resolution that provides a negotiation proposal that will support our Climate Commissioner , who is going to Cancún to negotiate .
However , I also think that , considering we had major problems getting the EU to speak with one voice at COP 15 in Copenhagen last year , it provides food for thought that we are so divided in Parliament , as was evident in the votes both on the amendments and on the overall resolution .
In this connection , I believe that perhaps we could learn a little from the fact that it could perhaps be advantageous to hold back a little on demands for a Tobin tax and other taxes , because this is part of the cause of the divisions in Parliament .
Other things being equal , it would have been better if we had cut down on our demands and thus sent our negotiators off with a more unambiguous and broad mandate than has been the case here today .
( ES ) Mr President , some have said that the condemnation of Morocco is too mild given the magnitude of the repression of human rights in the Sahara , where Morocco is nothing more than an occupying country , with no sovereignty or legal entitlement whatsoever .
What is important , however , is the message that Europe as a whole and Parliament will no longer stand for its violence .
Yesterday , I was talking about the Hague Court here in Parliament .
I hope that the international community , which sadly failed in its attempts to prevent genocide in Rwanda , Yugoslavia and Darfur , will , in this case , prevent it in the Western Sahara and we will not have to see it before another court , also in the Hague , but this time a war crimes tribunal .
( FI ) Mr President , it is regrettable that the foreign policy practised by several EU countries continues to be very colonial in character .
That has been very evident in the case of Western Sahara .
Spain and France , which support Morocco , are particularly responsible for prolonging the conflict .
Western Sahara is Africa 's last colony and it was a UN resolution in 1966 that first proposed that the territory should be freed from colonial rule .
The situation in Western Sahara has worsened recently .
The Moroccan authorities have been using excessive violence .
There have been reports of numerous cases of deaths , injuries and disappearances .
The crisis area has also been blockaded so that it cannot even receive international aid .
The present crisis in the Western Sahara and the entire conflict should be resolved as soon as possible .
This is a task for EU Foreign Minister , Lady Ashton , and for all the Member States of the EU too .
( BG ) Mr President , I naturally voted for the resolution on Ukraine .
I largely presented my arguments for this during yesterday 's debate .
However , I want to use this procedure to make one very important clarification as something was said during yesterday 's debate which is incorrect .
At the time , Mr Brok was more than likely misled by the use of wrong terms .
However , he said that the head of the security services appoints and is involved in the appointment of constitutional judges in Ukraine .
I checked this fact this evening and established that this is not the case .
The Constitutional Court is appointed by the President , the Ukrainian Parliament and the judiciary .
In practice , the head of security services has no involvement in the appointment of judges to the Constitutional Court .
I wanted to make this clarification .
Mr President , finally we have a resolution on Ukraine adopted by our Parliament .
Certainly , we were concerned about the recent developments in the country .
If Ukraine is our strategic partner , then my understanding is that it is our duty to express our concern about the shortcomings we see - for instance , the excessive powers granted to the Ukraine security services and the measures they have taken to intimidate NGOs operating in that country and to control the Ukrainian media .
We are also concerned at the political process as a whole , including the inability of the opposition parties to participate in the elections without restrictions and discrimination .
On the other hand , we should continue to support Ukraine 's European integration prospects and to use more carrots than sticks in trying to draw Ukraine closer to Europe - and not further away from it - and to do everything in our power to achieve this strategic goal of ours .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union conducts a very extensive environmental protection policy , which also covers agriculture and industry .
However , under current conditions of production and competition , it is not possible to stop using chemicals in agriculture , or to change the methods used to manufacture goods so that they do not require a huge expenditure of energy .
Accusing the Union that it is not the leader in ecological policy and putting forward the United States and China as models is hugely inappropriate .
These countries are , after all , leaders in CO2 emissions .
The overriding significance of environmental protection is an undeniable fact , however , which is why we should make every effort to make the European economy sustainable - industry , agriculture and transport .
Nature 's goods is our most precious commodity , and something that is very difficult to regain once it is lost .
Everything should therefore be done to find the proverbial golden mean .
( PL ) Mr President , searching for a balance between economic and social interests is very important , but also very difficult .
Economic cooperation which goes hand in hand with respect for the basic rules of democracy and the wellbeing of its citizens is the foundation of the European Union .
This is why it is so important to introduce unified standards for human rights , as well as social and environmental standards in international trade agreements .
Adopting this type of standard within European Union trade policy will lead to the latter being perceived positively by citizens and also to an improvement in the EU 's relations with its partners .
International cooperation in this area is unusually important , and the European Parliament should support it to the greatest extent possible .
( PL ) Mr President , horizontal agreements cover a very wide range of regulations , and oversights in legislative provisions , whether intended or unintended , can lead to the elimination of competition .
This is therefore a crucial issue and , at the same time , one which is sensitive to errors .
Balance must be ensured by appropriate regulations standardising procedures and promoting agreement between interested parties .
Intellectual property rights cannot be disregarded , and failure to observe them must entail serious consequences .
I also support the author 's demands regarding an improvement in the quality of legislative texts created .
The language used today in many documents is very often difficult to understand and inaccessible for the average citizen .
Written explanations of vote
Yet again , a farce is being played out between the political representatives of capital and the bourgeois governments in order to manipulate the people .
The main point is not whether or not we shall have an increase in the budget , but where the money will go .
That too has been decided .
Agricultural subsidies for poor , medium-sized holdings under the CAP have been cut , while the money from the agricultural funds is going to ' eligible ' projects , meaning projects awarded directly or via public private partnerships to large business groups .
Thus , the EU budget is also used to channel money to the monopoly groups .
On the other hand , any increase in the Community budget will be channelled towards funding the anti-grassroots policy and action of the EU , such as the newly adopted mechanism of the European External Action Service to facilitate the EU 's politico-military imperialist interventionist policy .
The EU budget is yet another instrument for slashing grassroots incomes and redistributing it to monopoly capital .
The imperialist infighting within the EU does not concern the people ; it concerns the fight between the bourgeois classes and parts of capital as to who will get the lion 's share of the booty plundered from grassroots incomes .
I am sure that you are aware of the problems that rocked the European Union again when it came to approving the 2011 budget .
The European Commission and Parliament wanted an increase of around 5 % in order to implement new European policies ( financial market regulation , common foreign policy , etc . ) which have been established in response to the challenges that we are facing .
In view of the current budgetary constraints , Parliament ultimately decided to agree to scale back this increase to 2.91 % , provided that certain political conditions were met ( debate on the granting of own resources to the European Union with a view to ending the horse trading between Member States , budget flexibility and funding for key strategic priorities ) .
As the European Council has rejected these terms , I voted in favour of the new resolution which clearly sets out Parliament 's eminently reasonable , constructive and yet ambitious stance .
Whilst I and my fellow Members are willing to tighten our belts together with everyone else in Europe , we do also want to emphasise how important European contributions are in terms of coordinating and supporting the policies pursued by the Union .
I supported this resolution .
The Treaty of Lisbon has brought many important changes in various fields and has given the European Parliament new powers .
The unsuccessful attempt to reach an agreement with the European Council on the 2011 budget was the European Parliament 's first serious effort to use the powers assigned to it .
The European Parliament is ready to come to an agreement as soon as possible so that the EU can begin 2011 with the budget adopted and so that the funding of important areas and projects is not delayed .
However , the European Parliament 's requirements must be mentioned in the agreement with the Council and there must be an agreement on certain flexibility mechanisms , allowing proper financing in 2011 and thereafter of the policies stemming from the new competences conferred on the EU by the Treaty of Lisbon and from the Europe 2020 strategy .
There must be a commitment by the Commission to present proposals on new own resources for the EU , and there must be an agreement with the Council on the review of the financial structure .
Furthermore , there must be an agreement between the three institutions on a method for working together which includes participation by Parliament in the process of negotiating the next multiannual financial framework .
The European Parliament must comply with the requirements it has presented .
Not only will the establishment of the EU budget in the future depend on them ; they will also establish a precedent to expand the influence of the only directly elected institution in European Union governance .
The European Parliament must not give into pressure from the European Commission to accept the 2011 budget .
This would be tantamount to the amendments in the treaty , which form the basis of the functioning of the Union , being infringed by the most democratic forum in the European Community and the only one which is directly elected .
The reactions from the European Commission 's leaders create the idea that the Union 's executive has the impression that Parliament does not agree with the budget that has been drafted precisely to show who holds the real power .
However , Parliament , which voted in its entirety against the 2011 budget proposed by the Commission , clearly has more important things to do than engage in futile power struggles .
In reality , the budget does not take into account the Union 's new powers and does not provide funding for the EU 2020 strategy , which enjoys unanimous agreement .
We cannot be inconsistent when making our own decisions .
We cannot devise and approve well-meaning strategies without also providing the financial input for implementing them .
Parliament has the right to set the path along which the Union will proceed next year , a right granted by the Treaty of Lisbon .
The united action taken by all the parliamentary groups in the European legislative only serves to demonstrate that the budget needs to be reviewed on a much more flexible basis .
I voted for this resolution because it reminds us , in technical terms , of the three requirements on which Parliament 's vote on the 2011 budget depends : namely , keeping the option of mobilising the flexibility instrument , which is a necessary budgetary tool for ensuring minimum financing for Community competences and priorities ; the European Commission 's commitment to make specific proposals on new own resources between now and July 2011 ; and the strong involvement of Parliament in future debates on the European Union 's funding system , specifically on the question of own resources and the drafting of the next financial framework .
This resolution reaffirms the changes made to the Council by the Treaty of Lisbon in order that the Council finally recognise the new legitimacy of Parliament in budgetary matters .
Beyond the interinstitutional battle , we must realise that the issue of European integration and the very future of the Community project is at stake in this debate on the budget , where Parliament once again embodies the Community spirit and respect for the citizens of the Union .
Finally , the Member States , which have ratified this treaty individually , must be fully aware of its requirements and take on the ambitions contained in it .
Before the Commission proposes a new draft budget , the European Parliament wanted to reaffirm the role that it intends to play in the negotiations on the next multiannual financial framework .
We have set down three conditions : firstly , maintaining a flexibility mechanism , not least so as to be able to mobilise millions of euro in emergency aid for developing countries ; secondly , that the Commission should provide substantive proposals on new own resources ; and thirdly , that the Council should undertake to examine those proposals in conjunction with Parliament during the negotiations on the next multiannual financial framework .
The resolution has been adopted by a very large majority , which is indicative of Parliament 's determination only to support the adoption of the 2011 budget if these three conditions are met .
We regret the fact that the negotiations have not , as yet , managed to achieve a result .
Despite the fact that the European Parliament went a long way in the negotiations by accepting the Council 's budget proposal for 2011 , offering a solution to large and difficult financing projects such as the ITER fusion research programme , and promising a swift approval of amending budget No 10 , which involved Member States receiving back just over EUR 600 million , a minority of Member States , including Sweden , have blocked the continuation of the negotiations .

Parliament 's resolution stresses that the negotiations should continue , but also lays down requirements for the future .
In order for the EU to avoid further budget crises and to manage to finance major priorities such as climate policy and EU 2020 , more flexibility within the EU budget will be needed for the years ahead .
However , we do not believe that the overall level of the EU budget needs to be increased .
In order to avoid the risk of a veto by Parliament if it is only permitted to adopt a position on a package between Member States when the negotiations are already complete , we also believe that the European Parliament should be permitted to take part in preparatory negotiations on the EU 's next long-term budget after 2013 and in the discussions on the future financing of this long-term budget , without , for that reason , essentially adopting a position on the question of own resources .
Finally , we would like to emphasise that these requirements do not go beyond the competence bestowed on Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are currently experiencing an institutional stalemate as regards the 2011 budget , with some Member States blocking the Commission 's proposal in the Council .
I hope that this stalemate will be overcome as swiftly as possible , as the budget has to respect the commitments and responsibilities of the European Union under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament wants the Treaty of Lisbon to be respected and institutional peace to prevail within the EU .
In fact , according to the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has to be involved - by voting or giving opinions - in the new interinstitutional agreement , in the next multiannual financial framework , and in establishing new own resources .
As regards the interinstitutional agreement , it is obvious that respect for the commitments made by European institutions , specifically the Council , is conditional on the existence of flexibility regarding the current multiannual financial framework .
The Europe 2020 strategy , the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor programme ( ITER ) , the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) and financial supervisors are a few examples that need financing .
The Council needs to take the Treaty of Lisbon on board , both from the point of view of the new areas which come under the jurisdiction of the European Union , as reflected in the budget , and from the point of view of the European Parliament 's strengthened powers , not least regarding the budget .
These changes , in fact , strengthen the democratic legitimacy of the Union 's institutions .
The use of the Community method rather than the intergovernmental route makes our governance more democratic .
Parliament is calling for only the bare minimum of what would be desirable , taking the budget constraints of the Member States into account .
We disagree with the proposed 2011 budget .
However , we also disagree with most of the justifications that the majority in Parliament are putting forward in order to prevent the 2011 budget from being adopted .
The debate which has begun on the post-2013 financial perspectives is already flawed for a number of reasons , among them , the inability of the European institutions - Parliament and the Council - to come to an agreement in the negotiations on the 2011 budget ; the attempts by several Member States to force a reduction in funds for future budgets ; the insistence of others on new own resources for the EU , suggesting the creation of European taxes on top of national taxes , paid by the public rather than the financial sector ; insistence on the full implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon ; and opposition by rich countries to considerably increasing their contributions to the EU budget .
In any case , although we agree that new responsibilities should mean new resources , we cannot give our support to a resolution that does not advocate distributing EU funds with a view to economic and social cohesion , facing up to the crisis and supporting employment with rights , without strengthening militarism or repression .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the current 2011 budget negotiations because it is essential that Parliament takes up its new and legitimate role in defining the European Union 's budget now that the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force .
As the Conciliation Committee has failed to reach agreement despite all Parliament 's efforts , we have restated a number of points on which the Council needs to be flexible .
Firstly , the need for greater flexibility up to the end of the multiannual financial framework 2007-2013 in order to take into account the new competences conferred on the European Union and , secondly , for Parliament to be fully involved in the negotiations on the post-2013 financial framework .
Lastly , when the Commission has agreed to present detailed proposals on the creation of own resources for the EU , we want the Council to undertake that Parliament will be fully included in the discussions on those proposals .
This resolution will send a strong message to the European Council when it meets on 16 and 17 December 2010 .
in writing . - ( SV ) I regret the fact that the negotiations have not as yet managed to achieve a result .
Despite the fact that the European Parliament went a long way in the negotiations by accepting the Council 's budget proposal for 2011 , offering a solution to large and difficult financing projects such as the ITER fusion research programme , and promising a swift approval of amending budget No 10 , which involved Member States receiving back just over EUR 600 million , a minority of Member States , including Sweden , have blocked the continuation of the negotiations .

Parliament 's resolution stresses that the negotiations should continue , but also lays down requirements for the future .
In order for the EU to avoid further budget crises and to manage to finance major priorities such as climate policy and EU 2020 , more flexibility within the EU budget will be needed for the years ahead .
However , I do not believe that the overall level of the EU budget needs to be increased .
In order to avoid the risk of a veto by Parliament if it is only permitted to adopt a position on a package between Member States when the negotiations are already complete , I also believe that the European Parliament should be permitted to take part in preparatory negotiations on the EU 's next long-term budget after 2013 and in the discussions on the future financing of this long-term budget , without , for that reason , adopting a position on the question of own resources .
Finally , I would like to emphasise that these requirements do not go beyond the competence bestowed on Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon , and even though I was against the introduction of this treaty , I believe that we now have no other choice than to accept the consequences of its ratification and work according to its provisions .
The European Union 's budget forms the framework within which its Member States can act .
Particularly during economically uncertain times , it is important to be able to rely on commitments made in this regard .
It must be possible for people to have confidence that the funds will actually be made available to them .
I am talking here to the farmers in particular .
Unused funds in the area of agriculture does not mean that they were not needed .
It just means that they have been managed very carefully .
Farmers must not be punished for this by shifting the funds to other areas .
In the interests of EU citizens , agriculture must be safeguarded financially .
A compromise must be found as quickly as possible so that we can adopt the 2011 budget .
Only once we have done that can the financing for agriculture be safeguarded and national bottlenecks avoided .
in writing . - I voted for the budget resolution but abstained on Amendment 1b , which deals with new own resources .
I certainly believe the EU should be looking for new sources of finance but do not believe this should done by seeking advance commitments from the Council .
We should have an open discussion about all the options .
If Parliament and the Council fail to reach agreement on the 2011 budget by the end of this year , it may have major consequences for the financing of Union programmes , cause serious delays in setting up the supervisory bodies , and render emergency instruments such as the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the Solidarity Fund inoperable .
Parliament needs to act firmly in future negotiations , however .
What it has asked of the Council is , in fact , merely respect for the powers granted by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament has done nothing except defend the EU budget from ill-considered cuts , which would have hit employment and seen the people of Europe pay the penalty for the intransigence of a few Member States .
I look forward to seeing a great sense of responsibility at the forthcoming negotiations , so as to avoid adding an institutional crisis on top of the current economic crisis .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given Parliament new responsibilities , and these mean increased costs .
These needs require a budget for 2011 that is slightly higher than that for 2010 , so that Parliament is able to perform its role properly .
No one is benefiting from the impasse that has been reached in the negotiations with the Council , and despite the crisis that Europe is undergoing , it is necessary to come to an understanding so that the EU can meet the objectives outlined in the EU 2020 strategy .
Particularly in times of financial crisis , when citizens are being asked to tighten their belts and accept massive cuts in the social and family-related spheres , rigorous savings must also be possible in the EU budget .
Instead of this , an increase of a good 3 % is planned .
Some projects have simply been pushed back so that , in the foreseeable future , we then have the prospect of only the most immediate major expenditure .
There would be numerous opportunities to make savings , for example , in connection with the two locations for plenary sittings , or by finally whipping the EU 's fight against fraud into shape and fully recovering the funds that have been incorrectly paid out .
We also need to consider whether all of the prestige projects really should be continued .
Some of these will certainly also be future-oriented , but the implementation of some projects raises doubts as to their rationale or approach .
I cannot support this EU budget for 2011 under any circumstances .
The budget talks have failed on account of the conflict between budget stability and adaptability .
Thus , representatives of the European Parliament are calling for broad budgetary flexibility , but without considering the interests of the countries that are net contributors .
It is the net contributors which finance the EU , are responsible for restarting the engine of the economy after the crisis and which are rescuing the countries with large budget deficits , as well as the euro itself .
It is therefore justifiable for them to keep to the binding budgetary appropriations , so that the net balance cannot be changed retrospectively on a whim and money thereby wasted .
Those who are investing and paying out money must be assured of the greatest possible level of stability .
Equally , the critical attitude to EU taxation has nothing to do with an apparent ' lack of solidarity ' .
It is simply due to the fact that the majority of Member States are clearly opposed to it and are retaining the ratification by the national parliaments for the sake of subsidiarity .
The ' emancipation of the European Parliament ' that is so often quoted in this context seems to me to be more like a very disturbing emancipation from EU citizens .
I therefore voted against this motion for a resolution .
Like the vast majority of Members , I voted for the draft budget because I believe Parliament has to be taken into account .
That is not only from a symbolic viewpoint , due to the fact that Parliament represents 500 million Europeans , but above all , from a ' constitutional ' viewpoint , inasmuch as the treaty requires Parliament itself to give its assent to the adoption of the future multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) .
The increase that Parliament is requesting is not a whim but is designed to benefit the citizens of the European Union .
The major benefits deriving from the funds and initiatives implemented across the Union bear witness to that .
I certainly agree , however , with those who believe we should perhaps consider distributing them differently , so as to prevent some countries from being merely net contributors and obtaining far fewer benefits .
I hope all these demands can be taken into consideration during the consultation and conciliation stage .
Given that the Council 's position on the draft budget has limited payment appropriations to an amount that represents an increase of 2.91 % over the 2010 budget , and that on 15 November 2010 , the Parliament-Council Conciliation Committee failed to agree on a joint text for the 2011 budget , I am voting in favour of the resolution as I agree with the conditions that Parliament is imposing on the Council and the Commission in order to facilitate an agreement on the 2011 budget .
I abstained from voting on the resolution on the 2011 budget and future funding for European policies , although I supported all the amendments aimed at improving the position of Parliament in the discussion and control over budgetary decisions .
In fact , the compromise text represents a return to previous positions taken by Parliament , namely , those which were behind the breakdown of the first conciliation with the Council .
In its newly recast form , the Members ' position does not guarantee what is vital in this negotiation : that there is not a repeat of the restrictive framework currently imposed by the richer countries of the EU in 2012 and 2013 .
Neither does the position of Parliament ensure that a democratic conference will take place within the framework of a debate , involving national parliaments , on the new resources which are to fund the new financial perspectives .
My abstention backs Parliament 's stance , which is critical of the position of governments that seek greater European powers with less money , but does not endorse poor agreements or a mediocre budget .
This resolution is a clear signal of Parliament 's commitment to overcoming the current impasse on the budget for 2011 .
in writing . - As to the 2011 budget proper , the Council indicated that the level of payment appropriations should not go beyond an increase of 2.91 % compared to the 2010 budget .
Especially for the Member States that had voted against the majority Council position budget in August , this was the absolute red line .
Parliament in trialogues on the 2011 budget had taken a step towards being willing to accept this position on payments , after getting assurances concerning extra commitments over and above the ceiling via the flexibility instrument both in Heading 1A ( competitiveness ) and Heading 4 ( external action ) so as to be able to cover for reinforced policy priorities in Heading 1A ( notably , lifelong learning ) and extra needs in Heading 4 ( notably Palestine ) .
Also , as regards ITER ( unanimity needed in Council ) , it seemed that a compromise would guarantee an extra 1.4 billion for the years 2012 and 2013 by using unused margins under the different headings from the year 2010 and - but that part was still under discussion , as it was linked to guaranteeing better flexibility mechanisms under the Multiannual Financial Framework Regulation - redeployments from the seventh framework programme for research and development .
in writing . - I abstained on the original text of paragraph 1 ( 6 ) because the idea of calling for new proposals on own resources through tax initiatives and other possible programmes such as ETs represents a potential for EU-style taxes .
This vote is consistent with my attitude and earlier approach on any suggestions of a euro-style tax system .
in writing . - This resolution sends a clear signal to the other institutions that the European Parliament is willing to start serious negotiations in order to resolve the current budget deadlock and to decide upon a budget for 2011 as soon as possible .
Reaching a deal will mean that single farm payments are not delayed , and funding for Structural Funds is not affected .
I believe that MEPs , as the only directly elected representatives in the EU , should be involved in shaping the next financial perspective in order to achieve the best deal for UK citizens .
Steps need to be taken to make the EU budget more flexible .
This will enable the EU to react quickly to crises and will allow unforeseen needs to be financed .
The resolution also calls for a much-needed discussion on new ways to finance the EU , which could reduce the cost of the EU for British taxpayers .
I have voted in favour of the resolution on the ongoing negotiations on the 2011 budget because to date , the budget negotiations have unfortunately shown that the Council has evidently not found time over the last 12 months to read and understand the Treaty of Lisbon .
All we are looking for here are rights and procedures that are based strictly on what was agreed in Lisbon - nothing more , nothing less .
It was the Council that insisted on the need for the new treaty .
The Council must stick to the treaty and is duty-bound not to allow obvious differences within its own ranks to impact negatively on Europe 's citizens .
In this context , I welcome the broad determination of Parliament to agree the 2011 budget as quickly as possible before the end of the year .
We need flexibility .
What is more , we also urgently need the new financial supervisory authorities , as the dramatic situation in Ireland illustrates day-by-day .
The inclusion of the clause on human rights or the implementation of social and environmental standards in trade agreements is a principle that the EU should seek to ensure .
I therefore agree with the EU 's aim of exerting pressure within international organisations , especially the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) and the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , and of promoting the creation of a new environmental organisation to promote fair trade .
On the one hand , Europe must respect rigorous social and environmental standards , but it must also demand the same level of diligence from its partners .
It is worth pointing out that this is possible , as has been demonstrated by the progress made in free trade agreements .
However , there needs to be a clear framework of standards within international organisations .
This can come about through strengthened dialogue within these organisations , particularly with regard to the compulsory implementation of these standards in trade agreements and the necessary surveillance mechanisms and incentives , along with strengthened arbitration panels .
The instruments of the generalised system of preferences ( GSP ) which enable the EU to grant trade preferences unilaterally may represent a chance to better identify which parties should benefit , taking into account their respective levels of development and monitoring of their commitments .
Every year , in accordance with the foreign affairs competences established in the treaties , the European Union signs a whole range of trade agreements .
Now that the European Union 's competences have been expanded in the fields of human rights ( the Charter of Fundamental Rights is now primary legislation ) and sustainable development ( one of the five key objectives for Europe 2020 ) , I felt it was important to support the report produced by my colleague Tokia Saïfi , which seeks to ensure that these issues are better reflected in the Union 's trade agreements .
Naturally , the report proposes improving cooperation within existing international organisations and the automatic inclusion of clauses on these subjects , but it also introduces new ideas , calling for the creation of a World Environmental Organisation to which cases of environmental dumping could be referred .
This proposal is also linked to the notion of establishing a carbon inclusion mechanism to complement the EU 's emissions trading system .
This two-pronged approach would enable us to prevent emissions being transferred to third countries .
I support this report .
Distortions of competition and the risks of environmental and social dumping are becoming more and more frequent in the area of international trade .
This is to the detriment of undertakings and workers in the European Union who , unlike their trade partners in non-EU Member States , are required to comply with more stringent social , environmental and fiscal standards .
Therefore , EU bilateral and multilateral agreements should provide for an obligation for all companies , not just those located in the EU , to comply with the aforementioned requirements .
EU trade agreements must provide for transparency and stringent public procurement standards , with a view to combating illicit capital flight .
In order to achieve these objectives , the EU should cooperate actively with international partners in the area of trade - the World Trade Organisation , the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations Organisation .
I voted for this report because it is nonetheless essential to ensure a balance between trade law and fundamental human rights and to step up the dialogue between the main international organisations , particularly between the International Labour Organisation and the World Trade Organisation .
Furthermore , including human rights and social and environmental standards in trade agreements can add value to international trade agreements , allowing greater support for political and social stability , thus establishing a climate which is more conducive to trade .
It should be pointed out that European industries and businesses are bound in Europe by strict social and environmental rules .
I agree with the position of the European Parliament that if the European Union complies with binding standards , it must also be able to require the same from its trading partners and particularly from emerging countries , and insist on quality and sustainability , particularly for food products coming into its territory , in order to preserve fair and equitable trade .
I would like to stress that , in order to strengthen human rights and social policy in international trade , we must demand that all future trade agreements provide for a ban on the exploitation of child labour , in particular , in the extraction and processing of natural stone .
I believe that social and environmental standards are not incompatible with the European Union 's trade interests and those of its partners .
Cooperation between international organisations should be stepped up as part of a global agreement on climate , especially at the level of carbon inclusion mechanisms for the EU 's emissions trading scheme , while ensuring , however , that existing leakage is stopped .
I also believe that the EU should lead efforts in the use of bilateral free trade so that this incorporates not only provisions on human rights , but also provisions on sustainable development issues .
I realise that the discussion on the inclusion of clauses on human rights and social and environmental standards in international agreements is a complex one , and I am aware that there is currently an imbalance between the rules of international trade and the rest of international law .
I believe that the European Union plays a key role in this quest for a new world governance and , to this end , must encourage consistency in the policies adopted by international institutions .
I believe that the European Union must seek a balance between restrictive and liberal approaches to trade and a compromise between defending its commercial interests and requiring respect for the values that underpin it .
It is therefore important to encourage dialogue and collaborative partnerships with international organisations , particularly the World Trade Organisation and the International Labour Organisation .
I also recall that the Treaty of Lisbon has introduced changes to trade policy which touch upon some of the proposals presented in this report .
I am therefore voting in favour of the bulk of the measures contained in this report .
in writing . - I support this report , which calls for trade not to be seen as a narrow end in itself .
Rather , our future trade strategy should also see it as an additional means to promote European values and interests .
Provisions on sustainable development are of benefit to all parties .
Moreover , the inclusion of social and environmental standards in trade agreements contributes to regulate globalisation .
Choosing to ignore them is a short-sighted and counterproductive approach which not only goes against the principles guiding our external action but will also undermine the European social model .
EU bilateral trade relations with third parties are all the more crucial for human rights and social and environmental standards when there is scant prospect of progress within the WTO framework .
Nevertheless , we need to keep pushing for the ILO to be granted observer status in , and the right to speak at , the WTO , and a committee on trade and decent work should be created within the WTO .
While the inclusion of binding human rights clauses in the EU 's international agreements is an admirable practice , poor monitoring and implementation seems to render them virtually useless , and this has to be seriously addressed in all future agreements .
International trade agreements should represent an opportunity for the EU to encourage its partners to adopt social and environmental standards .
The report has been adopted by a large majority and contains proposals to require imported goods to comply with the same social and environmental standards as European products .
It also suggests that it should be possible to refer cases of social or environmental dumping to either the ILO or a World Environmental Organisation , which needs to be created with all possible speed .
Current free trade agreement negotiations should include clauses on human rights but also on economic , social and environmental standards .
If this is not done , the unfair competitive advantage will mean that the EU is no longer able to compete with low cost and low quality imports .
The future of both European agriculture and European industry are at stake here .
I voted in favour of the report on ' human rights , social and environmental standards in international trade agreements ' because trade policy should be consistent with the EU 's objective and should contribute to safeguarding its social and environmental policy models .
It is therefore paramount that the EU ensures that specified social and environmental standards are implemented in international trade agreements .
The issue of whether we should trade with those who do not have the same standards of respect for human rights is nothing new in international relations and is threatening to drag on forever .
Being as realistic as possible , I believe that the EU should do its utmost to ensure greater acceptance of the standards deemed sufficient and seek to bind countries with which it trades into the global effort to respect those rights .
At economic and diplomatic level , I realise that the EU must not neglect stressing the importance and centrality of this issue at a time of establishing lasting trade channels .
At the same time , however , as is common knowledge , we are not in a position to impose these standards or to make such demands .
Although these standards are often formally obeyed , the EU is also aware that it has partners that do not comply with them on a regular basis .
The major energy suppliers to Europe come under that category .
That being said , I would like to reiterate the importance of continuing to fight for human rights and making them a condition for establishing sound trade relationships .
The inclusion of the human rights clause and the implementation of social and environmental standards in trade negotiations are complex issues that are dividing the international community .
On the one hand , the North is denouncing the social and environmental dumping practised by emerging countries , which distorts trade competition ; on the other hand , the South suspects the North of wanting to impede their economic development and , through the implementation of these standards , to exercise a form of disguised protectionism .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that trade policy should act as an instrument in the service of the European Union 's overall objectives , and that it is therefore important that trade is seen not as an end in itself , but rather as a tool for the promotion of European commercial interests , and as an instrument for fair trade that can bring into general practice the effective inclusion and implementation of social and environmental standards with all EU trade partners .
I voted in favour of the report on human rights and social and environmental standards in international trade agreements because it is vital that the European Union 's trade policy be consistent with its political aims .
The text , which has been improved considerably by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , makes it clear that trade can no longer be an end in its own right , but rather that all agreements should now contain certain social and environmental clauses .
These clauses must be binding and include scope for referring cases of non-compliance , notably to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights .
I agreed with the report because we should not forget that European industries and businesses are bound by strict social and environmental rules in Europe .
If the European Union complies with binding standards , it must also be able to require the same from its trading partners and particularly from emerging countries , and insist on quality and sustainability , particularly for food products coming into its territory , in order to preserve fair and equitable trade .
It is important to improve access to green goods and technologies to achieve sustainable development objectives , and we must reach a rapid conclusion to the negotiations on reducing or removing tariff and non-tariff barriers for environmental goods and services so as to promote new forms of employment policies and create jobs which meet decent work standards as laid down by the International Labour Organisation and establish growth opportunities for European industries and small and medium-sized enterprises .
Searching for a balance between economic and social interests is not only very important , but also very difficult .
Economic cooperation which goes hand in hand with respect for the basic rules of democracy and the wellbeing of its citizens is the foundation of the European Union , which is why it is so important to introduce unified standards for human rights , as well as social and environmental standards , in international trade agreements .
Adopting this type of standard within European Union trade policy will lead to the latter being perceived positively by citizens and also to an improvement in the EU 's relations with its partners .
International cooperation in this area is extremely important , and the European Parliament should support it to the greatest extent possible .
I voted in favour of the report , as human rights , social standards and environmental standards should apply in all countries , not just in Europe .
Within our sphere of influence are those states with which we trade .
There is a responsibility associated with this which we ought to fulfil , and this report points us in the right direction .
It is the direction towards fair trade and , in particular , fairness towards the people and the environment .
If we are able to improve something in these areas , we should do so as far as we possibly can .
in writing . - I warmly welcome this report , which makes clear that EU trade policy must be about more than trying to achieve maximum economic advantage .
EU trade agreements must include strong human rights , social and environmental standards .
This report highlights a number of pertinent points , such as the UN Human Rights Council 's periodic review of the application of the human rights clause in trade agreements , the ability of the ILO to refer cases to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights , the involvement of national parliaments and citizens of third countries in the negotiations , and the fight against modern slavery .
This concern with human rights is welcome coming from a Parliament which endorsed the coup d 'état in Honduras and the signing of a commercial agreement with the leaders of the putsch .
However , quite apart from my doubts about the real impact of the statements regarding human rights , the desire expressed in the report to introduce free trade agreements everywhere , as well as the promotion of the pollution rights exchange that we call the ' carbon market ' , mean that I cannot vote for it .
EU countries and all their economic operators are scrupulous in respecting human rights and complying with social and environmental standards , and it is perfectly natural to ask the same of their trade partners in the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) in order to make world trade fairer and more equitable .
We are aware that on occasions , those obligations are not easy to fulfil , especially for emerging countries .
However , the EU must continue to make an effort to bring this about , and it therefore falls to the EU and Parliament to make every effort to uphold respect for human life and affirm that decent work is the same everywhere and for everyone , and that there is a universal aspect to the meaning of environmental and social rights , including trade union rights and combating child labour .
I voted in favour of this resolution as it explicitly includes the need for the EU to make an effective contribution to the sustainable development of the world , solidarity between peoples , fair trade and the eradication of poverty .
My support is also based on the importance and the need , which is reflected in the resolution , to make it legally binding that international trade agreements must respect human rights , which must be strictly and constantly monitored .
On this point , I think that the proposal to grant the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) the status of official observer in the World Trade Organisation is a valuable one , especially the creation of a committee on trade and decent work in the ILO to supervise trade agreements in coordination with the ILO and the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights .
Another reason why I voted in favour of this resolution is the firm way in which it expresses the need to create a ' genuine World Environmental Organisation ' , and its unequivocal defence of human rights , sustainable development and respect for the environment , prioritising them above the current international trade models .
It should certainly be in the interests of the EU to conclude trade agreements primarily with equal partners .
This means that more attention should be paid to human rights and environmental and social standards , because , as long as the EU complies with these standards , it can also require them of its trade partners .
However , particularly in the area of human rights , as well as social and environmental standards , the EU repeatedly hits a brick wall when other countries with which it has concluded bilateral trade agreements have different opinions in this regard .
I am abstaining from the vote , because I would question whether it would actually be possible to implement what the rapporteur has proposed .
Human rights and the application of social and environmental standards in trade negotiations are quite complex and highly problematic issues .
It is therefore essential for the social clause to appear more and more frequently in bilateral agreements .
Despite the evident imbalance today between the rules of international trade and the other standards of international law , I believe it is fundamentally important to vote in favour of Mrs Saïfi 's report so that new ways of thinking can be developed to achieve genuine coordination between international organisations .
The European Union has a key role in this quest for a new world governance , and to this end I feel it must encourage consistency in the policies adopted by international institutions .
I voted for the report so that a new trade policy can be launched and conducted ; one that is based on firmness and dialogue and that takes environmental standards into account so as to achieve ' legitimate ' objectives .
I voted in favour of the report on human rights and social and environmental standards in international trade agreements as I agree with the inclusion of clauses relating to human rights or to the implementation of social and environmental standards in trade negotiations .
There is real tension between the countries in the North , which are denouncing the social and environmental dumping practised by emerging countries , and the countries in the South , which suspect the North of wanting to impede their economic development and , through the implementation of these standards , to exercise a form of disguised protectionism .
However , this conflict of interests must not prevent the EU from adopting a positive , yet also legally binding approach in its negotiations , with the inclusion of provisions on sustainable development , particularly in bilateral agreements .
The European Union , through its policies and particularly its trade policy , must uphold its commercial interests while complying with and ensuring that others comply with its standards and values .
It is this thought which should help the various EU institutions launch and conduct a new ambitious trade policy based on firmness and dialogue .
We must not forget that European industries and businesses are bound in Europe by strict social and environmental rules .
If the European Union complies with binding standards , it must also be able to require the same from its trading partners , particularly from emerging countries , and insist on quality and sustainability , particularly for food products coming into its territory , in order to preserve fair and equitable trade .
In this sense , the European single market 's tough rules on health , safety , the environment and protection of workers and consumers are a specific European model which must serve as an inspiration at international level and in multilateral fora and which must be reflected in the current negotiations on bilateral trade agreements .
I voted in favour as I believe that as the European Union plays a crucial role in the quest for a new world economic governance , it must encourage consistency in the policies implemented by the various international institutions .
Today , there is a growing imbalance between the specific standards for international trade and the other rules of international law .
As frontline players , we have an obligation to find new ways of thinking , with the specific aim of establishing effective coordination between international bodies .
The inclusion of the human rights clause , along with the application of social and environmental standards in trade negotiations , are complex problems that divide the international community .
On the one hand , Northern countries are condemning the unfair competition from emerging countries when it comes to social and environmental matters , which results in a distortion of competition in trade .
On the other hand , Southern countries suspect that Northern countries want to hinder their economic development and use the application of those standards as a concealed method of protectionism .
All of this explains why it is extremely difficult to conduct a calm discussion within multilateral institutions on these standards , especially within the World Trade Organisation , as it is coinciding with the increasingly frequent appearance of the social clause in bilateral trade agreements .
We are in favour of the report on human rights and social and environmental standards in international trade agreements , because third countries that do not respect workers ' rights and refuse to play an active part in fighting climate change all too often compete unfairly with EU companies .
Our businesses have to comply with extremely demanding standards of worker protection , meet high wage and tax bills , abide by laws placing strict controls on emissions into the environment , and abide by conditions imposed by local planning regulations .
Competing businesses in third countries , such as China and India , are obviously not subject to such controls and rules , and their end products are clearly competitive with regard to Europe 's .
When I spoke in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and at the interparliamentary meeting on energy , I called for the EU to use its influence in the World Trade Organisation to allow Europe to impose a carbon tax on countries that do not sign the climate change agreements .
The same argument should apply to those countries that produce by methods that are very different from those found in Europe , such as the use of child labour , or countries that do not grant workers their rights .
I voted for the adoption of the resolution on human rights and social and environmental standards in international trade agreements .
The European Union is based on principles that include respect for human rights .
This is why it sets such great store by the observance of human rights throughout the world .
The Treaty of Lisbon confirms that the external activities of the European Union , of which foreign trade is an integral part , should be carried out according to the same principles as those which underlie the creation of the EU .
This is why I fully support the practice of including legally binding clauses regarding human rights in the European Union 's international agreements .
I would like to draw attention , however , to the need for them to be implemented and to the fact that countries that do not adhere to established rules will need to face possible economic consequences .
In accordance with point 15 of the resolution , I believe it is crucial that all free trade agreements contain negotiated social and environmental standards , including : a list of minimum standards that all the EU 's trade partners should observe , as well as a list of additional conventions that should be implemented gradually and flexibly , taking into account the economic situation and the social and environmental issues of a given partner .
In particular , I am in favour of placing in all future trade agreements a ban on child labour .
I also support a strengthening of cooperation in human rights between the WTO and the main UN institutions .
In 2009 , the European Ombudsman received 3 098 complaints , 727 of which fell under his competences .
The post of European Ombudsman was established in the Treaty of Maastricht in 1992 , creating an intermediary between European citizens and the authorities of the European Union .
European citizens and businesses , but also institutions and any individual who lives or is legally resident in a Member State , are entitled to lodge complaints with the Ombudsman .
The Ombudsman is elected by the European Parliament at the start of its term of office for that term and investigates administrative failures that are brought to his attention .
The Ombudsman produces an annual activity report .
In voting for this resolution , I am associating myself with the general approval expressed by the European Parliament for this vital link in the chain of democracy .
The institution of the European Ombudsman safeguards the right , anchored in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , of every citizen ' to have his or her affairs handled impartially , fairly and within a reasonable time by the institutions and bodies of the Union ' .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon increased the democratic legitimacy of the Ombudsman thanks to his election by the European Parliament and extends his remit to include the common foreign and security policy and the activities of the European Council .
I voted for this resolution because I welcome the results of activities in 2009 .
The average time taken to consider complaints fell by four months in 2009 , and more than half of the procedures initiated were concluded by an amicable resolution .
This bears witness to the effective cooperation which exists between the Ombudsman and the institutions and bodies of the Union .
I feel that it is necessary to increase EU citizens ' confidence in the EU and its institutions and , above all , to ensure that citizens have every opportunity to obtain the information they require and have faith in the ability of EU institutions to defend their rights .
I voted for this report because through his work , the Ombudsman is helping European institutions to adopt transparent decisions which can be accessed by all citizens and legal persons .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon increased the democratic legitimacy of the Ombudsman thanks to his election by the European Parliament and extends his remit to include the common foreign and security policy and the activities of the European Council .
Transparency , access to information and respect for the right to good administration are vital preconditions for maintaining citizens ' confidence in the institutions ' ability to assert their rights .
The most common types of alleged maladministration were lack of transparency .
Therefore , it is essential to ensure that citizens receive prompt and substantive responses to their enquiries , complaints and petitions .
The European institutions and bodies must provide citizens with the information they require .
I welcome the collaboration between the European Ombudsman and ombudsmen and similar bodies at national , regional and local levels in the Member States .
The role of the European administration is vast and complex .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe it is vital to ensure public confidence in the European institutions through efficient administration , with transparent procedures and easy access to infrastructure .
I welcome the positive results in the reduction in complaints and the improvement in handling them at a European level .
The work of the Ombudsman is essential and contributes to greater transparency , bringing the EU closer to the public , while strengthening public confidence in the ability of the institutions to enforce their rights .
Although , in 2009 , there was a small reduction in the number of complaints ( 9 % ) in comparison with 2008 , of the 335 cases opened , approximately 318 were concluded and closed .
The fact that 56 % of cases were closed having reached an amicable agreement or been solved is fairly positive .
These results demonstrate that there is constructive cooperation between the Ombudsman and the EU 's institutions and bodies , which , for the most part , see these complaints as a perfect opportunity to remedy any mistakes made and cooperate with the Ombudsman on behalf of members of the public .
I would like to emphasise the importance of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , in which the right to good administration was inscribed among the fundamental rights inherent to EU citizenship .
Two substantial amendments were also made : that the Ombudsman should be elected , strengthening his democratic legitimacy , and that his mandate should be extended to the common foreign and security policy .
The report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2009 is of great interest , since it allows us to assess whether and to what extent the relationship between the EU institutions and the people is transparent , quick and effective .
There are many topics , in fact , on which Parliament and the Commission express their views without receiving any feedback from the public apart from the complaints made to the Ombudsman .
While I approve the report , however , I think the European Ombudsman himself and the work he does should be more widely publicised , especially in the Member States where he is not immediately recognisable .
In fact , it should never be forgotten that a small number of complaints can mean either that people do not notice many irregularities or that they have little confidence in a possible legal solution to their problems .
Providing greater publicity would be a way of expanding the survey , so that we would be able to state more confidently which of the two scenarios above applies in this case .
In 2009 , the Ombudsman recorded a total of 3 098 complaints , as opposed to 3 406 in 2008 , which represents a drop of 9 % .
The complaints related to : the Commission ( 56 % ) , the administration of Parliament ( 11 % ) , the European Personnel Selection Office ( 9 % ) , the Council ( 4 % ) and the European Court of Justice ( 3 % ) .
The main complaint was about poor administration and the lack of transparency , including refusal to disclose information , which is a key factor in ensuring public safety and confidence in the EU .
This therefore demonstrated the need to continue working towards better administration and allowing greater transparency in the institutions , which can be achieved by a joint effort from the Ombudsman and the institutions , particularly through the constant exchange of good practice .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which reviews and supports the Ombudsman 's activities in 2009 .
The Ombudsman provides an important link with the citizens and his work helps build trust in the EU institutions and makes them more accessible .
The aim of the European Ombudsman is to ensure that citizens ' rights under EU law are respected at every level in the Union and that EU institutions and bodies conform to the highest standards of administration .
Recently , the Ombudsman has continued his efforts to improve the quality of information provided to citizens and potential complainants concerning their rights , especially through the European Network of Ombudsmen .
The Ombudsman must continue to strive to make certain that the EU institutions and bodies adopt a citizen-centred approach in all their activities , and he must therefore seek every opportunity to achieve friendly solutions to complaints and launch more inquiries on his own initiative in order to identify problems and encourage best practice .
I supported this report because it seeks to encourage the Ombudsman to continue to work with the institutions to promote good administration and a service culture and to increase communication efforts , so that citizens who might need to make use of his services are properly informed of how to do so , thus strengthening their trust in the European Union and its institutions and improving our own credibility .
The role of the Ombudsman is very important as it helps to bring the public closer to the European institutions .
The Ombudsman registered a total of 3 098 complaints in 2009 , compared to 3 406 in 2008 , which represents a reduction of 9 % on 2008 , with 335 inquiries opened on the basis of complaints and 230 complaints declared inadmissible .
Most inquiries opened by the Ombudsman in 2009 concerned the Commission ( 56 % ) .
Complaints also targeted the administration of Parliament ( 11 % ) , the European Personnel Selection Office ( EPSO ) ( 9 % ) , the Council ( 4 % ) and the European Court of Justice ( 3 % ) .
Twenty-three other EU institutions and bodies were the subject of a further 59 inquiries ( 17 % ) .
The figures presented in the report amply demonstrate this body 's efficiency and its importance for the transparency of relations between the European institutions and the public .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I am in agreement with the need to achieve greater transparency regarding the Commission 's activities and to do the work necessary in order to bring the EU 's institutions closer to the European people .
I have given my support to the report presented by the Ombudsman because it reflects the work that he does in condemning maladministration , and the positive work that he is doing towards greater transparency through his response to complaints from EU citizens regarding maladministration on the part of the institutions and European bodies .
My vote supports the work done by the Ombudsman , who resolves numerous complaints through mutually agreed solutions , in cooperation with Parliament .
I also think it is very positive that this resolution encourages the Ombudsman to initiate his own investigations in order to resolve systemic problems in the institutions .
The European Union has been working for decades to reduce bureaucracy and increase transparency .
There is often not much sign of this in the European Parliament itself .
On the contrary , I get the feeling that bureaucratic paperwork increases by the year .
Prior to the hearings for the most recent elections , the word transparency was on everyone 's lips .
Thanks to the authority of their office and the rights that come with it , Members of Parliament can have their voices heard .
The same cannot be said for the citizens of Europe .
That is why they have the European Ombudsman .
When more than one third of the investigations carried out by the Ombudsman involved cases where there was a lack of transparency and when 56 % of all cases were resolved amicably , it only serves to confirm how important the office of the Ombudsman is .
However , I cannot fully support the rapporteur 's statements and for that reason , I am abstaining from the vote .
Protection of and respect for human rights is a key element of the European Union , and so the European Ombudsman 's important role in this context cannot be overlooked .
That is why I voted in favour of Mrs Nedelcheva 's report , because the role of the European Ombudsman as a promoter of respect for human rights cannot be ignored .
This important figure at European level strives to make certain that the institutions adopt a citizen-centred approach in all their activities , by seeking every opportunity to achieve friendly solutions to complaints and by launching new inquiries in order to identify problems and encourage best practice .
The existence of an ombudsman ready and willing to settle disputes and differences between citizens helps people with different ideas , experiences and plans to communicate and live together .
This is the starting point for reinforcing and promoting this role in Europe and for ensuring that the service is properly promoted and fairly administered .
The annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2009 show that he has been extremely active .
The new legal framework which reflects the changes to the Ombudsman 's status and the entry into force of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , which adds the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) and the European Council 's activities to the Ombudsman 's mandate , have not been detrimental to the pace of work .
The average time taken to consider complaints fell from 13 months to nine months .
It is worth pointing out the obvious willingness of the EU institutions and bodies to see complaints to the Ombudsman as an opportunity to remedy any mistakes made and to cooperate with the Ombudsman on behalf of citizens .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , which approves the annual report for 2009 and presents guidelines for the future .
Of these , I would like to highlight the following : the call for the Ombudsman to enforce the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which has become legally binding with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon ; the call for the Commission to draft a European administrative law common to all the bodies , institutions and agencies of the Union ; and the call for the Ombudsman to monitor the new procedure concerning the selection of staff for the European Institutions by the European Personnel Selection Office ( EPSO ) .
I voted in favour of this report as it highlights the crucial role of the Ombudsman in ensuring respect for the rights of EU citizens and in promoting a culture of public service within the institutions , based on best practice in good administration .
The annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2009 was officially presented to the President of the European Parliament , Mr Buzek , on 19 April 2010 , and the Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , presented his report to the Committee on Petitions on 4 May 2010 .
The report provides an overview of the Ombudsman 's activities during the past year .
The results of the different investigations are divided into categories according to the nature of the cases of maladministration or the institution concerned .
A six-page summary has also been published .
The new publication contains the most significant results achieved by complainants , and highlights the main political issues examined during the past year .
Naturally , I voted to accept the annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities because , as a member of the Committee on Petitions , I have had many opportunities to witness Mr Diamandouros 's dedicated and objective approach to his work .
His achievements have been excellent : in 2009 , 70 % of his investigations were completed within a year , 55 % of them within an impressive three months .
I voted for this resolution on the special report by the European Ombudsman because it notes that the Ombudsman has completed an own-initiative inquiry into the rules which the Commission applies to applications by members of the public for access to documents concerning infringement proceedings .
Complaints submitted by EU citizens are an important source of information on possible violations of EU law .
The Commission receives a particularly high number of complaints from citizens concerning maladministration .
It is therefore very important for the Commission to take action to ensure that requests for access to documents receive a prompt reply .
Efforts should be made to increase cooperation with the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions and to exchange information with the Ombudsman on a regular basis .
The Ombudsman should keep the European Parliament informed about inquiries which he is conducting and the results thereof .
The Commission should adopt a more open and proactive attitude towards information relating to infringement proceedings .
For the sake of correctness , I think Parliament should also have listened to Commissioner Verheugen 's arguments on the merits of the case .
Therefore , I do not feel able to pass judgment on him .
Nonetheless , I support the Ombudsman 's position , since I believe that collaboration between the institutions is , and should continue to be , one of the strong points of their roles .
To that effect , replying late and avoiding not legislative but moral obligations are signs of a censurable attitude .
The building of social capital , in the sense intended by Putnam , in fact goes beyond the licitness of behaviours to look at their good faith , consistency and morality .
Therefore , whatever the Commissioner 's reasons may have been , I certainly stand behind the Ombudsman .
I welcome the excellent institutional relations between the Ombudsman and Committee on Petitions in terms of mutual respect for each other 's remits and powers .
I think that the practice already established by the Ombudsman of ensuring that a representative is present at all the meetings held by the Committee on Petitions bodes well .
The special report by the European Ombudsman follows the Commission 's refusal to disclose to a non-governmental organisation for environmental protection three letters , from a set of 18 , sent by Porsche AG to Commissioner Verheugen , concerning the exchange of information between the Commission and automobile manufacturers on a possible approach to carbon dioxide emissions from vehicles .
Following the request by the Ombudsman for a reasoned opinion on the non-disclosure of these three letters from the Commission , it delayed its response six times , over 15 months , thus violating the principles of good faith and cooperation , and harming interinstitutional dialogue and the public image of the EU .
It is Parliament 's responsibility , as the only elected body of the EU , to safeguard and protect the independence of the Ombudsman in fulfilling his duties to the European public , and to monitor the implementation of the recommendation that he has made to the Commission .
Article 228 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union empowers the Ombudsman to receive complaints from any citizen of the Union concerning instances of maladministration in the activities of the Union 's institutions or bodies .
These complaints submitted by EU citizens constitute an important source of information on possible infringements of EU law .
According to Article 41 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , ' every person has the right to have his or her affairs handled impartially , fairly and within a reasonable time by the institutions , bodies , offices and agencies of the Union ' .
In the context of the consultations provided for in Article 4 ( 4 ) of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 , the Commission must establish a deadline for the third-party author of a document to reply , and it should exercise this power in a way that enables it to abide by its own deadlines .
Furthermore , the Commission cannot delay or obstruct the Ombudsman 's inquiries in cases involving issues of access to documents , and should respond to the Ombudsman without delay , so as to comply with its duty of sincere cooperation , as envisaged in the treaty .
in writing . - The Ombudsman offers an important service to Irish citizens .
If they feel that the EU or government does not seem to be working for them , they always have the office of the Ombudsman to turn to , to seek redress .
From my dealings with the office , I have found that they aid the Irish citizens thoroughly and professionally and by voting in favour for the passing of this report , it shows the faith I have in the office .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
I take the view that the Commission 's uncooperative attitude in this and other cases risks eroding citizens ' trust in the Commission and undermining the ability of the European Ombudsman and the European Parliament to adequately and effectively supervise the Commission , and that as such , it runs counter to the very principle of the rule of law upon which the European Union is founded .
I support demands that the Commission give an undertaking to Parliament that it will fulfil its duty of sincere cooperation with the European Ombudsman in future .
The role of the European Ombudsman is clearly defined as being to investigate complaints against the EU institutions and bodies .
Such powers mean greater transparency in the relations between the European institutions and the citizens , companies , associations and other bodies with a registered office in the EU .
The complaint submitted by the non-governmental organisation ( NGO ) in question in this report concerns access to documents in the Commission 's possession .
The Ombudsman gave the Commission a deadline of three months to submit a detailed opinion , but this occurred only after 15 months .
This behaviour means that the Commission breached its obligation to cooperate with the Ombudsman sincerely and in good faith during his inquiry , and was detrimental not only to interinstitutional dialogue , but also to the EU 's public image .
I believe that it is Parliament 's responsibility , as the only elected body of the EU , to safeguard and protect the independence of the Ombudsman in fulfilling his duties towards the European public .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I agree with its criticism of the Commission for having prioritised the interests of the multinational company Porsche over the public 's right to access Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
This resolution criticises the Commission 's uncooperative attitude , which is detrimental to both interinstitutional dialogue and the EU 's public image .
My support for this resolution is based on the fact that I agree with its criticism of the daily lack of transparency by the Commission , which constantly infringes the principle of loyal cooperation between the European institutions through ' the general practice of delay and obstruction by the Commission in respect of the Ombudsman 's inquiries in cases involving access to documents ' .
The EU institutions normally cooperate very well with the European Ombudsman .
If everything is regulated in the EU , for example , the permissible payment deadlines for companies , it seems strange that the Commission , on the other hand , when consulting with a third party , is not in a position to set a deadline for this third party that enables it to meet its own deadlines .
If we consider the fact that the Commission has only managed to meet the internal EU deadlines in less than a fifth of cases , this reflects a disregard for good manners .
It is nothing short of regrettable when a special report by the Ombudsman is required in order to make public something as simple as access to documents to which EU citizens have a right .
To quote the words of the Ombudsman : citizens have a right to know what the EU and its administration are doing .
Perhaps I might expand on this by saying that our citizens also have a right to know how the European Union spends its taxes and where resources are wasted .
Therefore , I can only vote in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of the special report by the European Ombudsman to Parliament following his draft recommendation to the European Commission in complaint 676 / 2008 / RT , which relates to the Commission 's excessive delay in providing a response to the Ombudsman 's services .
I agree with the Ombudsman 's concerns and criticisms , because excessive delays in responding to the Ombudsman , no matter what the case may be , constitutes a violation of the duty of sincere cooperation , as envisaged in the Treaty of Lisbon .
This failure to respond is , in fact , an obstruction of the Ombudsman 's work , and for this reason I agree that deadlines must be set for the Commission to respond .
These must be scrupulously met , so as not to jeopardise public confidence in the European institutions .
This special report by the Ombudsman follows a complaint submitted about the Commission 's refusal to disclose three letters sent by Porsche AG to the Commissioner , Mr Verheugen , and the Commission 's subsequent six extensions of the deadline for submitting its detailed opinion on the Ombudsman 's draft recommendation .
It is crucial that there is not a repeat of situations like this .
The EU institutions have a duty to cooperate with one another in good faith in their relations , and it is vital that this obligation is heeded in order to safeguard public confidence in the European institutional players .
Today , we voted in plenary on the special report by the European Ombudsman following his draft recommendation to the European Commission on complaint 676 / 2008 / RT .
In March 2007 , a non-governmental organisation acting in the field of environmental protection asked for access to certain documents under Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
The European Parliament , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , endorses the European Ombudsman 's critical remarks and his recommendation to the Commission in relation to complaint 676 / 2008 / RT , and recognises that the excessive delays in responding to the Ombudsman in this case constitute a breach of the Commission 's duty of sincere cooperation as envisaged in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Furthermore , the Committee on Petitions is of the view that the Commission 's uncooperative attitude in this and other cases of access to documents risks undermining citizens ' trust in the Commission and eroding the ability of the European Ombudsman and the European Parliament to adequately and effectively supervise the Commission .
Special reports are the last resort for the European Ombudsman .
The European Ombudsman 's decisions are not legally binding , and are therefore based on persuasion and his ability to convince through a reasoned argument and , from time to time , on publicity and the weight of public opinion .
The small number of special reports that the European Ombudsman has had to present to Parliament ( 17 since 1995 ) is proof of the cooperation that exists between the EU institutions in the vast majority of cases .
Part of the context for that cooperation is , however , the power to present a special report to Parliament .
Especially when a draft recommendation is being drawn up , the knowledge that the next step could be a special report often helps to encourage the institution or body concerned to change its position .
Special reports should therefore only be presented for important issues , when Parliament can help to encourage the institution or body concerned to change its position .
As a political body , Parliament has the power to deal with special reports by the European Ombudsman , both in terms of procedure and in terms of focus and actions .
I voted for this resolution .
The Treaty on European Union lays down Member States ' responsibilities in connection with the application of EU law , while the Commission , as guardian of the treaties , is granted competence and responsibility for ensuring that the law is applied correctly .
Given the scope of the EU acquis and the size of the EU , citizens , civil society interest groups and companies have many questions and doubts .
The EU Pilot programme was launched in 2008 so that the law would be understood and applied correctly .
According to it , a confidential on-line database was established for communication between Commission services and Member State authorities , to observe how EU law is being implemented and initiate proceedings .
I agree with the opinion expressed in the resolution that this initiative is an appropriate response to the need for cooperation between all institutions of the European Union in the interests of a well functioning , citizen-focused system .
I feel that as an institution representing the citizens of the EU , the European Parliament must be given access to this database to enable it to scrutinise the Commission 's discharge of its role as guardian of the treaties .
I voted for this resolution because in their present form , the Commission 's annual reports ' on monitoring the application of European Union law ' do not give citizens or the other institutions sufficient information about the true state of application of EU law .
In the Commission 's summary of the monitoring of application of Community law , more emphasis is placed on transposition than on actual application .
The Commission only makes reference to formal proceedings being opened against Member States that have not transposed EU law into their national legal systems .
Citizens and Parliament should therefore be informed when the Commission initiates infringement proceedings in connection with the incorrect or poor transposition of EU law , with details of those infringements also being supplied .
Furthermore , the Treaty of Lisbon provides for the possibility for citizens to set the legislative agenda and to help ensure the correct application of , and compliance with , European Union law and the transparency and reliability of the related procedures .
It is regrettable that several Member States are underestimating the importance of the proper and timely implementation of EU legislation .
The poor and delayed transposition and its inadequate implementation and application create legal uncertainty and prevent the public and companies from reaping the benefits of the internal market .
In 2008 , 55 % of the necessary transpositions were delayed , in many cases by two years or more .
Although the facts indicate an improvement of 15 % this year , we have to bear in mind that there was also a 40 % reduction in the number of transpositions to be carried out .
It is unacceptable that in May 2009 , there were 22 directives with deadlines that had expired more than two years previously , and for which the transposition had still not been completed by one to five Member States .
It is vital to strengthen cooperation between the EU institutions and national authorities , as well as between the Member States ' administrations , in order to ensure better , more effective and more timely implementation of EU legislation , along with detecting any problems with implementation at an early stage .
Given that the European Union is a legal entity based on treaties and legislative acts , it is vital that these are properly implemented in a uniform way across the 27 Member States .
However , we know that Member States frequently fail to promptly implement or transpose standards from EU law , or they implement or transpose them in a defective or incomplete way .
As the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection stresses , ' poor and late transposition and inadequate implementation and enforcement of rules result in legal uncertainty and prevent citizens and businesses from enjoying the benefits of the internal market to the full ' .
It is therefore vital that the Member States do not underestimate the value of implementing EU law properly and promptly , and that the Commission keeps Parliament duly informed of the state of the application of EU law .
Poor and late transposition and inadequate implementation and enforcement of rules result in legal uncertainty and prevent citizens and businesses from enjoying the benefits of the internal market to the full .
It is therefore vital that there is closer and permanent cooperation between the EU institutions and national authorities , as well as between the Member States ' administrations , in order to ensure the correct , effective and timely implementation of EU legislation .
To this end , it is crucial that Parliament and the national parliaments make use of the new framework for cooperation established by the Treaty of Lisbon and carry out annual reviews of the implementation process in a selected area of the single market .
I would like to highlight the paragraph in this report that calls upon the Commission to produce detailed data on all types of infringement and to make all these data freely available to Parliament to enable it to perform its role of scrutiny .
The collation and categorisation of such data should be consistent with previous annual reports in order to assist Parliament in making meaningful assessments of the progress being made by the Commission .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
It evaluates the Commission 's monitoring of the application of European Union law in 2008 .
It focuses its analysis on the report from the Commission entitled ' EU Pilot Evaluation Report ' , in which the Commission proposes an evaluation of the performance of the ' EU Pilot ' project after its 22 months of operation .
The Committee raises some key questions on the functioning of the EU Pilot and on the role of citizens in ensuring compliance with Union law on the ground and asks the Commission to provide relevant data to enable an analysis of the value the EU Pilot adds to the existing infringement process .
The Committee also suggests calling on the Commission to propose a ' procedural code ' on the infringement procedure under the new legal basis of Article 298 TFEU , in order to enforce citizens ' rights and transparency .
The annual reports on monitoring the application of European Union law are essential for assessing how EU law is being implemented by the Member States .
In 2008 , 55 % of the necessary transpositions were delayed , in many cases by two years or more .
Although the facts indicate an improvement of 15 % this year , we have to bear in mind that there was also a 40 % reduction in the number of transpositions to be carried out .
We can therefore conclude that there is still a long way to go before the standards set out in EU law are properly and promptly transposed by the Member States .
It will only be possible for citizens and businesses to enjoy the full benefits of the internal market once this aim is realised .
Evaluations are a means , where necessary , of making adjustments .
The EU Pilot Evaluation Report raised a number of questions in the committee responsible , which is why the European Commission has been called on to make available the relevant data .
We need to examine the question of what is more sensible in particular cases : the EU Pilot or the previous treaty infringement proceedings .
In this connection , the possibility of a revision of the treaty infringement proceedings should not be disregarded either .
What is important is that , irrespective of what form , revision or combination thereof is chosen for the future , it should not result in more bureaucracy and , in particular , it should meet the EU objective of greater transparency .
Although this report contains some good proposals , it cannot fulfil the specified aims .
For this reason , I have abstained from voting .
I voted today in favour of the report on monitoring the application of European Union law .
The report focuses on the efficacy of the EU Pilot project to foster cooperation between the Commission and the Member States with a view to guaranteeing the proper application of the treaties .
The report highlights the need to adopt a procedural code in the form of a regulation designed to improve transparency and the defence of citizens ' rights , which sets out the basic points of infringement proceedings , such as notification , deadlines , the right to a hearing and need for statements of reasons .
As the guardian of the treaties , the Commission will be required henceforth to provide all information which illustrates any added value offered by the EU Pilot project in the procedure to handle infringement proceedings .
The aim of the 26th Annual Report on Monitoring the Application of European Union Law ( 2008 ) is to shed light on problems in the application and transposition of EU law .
This is a document which , if properly prepared based on a comprehensive , systematic approach , could act as a mechanism for monitoring and streamlining the evolution of EU law .
The annual report 's lack of new methods and incomplete information have provoked criticism from Parliament , which I am supporting by voting in favour of the Lichtenberger report .
I must , however , stress that , besides causing a lack of confidence in the European institutions , the delays in the proper application and transposition of EU law affect all of us Europeans and have the knock-on effects of not allowing us to enjoy the rights created by legislation , creating legal uncertainly and preventing the public from fully benefiting from the internal market .
I therefore support the desire to ensure that the Commission continues to produce detailed data on all types of infringement and that all these data are made freely available to Parliament , so as to enable it to perform its role of scrutiny of the Commission 's discharge of its duties as guardian of the treaties .
I believe that an evaluation should be carried out of the value added by EU Pilot to the existing procedure for managing cases of infringement .
The provision of relevant data depends on that , of course .
I would also like to point out that , as is mentioned in the report , national courts play a vital role in applying European Union law .
It is therefore necessary to support the EU 's efforts to enhance and coordinate judicial training for national judges and legal professionals in general .
This report evaluates the Commission 's monitoring of the application of European Union law in 2008 .
It focuses its analysis on the ' EU Pilot Evaluation Report ' , in which the Commission proposes conducting an assessment of the achievements of the EU Pilot project 22 months after its implementation .
The Committee raises a series of important questions regarding the functioning of the EU Pilot project and the role of citizens in guaranteeing respect for EU law on the ground , and asks the Commission to provide relevant information so that an analysis can be conducted of the added value of EU Pilot in relation to current infringement procedures .
The Committee also suggests calling on the Commission to propose a ' procedural code ' for the infringement procedure based on the new legal basis provided by Article 298 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to strengthen citizens rights and transparency .
European audiovisual practices have resulted in a pluralist media model built around a dual system .
This unique system allows public service broadcasters and commercial operators to function in a balanced and mutually complementary relationship .
The digital revolution has created new challenges within this dual system .
The emergence of new communication channels and alternative networks is threatening the old order .
In order to maintain the complementary nature of the old system and make way for new modes of communication , we need to reform European broadcasting .
This is the purpose of the resolution for which I have voted : it seeks to address the threefold challenge of modernisation , convergence and respect for pluralism .
Broadcast media are among the most important sources of information available to citizens in EU Member States and , as such , are an important factor in shaping people 's values and opinions .
The EU audiovisual landscape is unique .
Based on a true balance between public service and commercial broadcasters , it ensures a diverse range of freely accessible programming and contributes to media pluralism , cultural and linguistic diversity , editorial competition and freedom of expression .
I voted for this resolution because the European Parliament supports the aim to maintain strong and vibrant independent public service broadcasting , whilst adapting it to the requirements of the digital age and making it easier for consumers to switch from analogue to digital television .
I feel that the Member States should better address the digital divide and ensure that , with digitisation , all individuals in all regions have equal access to public service broadcasting .
Broadcast media are among the most important sources of information available to citizens in EU Member States .
As such , they are an important factor in shaping people 's values and opinions .
A balanced European system plays a fundamental role in promoting democracy , social cohesion and integration and freedom of expression , with an emphasis on preserving and promoting media pluralism , media literacy , cultural and linguistic diversity and compliance with European standards relating to press freedom .
The Commission should adapt copyright to the new digital era , allowing broadcasters to continue to provide a wide range of good quality European content , and to consider specific ways of facilitating the re-use of archive content and putting in place extended collective licensing systems and easy , one-stop-shop systems for the clearance of rights .
In a democratic European society , it is vital that citizens have access to information and are able to participate in public debate .
The existence of an independent and competitive audiovisual and written press sector is fundamental .
In the current situation facing the EU audiovisual sector , it is in the public interest to safeguard what has been described as the ' dual system ' and ensure that there is a genuine balance between public service and private-sector broadcasters .
That is the only way we can ensure that there is a sufficiently diverse range of programming , and thus contribute to media pluralism , cultural and linguistic diversity , editorial competitiveness within the media and freedom of expression .
Having a strong , viable public broadcasting system that is free from political pressure or loss of editorial independence , and which benefits from sufficient funding , is vital .
However , care should always be taken to avoid jeopardising fair competition with other commercial players .
The EU 's role is to try to bring the different stakeholders in the media sector together with the aim of maintaining a healthy , viable industry .
I believe that the implementation of the mechanism for monitoring media pluralism can play a vital role in this .
I am not old enough to remember the time when broadcasting was a state monopoly and , to be perfectly sincere , I do not miss it .
Despite the fact that the huge barriers to entry end up restricting access to the market for new players , and although competition in that sector is therefore always limited for structural reasons , I personally have witnessed a marked change in competitiveness in television broadcasting .
Having said that , I do not believe a wholly public system is even conceivable , as it would end up further stifling the drive for efficiency caused by having competitors , to the consumers ' disadvantage .
On the other hand , a purely commercial television system might not have any interest in pursuing objectives of general interest or broadcasting educational programmes , which are not always profitable in terms of audience figures , but which are , by their very nature , necessary .
The dual system therefore needs to be kept , provided there are rules to allow free , healthy competition , and provided there are checks to prevent any collusion between the public and private broadcasting companies , while respecting editorial decisions but bearing in mind the social function that broadcasting services must perform .
Public service broadcasting must retain its independence from politics and have sufficient financing to provide good quality information programmes , offering increased accessibility to all citizens in every area of the relevant country .
At the same time , I think that implementation of new technologies will help produce good quality programmes aimed at every audience group .
There should be an increased focus on young people , who are always at the forefront of new technologies , which is why programmes are required that are specifically targeted at them , including via the Internet .
The European Union regularly calls for freedom of expression to be respected in various third counties , but also needs to practise what it preaches .
The resolution adopted on 25 November by a large majority calls on Member States to put an end to political interference in public broadcast content and recalls that compliance with European standards on the freedom of expression , on media pluralism and independence , and on funding for public service media , should be a priority for all Member States .
Parliament proposes that the European Audiovisual Observatory should assess how Member States have applied these standards and demands that the Member States be held accountable if they fail to ' live up to ' their commitments .
Parliament has also taken this vote as an opportunity to highlight the need for appropriate and stable funding in order for public service media to remain independent , and for transparent ownership of private broadcasters .
Lastly , Member States are invited to adopt legislation on public service broadcasting online by amending copyright law to reflect the realities of the new digital era .
I voted in favour of this report as it advocates the need for society 's public and private sector media to carry out their respective functions free of political and economic pressure .
The dual European system could play a key role in promoting democracy and freedom of expression , and preserving and promoting media pluralism , as well as cultural and linguistic diversity .
The importance of ensuring the pluralism of broadcast media is due to the pivotal role that such media play in our society in terms of information and pluralism , as well as the promotion of rights , freedoms and guarantees , which clearly contribute to a more informed and participatory society .
It is therefore of paramount importance to ensure that these services have financial and editorial autonomy , and that they are prevented from becoming politicised or making concessions to economic interests .
In Portugal , there have recently been reports of possible government interference in the field of news , including the replacement of the editor of a daily newspaper and the head of news at a radio station , along with the sudden cancellation of a commercial channel 's news programme and the replacing of its director-general .
There have also been several incidents where columnists who were critical have been removed , and an alleged plan for a company in which the state holds a golden share to acquire a stake in a media company that owns a private channel .
In view of this , it is vital to give precedence to a dual EU system that ensures independence at all levels and which safeguards freedom of expression in both public and private sector broadcasting services , given that the latter are not immune to political interference .
The EU audiovisual landscape is characterised by what is described as a ' dual system ' .
The coexistence of public service and commercial broadcasters has ensured a very diverse range of programming .
This has contributed to media pluralism , cultural and linguistic diversity , editorial competition ( in terms of content quality and diversity ) within the media , and freedom of expression .
I would like to highlight the need for the Member States to address the digital divide between urban and rural zones and to ensure that , with digitisation , all individuals in all regions have equal access to public service broadcasting , along with offering attractive , quality content to appeal to young people who access the media .
The main message which we wanted to convey with this report is that we need to keep public service broadcasting independent .
We insisted in the additions made to the draft report on the need to make appointments to management boards based only on competence and not on political bias .
In addition , we have endeavoured to make as clear as possible our wish not only for public stations with high quality , attractive content , but also for the integration of new platforms , taking into account the latest technologies .
One point which we insisted on was investment in public service broadcasting , without which it is impossible to operate to high standards .
in writing . - The British Conservative delegation supported this report because it recognised that under the ' Amsterdam Protocol ' , it is the exclusive competence of Member States to define the public service remit and to provide funding of public sector broadcasters .
This is of importance to the UK because of the unique method of funding of the BBC and we welcome this confirmation that the European Parliament will not try to intrude into the funding methods used in the UK to fund the BBC .
There were two issues that the UK delegation could not support in this report : the call for search engines and Internet service providers to provide funding for the financing of content creation on the Internet and the call for a European Audiovisual Observatory to gather data on national public sector broadcasters .
The UK delegation therefore requested separate votes on these paragraphs and voted against them .
However , overall , the report is a balanced approach to this subject and for this reason , the British Conservative delegation supported this report .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution , which reaffirms Parliament 's commitment to the dual broadcasting system , in which private and public service media play their respective roles , independent of political and economic pressure , and calls for access to broadcasting of the highest level to be ensured irrespective of consumers ' and users ' ability to pay .
It is rare in this Chamber to see a public service being defended .
While I have reservations about the idea that a dual system necessarily allows for media pluralism , and while I believe it is impossible to separate private media from financial concerns , I would like to praise a report which advocates the maintenance of public service broadcasting .
Only public service broadcasting can be controlled by the sovereign population and can allow everyone access to pluralistic information of a high quality , something which is not true in France today , nor in several countries which are dominated by an oligarchy .
We have all witnessed a certain amount of political interference throughout the EU in services offered by both public service and private sector broadcasters .
Just recently in Portugal , there have been various curious situations where news programmes have been suspended , and news anchors and heads of television stations have been replaced without any apparent plausible reason , suggesting that this is taking place on political orders .
Although it is worth being aware that public service broadcasting is more prone to this kind of pressure , the private sector is not immune to it , as its revenues often depend on selling advertising space to the state sector .
The public has a right to public service or private sector broadcasting which is independent and takes an objective approach to all content .
In view of this , I am convinced that the dual European system will play a key role in promoting democracy and freedom of expression , and preserving and promoting media pluralism , as well as cultural and linguistic diversity .
Information is gold .
In order to provide citizens with objective information and to fulfil the task of educating , we have public service broadcasters in the area of television and media .
In return for broadcasting high quality programmes , these broadcasters have a right to funding from fees .
Broadcasting represents the main source of information for citizens .
Some public service broadcasters have rather successfully changed their programmes as a result of competition from private broadcasters .
The best example of this is the British broadcaster , the BBC .
Others , like the Austrian ORF , are not only suffering as a result of falling viewing figures ; they also cannot genuinely fulfil the requirement for impartiality and objectivity due to their party political influences .
In addition , private broadcasters have started a debate as to whether broadcasting fees are , in fact , legitimate at all , as public service broadcasters also , of course , profit from advertising income .
As the organisation and the framework conditions are different from one Member State to the next , no standardising decision can be taken at EU level .
I have therefore abstained from the vote .
Free and independent media are one of the main pillars of democracy .
I voted for this report because I agree with the opinion that public service broadcasters unfettered by political pressure and commercial interests are a particularly important part of this system .
However , current tendencies are not encouraging .
In some countries , public service broadcasters face ever-increasing political pressure and broadcaster funding is becoming dependent on the goodwill of the political party that has come to power .
Elsewhere , business structures are having an ever increasing impact on broadcasters .
I agree with the view that culture and the media will always lie within the competence of the Member States .
However , I feel that EU institutions could also play a significant role .
They could help to exchange examples of good practice and , in certain cases , could also publicise and condemn malpractice .
During the economic crisis , public service broadcasters should better exploit the opportunity to obtain soft loans from the European Investment Bank which would help to modernise infrastructure and would raise the level of public service broadcasters , thus helping them to adapt to the challenges of the 21st century .
I voted in favour of Mr Belet 's report on public service broadcasting .
Europe has now entered the digital age , and the institutions must guarantee balance in the dual system that has been established between private sector and public service broadcasters .
The entire system should be based on listening figures for radio and television broadcasters , which are capable of influencing public opinion as a whole .
Adjusting EU funding for the public service broadcasting system of Member States is essential because it is directly connected to the democratic , social and cultural needs of every society , as well as to the need to preserve the pluralism of the media and guarantee diversified information and free expression .
Since this topic is the responsibility of the national authorities of the individual Member States , the EU hopes that greater incentives will be given to public service broadcasters with the aim of relaunching a service that , in many countries , suffers under the weight of politics and information control , and of preventing imbalance with private sector competition that is , at times , unfair .
Pluralism in the media can only be safeguarded by ensuring that private and public media can coexist without obstruction or discrimination .
However , in order to achieve this objective , two preconditions need to be met .
Firstly , we need to ensure that both public and private media carriers catch up with the digital age , by modernising their services without - and this is important - increasing the cost to consumers and , secondly , that viable space is safeguarded in the new digital environment for the coexistence of radio and television with other sources of information , such as journals and newspapers , especially now that print media are in complete recession throughout Europe .
In other words , we need adequate funding and national planning in the Member States .
The EU can and must demonstrate that it supports these parameters , both via funding , such as from the Investment Fund for the digitisation of the media , and by coordinating exchanges of best practices in the procedure to digitise radio and televisions between the Member States .
I think that these points are well highlighted in this particular report , which is why I voted in favour of it .
I voted in favour of the resolution on public service broadcasting in the digital era : the future of the dual system , as I believe that the role of public service television in a multimedia society has to take account of the concentration and pluralism of the media in the European Union , media literacy in a digital world , diversity of media content and the guarantee of independence for public service broadcasting in the information society .
In fact , the dual broadcasting system , in which private and public service media play their respective roles independent of political and economic pressure , is vital for ensuring access to information of the highest quality and for promoting democracy itself .
Public service and private sector broadcasting have a crucial role to play with regard to European audiovisual production , cultural diversity and identity , information , pluralism , social cohesion , the promotion of fundamental freedoms and the functioning of democracy .
I support the recommendations made , with the emphasis on the incentive for the exchange of best practices between Member States and greater cooperation between national media regulators within the European Platform of Regulatory Authorities ( EPRA ) .
I believe it is crucial for the EU to bring together the different players and stakeholders in the media sector with the aim of moving towards the creation of a healthy and economically viable industry .
The rapid changes in the media , particularly the digital media , will make it necessary to find new solutions and will inevitably lead to the definition of a ' new media ecology ' .
Broadcasting is a special sector .
It influences people 's values and opinions and continues to be the main source of information for the majority of EU citizens .
It therefore has special significance for the protection and promotion of fundamental values and democracy , including social cohesion .
As the Audiovisual Media Services Directive points out , the EU 's audiovisual scene is characterised by what has been described as ' the dual system ' .
The coexistence of public and commercial broadcasting bodies has ensured that we have a broad range of programming .
It also contributes to pluralism in the media , cultural and linguistic diversity , editorial competition ( in terms of quality and diversity of content ) and freedom of expression .
This is partly achieved through a strong , viable public broadcasting service with adequate funding .
In a dual system that works well , public broadcasting bodies can raise the level of the market .
Broadcasting is in the middle of a technological upheaval : the digitisation of media content and its accessibility , thanks to the Internet , have revolutionised the broadcasting paradigm .
In the 1970s , commercial and private players struggled to obtain broadcasting frequencies in the face of state monopolies .
Today , the large number of opportunities available to consumers for accessing multimedia content means that we need to define the necessary balance between public service and private media .
What do we advocate in this report ?
Public service broadcasting needs particular attention , given the concentration of media ownership and commercial competition , if it is to contribute , without political interference , to maintaining a public space which provides high quality programmes and objective information .
We ask the Member States to provide sufficient resources to support the digitisation of public service broadcasting and , above all , to combat a dangerous digital divide .
Whether they are in rural or in urban areas , and whether they are poor or well-off , everyone must have equal and high quality access to public service broadcasting .
Finally , in view of the inequalities of revenue between giants such as Google and the sites they list , we must think about search engines making more of a contribution to financing content creation .
United Nations Security Council resolution 1325 on women , peace and security is not the first resolution on these issues that the Council has adopted in its time .
Nevertheless , it should be viewed as a seminal moment for gender mainstreaming , as women are now taken into account in security and peacekeeping operations .
To commemorate the 10th anniversary of the text 's adoption , which coincides with the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , my fellow Members and I have sought to express the European Parliament 's commitment to promoting the objectives set out in the resolution , primarily through actions taken by the European Union .
Through the EU 's common security and defence policy , the new European External Action Service , and in partnership with other international strategic cooperation bodies , we want to improve the situation of women in serious conflict zones .
I voted for this resolution because great attention must be paid to women 's security when deploying peacekeeping missions and during armed conflicts .
I would like to stress that there should be an ongoing review of the EU 's human rights policy when it comes to the elaboration of a comprehensive human rights country strategy and to the evaluation of the EU guidelines on violence against women and girls and those EU guidelines concerning children and armed conflict , as well as combating all forms of discrimination against them .
It should be noted that when part of a widespread and systematic practice , rape and sexual slavery are recognised under the Geneva Convention as crimes against humanity and war crimes .
Furthermore , rape is also now recognised as an element of the crime of genocide when committed with the intent to destroy , in whole or in part , a targeted group .
Therefore , the EU should take concrete action to end impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence against women and children .
Furthermore , there is a need to establish a code of conduct for the EU 's personnel serving in military and civil missions which illustrates sexual exploitation as unjustifiable and criminal behaviour .
Women , peace and security are areas which should be given the utmost attention .
The 10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 is an opportunity to make progress in these areas , as are all the ongoing reviews of EU policies , particularly on human rights and combating violence against women , the use of children in armed conflicts and the fight against all forms of discrimination .
In addition , another aspect that I see as relevant in this report is the fact that it calls for the promotion of women 's participation in reconciliation processes , peace building and conflict prevention , which is another reason for my vote in favour of its adoption .
in writing . - The treatment and safety of women and children in areas of armed conflict around the EU is a matter of growing concern .
It is vital that everything possible is done in order to limit the consequences resulting from such a state of affairs in these regions .
It is for this reason that I have decided to support the motion for resolution .
I voted against the joint motion on the 10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women in peace and security because it has a distorted view of gender equality .
In my opinion , equality is not achieved by having women in military organisations or international police forces .
Likewise , the security of women , within the meaning of UN resolution 1325 , is safeguarded by permanent jobs to prevent conflicts using civilian and peaceful means , not by military intervention .
On the contrary , this particular resolution calls for more women to be employed in police and military missions and for the EU to deploy more women officers and soldiers in CSDP missions .
Another reason why I voted against the resolution was because the amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left deleting these calls and asking for more women to be involved in EUPOL and EUSEC and for a stronger female presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were rejected .
We are currently celebrating the 10th anniversary of this first UN resolution on the unique and disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women .
I hope that the EU makes the most of this occasion to send a strong political signal and strengthen efforts towards its implementation , whether through political guidelines or through an increase in financial resources .
I also hope that the ongoing review of EU human rights policy will lead to the elaboration of a consistent strategy in terms of human rights , as well as an assessment of EU guidelines on violence against women and girls and on the situation of children in armed conflict , with the aim of combating all forms of violence and discrimination .
I believe that the establishment of the European External Action Service will contribute to better implementation of these resolutions , while it should also highlight the role of the EU in this field .
I would like to congratulate the 10 Member States , including Portugal , which have already adopted a national action plan to implement this resolution , and I hope that the remaining Member States will follow this example as soon as possible .
I find it surprising that the United Nations Security Council first took an interest in the particular situation of women in war zones only 10 years ago .
However , we now need to take stock of the results achieved and carry on in the same direction .
The European Union is sensitive enough to take such topics into consideration .
In particular , the time has come to go a step further and recognise that women suffer different traumas and also experience certain situations and suffer certain constraints rather more intensely than men do on average .
I therefore give this resolution my full support , because anyone who intends to bring peace to conflict zones must first find serenity at a personal level .
To that end , differentiating the target is the best way to make more efficient use of resources , a goal that we have to pursue , especially if the result is a woman 's sincere and gracious smile .
Unfortunately , all the assertive efforts undertaken - the resolutions and national and international plans for improving the level of protection for women in conflict zones - have failed to eliminate this barbaric weapon which is frequently resorted to in modern warfare : sexual violence .
On the contrary , impunity provides conditions conducive to the spread of this practice which is diametrically opposed to our values .
I have repeatedly spoken out , along with others , against the acts of mass rape perpetrated in the Congo , Liberia and other conflict zones , especially in Africa .
The most serious problem is that incidents have been reported where atrocities have been committed a stone 's throw away from the bases of UN forces .
The thousands of women falling victim to sexual abuse and violence are also being condemned to bear in the future the social stigma and burden of terrible diseases , such as HIV .
The European Union must step up its actions to combat these serious human rights violations so that UN resolutions mean more than just a piece of paper .
The International Day against Violence against Women , which we mark on 25 November , must also remind us that women are victims of domestic violence , which is occurring with alarming frequency , marital rape , sexual harassment and human trafficking .
When we think of armed conflict and most traditional war scenarios , we imagine men as the main victims .
However , unfortunately , the fact is that everywhere in the world where there is armed conflict and threats to peace , women and children are often the first and most numerous , albeit silent , victims .
Women face countless threats , whether from the practice of barbarous customs that violate their rights in the context of war and conflict , or in the context of poverty and social exclusion .
It is therefore crucial that Europe does not forget about women who suffer daily violations of their most basic rights such as life and physical wellbeing , women who are sentenced to death by stoning , women who are denied access to education , women who are forced to flee and live as refugees in order to exercise the liberty that the Charter of Fundamental Rights confers upon us all , and women who are discriminated against purely because of their gender .
In essence , it is vital that Europe does not forget or turn its back on all the women who are not already ensured a future of freedom and hope .
Violence against women in conflict zones is often an extension of the gender-based discrimination that unfortunately still exists in peacetime .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree with the need for financial and human resources to be allocated with a view to the participation of women and gender mainstreaming in the field of foreign and security policy .
I would like to highlight the need for the establishment of adequate public complaint procedures in the context of common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) missions aimed at facilitating , in particular , the condemnation of sexual and gender-based violence , and the call for the High Representative / Vice-President of the Commission to include detailed reporting on women , peace and security in the six-monthly evaluation of CSDP missions .
We voted against this resolution as we believe that having a gender perspective in civilian and military missions is not enough .
The problem of discrimination against women will not be solved or wars made more just by involving more women in military missions for intervention in wars and occupations such as in Iraq and Afghanistan .
Reality shows us that this is not the case .
We believe that military interventions do not help to protect the rights of women , but rather increase violations of these rights .
Only the prevention of conflicts and the implementation of civilian measures in conflict situations are capable of fulfilling the promise made in UN Security Council resolution 1325 .
We are therefore disappointed that the proposed amendments that we tabled were not adopted .
Today is 25 November , the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women .
With today 's vote on the joint motion for a resolution on the 10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 ( 2000 ) on women , peace and security , we wish to give a tangible sign of our commitment as MEPs but , above all , as European citizens .
It is only right that we remember this 10th anniversary , lest we forget that 80 % of war victims are civilians , above all , women and children .
The topic of fundamental human rights and the extension of their protection must always be central to European debate in order to enable us to develop common and effective strategies to protect women and children alike .
We increasingly see acts of violence being committed against these categories of people , but as well as striving to ensure that the perpetrators of these crimes are personally held to account , after the judicial authorities have intervened , we must apply certain essential conditions to ensure that the phenomenon is minimised as far as possible , with the aim of preventing conflicts and contributing to the reconstruction of areas that have been affected by them .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which calls for the allocation of specific and significant financial , human and organisational resources regarding the participation of women and gender mainstreaming in the field of foreign and security policy ; calls for more women to be deployed in police , military and justice and rule-of-law missions and in peacekeeping operations , as well as in diplomatic mission and democracy building efforts ; calls on EU Members States to actively promote women participation in their bilateral and multilateral relations with states and organisations outside the EU ;
Although we are commemorating the 10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 on women , peace and security , much remains to be done in this area , especially with regard to violence against women , EU guidelines on the use of children in armed conflicts and combating all forms of discrimination against them .
This is the time for us all to join forces to ensure that we achieve this purpose .
While I agree with many of the points included in this resolution , especially the need to make progress on the gender focus in development cooperation , I voted against it as I oppose the increase in the number of police officers or soldiers , whether they be men or women , due to the advance that this represents in the EU wave of militarisation .
The resolution ' Stresses that it is important that the EU should appoint more female police officers and soldiers to CSDP missions ' , which is contrary to my group 's support for demilitarising the common security and defence policy .
Moreover , it makes constant reference to the European External Action Service , to which I have repeatedly expressed my opposition as it is a further step in the escalation of the militarisation of the European foreign policy .
Although resolution no 1325 of 31 October 2000 shows that the UN Member States had become aware of the impact of armed conflicts on women , the violence that they endure during wars and the important role that they could play in preventing and resolving conflicts , the 10th anniversary of the resolution , which we are celebrating today , is also an opportunity to take stock .
In this regard , we can cite resolution nos 1820 ( 2008 ) and 1888 ( 2009 ) , which , for the first time , explicitly acknowledged the use of sexual violence as a war tactic , something which calls for specific political and security responses .
We can also cite Mrs Wallström 's nomination to the post of Special Representative on issues of ' sexual violence affecting women and girls in armed conflicts ' .
This serious problem deserves all of our attention .
This is why , as co-president of the JPA , I personally wanted her to be at the centre of our debates during the plenary session of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly that takes place in Kinshasa on 2 December .
Women continue to be discriminated against in many countries of the world .
Violence against women is on the agenda , and this is particularly dramatic in conflict situations .
Studies reveal that women in crisis regions where there are military conflicts are often raped and / or subjected to sexual slavery .
It should be a prime objective to punish sexual violence towards women as crimes against humanity , including in war-torn regions of the world .
After all - and the Western nations also have a responsibility here - sexual exploitation is unjustifiable and criminal behaviour at any time .
The report addresses important issues and I therefore voted in favour of it .
Violence against women in conflict zones is often an extension of gender discrimination ; also considering that this year , the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women coincides with the 10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 , this could and / or should mark the start of a reinvigorated agenda for the implementation of that resolution , which cannot be advanced without political leadership at the highest levels and increased resources .
I believe that this issue should be duly addressed in the ongoing review of the EU 's human rights policy , through the allocation of specific financial , human and organisational resources for the participation of women and gender mainstreaming .
I consider this occasion to be the starting point for targeted action to reinforce , strengthen and develop the integration of women .
The issue of women , peace and security should become an integral part of the planning and programming of the external financial instruments for democracy and human rights , cooperation and development between peoples .
It is 10 years since the adoption of UN Security Council ( UNSC ) resolutions 1325 ( 2000 ) and 1820 ( 2008 ) on women , peace and security , and UNSC resolution 1888 ( 2009 ) on sexual violence against women and children in situations of armed conflict .
These resolutions emphasise the responsibility of all states to end impunity and prosecute those responsible for crimes against humanity and war crimes , including those involving acts of sexual violence and other crimes against women and girls .
Ten years have passed since the adoption of the aforementioned resolutions and , as outlined in the resolution that I voted for , there is still a long way to go .
The International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , which was held on 25 November , the same day as the vote on this resolution , is not just another day , but a wake-up call about a situation that is still happening .
These issues need to be handled at the highest level and remain on the political agenda until this scourge that knows no race , creed or age is eradicated .
UN Security Council resolution 1325 , adopted on 31 October 2000 , stipulates that , through the course of history , women have not been involved in the process of establishing peace and stability in any nation and calls for the equal involvement of women at every level , from conflict prevention to post-conflict reconstruction and the maintenance of peace and security .
The 10th anniversary of the resolution 's adoption should mark the start of a new agenda which will be introduced and cannot be implemented without political support at the highest level and the necessary resources .
The EU must actively promote the appointment of as many women as possible in management positions to coordinate and ensure consistency in the EU 's policies and actions and to monitor the fulfilment of its commitments .
The EU must appoint at least five women to management positions in the European External Action Service and comply with the gender balance in terms of specialists employed .
At the same time , the EEAS requires an organisational unit which will be responsible for gender issues , with at least one full-time post in each geographical department and EU delegation devoted to gender aspects , with responsibility for women , peace and security .
I hope that the 10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 will mark the beginning of a reinvigorated agenda for implementing its commitments on women , peace and security .
I am pleased that this resolution has been adopted .
It points out that the 10th anniversary of UN Security Council resolution 1325 ( 2000 ) should mark the start of an enhanced agenda for the application of the resolution , which will not move forward without high-level political leadership and an increase in available resources .
It strongly recommends that this issue be duly tackled during the current review of EU human rights policy in order to draw up an overall strategy on human rights for each country and evaluate the EU guidelines on violence against women and children and on children and armed conflict and fighting all forms of discrimination against them ; and it calls for the allocation of specific and significant financial , human and organisational resources for the participation of women and gender mainstreaming in the field of foreign and security policy .
in writing . - The ECR is wholeheartedly supportive of equal rights and opportunities and gender non-discrimination for all women , as stated in UN resolution 1325 , and strongly advocates the invaluable role of women in the area of peace and security and condemns the barbaric and horrific treatment of women and children in conflict zones .
However , the ECR has consistently been against setting quotas for women within national , regional and international institutions , as well as the establishment of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
I am very pleased about the adoption of this resolution on the 10th anniversary of UN resolution no 1325 on women , peace and security which , moreover , takes place on the symbolic date of 25 November , International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women .
I would like to underline the need to boost women 's participation in all fields of activity , particularly in reconciliation , negotiation , construction , enforcement and peacekeeping , as well as conflict prevention .
It is essential for all parties present to take the specific needs of women into account , and it is only through an increased presence of women on the ground that we will manage to improve the situation .
Moreover , making women visible on the ground would enable us to make populations more aware of the inhumane nature of the use of rape as a weapon of war , and perhaps to put an end to the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of such violence .
Finally , this presence will allow us to build mutual trust between civilian victims of conflicts , who are mostly women and children , and actors on the ground .
I voted in favour of this resolution because bee mortality is increasing and the number of beekeepers is decreasing .
This is a problem for agriculture and biodiversity , as 76 % of food production and 84 % of plant species are dependent on pollination by bees .
I would like to advocate more research in order to help ensure the implementation of better solutions and support for measures to enhance biodiversity and mitigate the effects of climate instability .
The life of a worker bee is very short and very sensitive to changes in the environment .
This has meant that the production of honey has also been affected , not only by the increasingly uncertain length and stability of the seasons , but also by increasing damage from outside sources , such as pesticide use and mites , amongst other things .
The current programmes must therefore be strengthened within the framework of the new common agricultural policy so that we can also find more effective solutions at this level .
2010 was declared the European Year of Biodiversity in order to draw attention to the threat to biodiversity throughout the world .
The beekeeping sector , which is an important source of employment and income in rural areas , is also at risk due to the recent increase in bee mortality and bee diseases .
I voted for this resolution in which the European Parliament calls on the Commission to fund specific studies to improve the knowledge and understanding of factors that affect bee health .
The resolution observes that genetically modified crops or the spread of toxins via pollen may affect bee diseases and bee mortality .
Given that grain , fruit and vegetable crops in Europe are dependent on pollination by bees , these crops and agriculture in general face a huge risk of various diseases .
I feel that faced with such uncertainty , the European Commission must urgently conduct independent research , which would assess the effects of genetically modified crops and the spread of toxins via pollen on the environment and specific species and ensure that such data are made public .
Bees play an important role in the ecological balance , and their demise has serious effects on the food chain .
This report advocates the need to promote and improve the beekeeping sector , especially at the level of statistical data for honey production forecasts , the improvement and harmonisation of monitoring and research programmes , clearer rules for the origin labelling of honey , the development of beekeeping programmes and related legislation , and the development of innovative and effective treatments against Varroa mites .
The multiplier effect of pollination , meaning the ratio between the economic value of pollination itself and the value of the honey produced as a result of it , leads to exceptional results in economic terms .
Therefore , at a time when all kinds of efficiency are being sought , it does not appear to make sense to give up the activity when the cost / benefit ratio shows how foolish such a decision is .
Since the reasons are not to be found in economic factors , but rather in external conditions , I think the Commission 's report hits the mark when it sets out to compare all the factors that currently hamper beekeeping .
I also believe it is worth encouraging this activity through collateral measures , and that any scientific contribution in that respect should be welcomed .
I think that the European Commission must adapt the scope and financing of European veterinary policy to take account of the specific nature of bees and beekeeping with a view to ensuring more effective disease control and availability of effective and standardised veterinary medicine throughout the European Union , in collaboration with beekeepers ' organisations .
There is severe volatility of prices in the European honey market , because 40 % of it currently depends on imports , putting beekeepers across the EU , including the Portuguese , at a competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis honey from third countries .
According to official statistics , there are 17 291 beekeepers in Portugal , with 38 203 apiaries and 562 557 colonies .
Production in 2009 amounted to 6 654 tonnes of honey and 235 tonnes of wax , which represents 1.9 % of the honey produced in the EU , at 351 000 tonnes .
The activities of bees and beekeeping are crucial to maintaining ecosystems , the ecological balance of flora and the preservation of biodiversity , as well as being , economically speaking , an activity that it makes sense for Europe to protect and encourage , so that it becomes less dependent on imports .
Bees are essential for the pollination of crops , for maintaining the ecological balance , and as a way of preserving biodiversity .
The decline in the number of colonies is therefore regrettable , and we need scientific data to enable us to understand the mechanisms that help the spread of this species and develop ways of ensuring its preservation .
I believe that it is vital to focus on European honey , which is gradually being replaced by other varieties of poorer quality that do not fulfil the criteria for production in the EU .
Beekeeping is one of the farming models with the least environmental impact , and the activity is therefore particularly well suited to protected areas .
Beekeeping is widespread in my region , and it constitutes an outstanding example of land management as well as a symbol of history , tradition and local identity .
For very many years , beekeeping in Veneto has produced products of excellent quality and helped sustain the most deprived areas .
The sector cannot , however , continue to produce such results if the European Union does not help to fund it , in conjunction with national , regional and local authorities .
As indicated in the motion for a resolution , it is important to provide incentives for research against bee diseases and to support European producers in the competition they must face against third countries , following the opening-up of the EU market to imported honey .
I will therefore vote in favour of this motion .
I agreed with this report because the beekeeping sector plays a strategic role in society , providing a public service of environmental value .
Today , there is an alarming reduction in the numbers of pollinating insects , including honey bees .
After all , 84 % of the plant species and 76 % of food production in Europe are dependent on pollination by bees , the economic importance of which is much greater than the value of the honey produced .
Forty percent of the European honey market depends on imports and the previous opening up of the EU market for honey from third countries has placed beekeepers across the EU at a competitive disadvantage .
Therefore , we must support the future development of European apiculture , contributing to the preservation of biodiversity .
It is important to follow a comprehensive and sustainable approach including such aspects as rural development , climate change and biodiversity , especially by supporting measures to maintain and expand flower pastures .
It is also important to support the European apiculture sector in an even wider and coherent manner by using additional instruments in the future CAP , including measures to enhance biodiversity , mitigate the effects of climate change , preserve the heritage of national traditions and cultures which provide employment for many European families , and to safeguard and improve the quality and effective functioning of the market for apiculture products .
Bees are very important creatures , as without them we would have no pollination .
That is why the growing number of reports on the decreasing number of bee colonies is very regrettable and requires urgent investigation .
This is particularly the case for the agricultural sector , because it is extremely dependent on the useful work of bees .
It is unfortunately evident that industrialism and modern life have made it harder for these beneficial bees to survive .
Scenarios such as the mass extinction of bees as a result of the Varroa mite , the unexplained exodus of bee colonies in the US and the threat to bees from electro-smog and from incorrectly treated seed are unfortunately not just isolated incidents .
It is for this reason that I welcome the fact that Parliament has today agreed to support the beekeeping sector in the future .
I believe it is important that we concentrate on research into bee populations .
Without precise scientific data , we shall not be able to identify problems and deal with them effectively .
I hope we will succeed in explaining and preventing the decline in bee colonies , so that we can continue to profit from the important , multi-faceted role of bees .
Beekeeping is extremely important for agriculture , particularly for pollination , because income from arable crops and fruit depends on pollination by bees .
The continuing bee mortality in many regions is even more disturbing and measures need to be taken to tackle this .
I therefore support the resolution , which calls on the Commission to include bee diseases within the scope of European veterinary policy and to draw up an action plan to tackle bee mortality .
The Commission is also called on to ensure that support for beekeeping is maintained and strengthened in the CAP after 2013 , guaranteeing the continuation of this sector .
Forty percent of the European honey market depends on imports , partly as a result of the opening up of the EU market to honey from third countries , and prices are close to the limits of profitability .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on beekeeping because it is important to guarantee attention for a sector that protects biodiversity and produces a complete food such as honey .
With this role in mind , provision has been made to increase annual aid to the sector in Europe from EUR 26 million for 2008-2010 to EUR 32 million for 2011-2013 .
This funding will be specifically aimed at supporting beekeeping , including through national research projects into new methods to combat the high mortality rate of bees , which has reached alarming levels recently .
On the other hand , however , it is important to guarantee fair transparency in aid distribution and guarantee more resources to States that actually need them .
I voted in favour of implementing the data survey system by 2012 .
This is a step in the direction of transparency , to ensure that aid is distributed on the basis of the results of a survey of hives present in the various Member States and not on the basis of estimated data .
I considered this extremely important for the purposes of guaranteeing fairness in relation to public expenditure and protection for those who actually practise beekeeping activities .
in writing . - In 2010 , the European Year of Biodiversity , the beekeeping sector throughout the world is gravely threatened , registering losses 100 to 1 000 times worse than normal .
This sector plays a strategic role in society , providing a public service of environmental value , and beekeeping is a valuable example of a ' green occupation ' ( improving and preserving biodiversity and the ecological balance and conserving plant life ) and a model of sustainable production in a rural environment .
I therefore welcome this resolution that makes proposals to improve the situation of the beekeeping sector .
The worrying rise in bee mortality and the falling numbers of beekeepers could have very serious consequences on food production in Europe because , as we all know , most crops and plants depend on pollination .
Parliament should therefore call on the European Union to increase its support for the beekeeping sector , seeing that the common agricultural policy is to be renewed .
Strong , specific action is needed to address this problem and to ward off its adverse effects on both the agricultural and trade sectors of our economy .
The action plan called for in the resolution to address bee mortality is just the first in a series of measures that must be adopted .
I voted for the motion .
The EU is highly dependent on imports in the apiculture sector , with 40 % of the honey that we consume being imported .
Given the importance of the beekeeping sector , which plays a strategic role in society , providing a public service of environmental value , and the fact that this activity is a valuable example of a ' green occupation ' , improving and preserving biodiversity and the ecological balance and conserving plant life , and a model of sustainable production in a rural environment , it is in everyone 's interest to support it in order to ensure its sustainable growth and to make us less dependent on third countries .
In my country , too , this sector must be nurtured so that its benefits can be seen in both economic and environmental terms , and so that there is an increase in honey production , which , at present , amounts to only 1.9 % of EU production .
My support for the resolution on the situation in the beekeeping sector is due to my concern for the serious decline in the number of bees , which are essential and irreplaceable due to their important pollinating role , which , along with other pollinating insects , affects 84 % of plant species .
I therefore believe that helping to improve the sector 's situation is an obligation , given that , as the resolution states , it ' plays a strategic role in society , providing a public service of environmental value ' .
I am also pleased that the resolution asks the Commission for it to be compulsory for European and national authorities to consult beekeepers during the development of programmes relating to beekeeping and related legislation , as I believe that it is a step forward in improving public participation , and a democratic step forward .
I also voted in favour because I agree with the Commission guaranteeing that common agricultural policy aid to the beekeeping sector will be increased after 2013 .
The loss of bee colonies is an EU-wide problem , the causes of which cannot yet be fully explained .
Factors such as the use of plant protection products , unsustainable farming techniques , climate change , pathogens and parasites and a lack of food and foraging as a result of the increase in monocultures have altogether resulted in a significant decline in the number of honey bees .
In addition to ecological consequences , this also has an economic impact , as increasing amounts of honey have to be imported .
In order to be able to tackle this problem , European beekeeping should receive more support in future .
The report takes a thoroughly balanced approach and that is why I have voted in favour of it .
In 2010 , the beekeeping sector suffered massive losses and bee stocks declined considerably .
This has a negative impact on the whole environment and on agriculture , as bees are important pollinators .
The situation is particularly bad when it comes to honey bees .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report , which takes measures to tackle the massive bee mortality .
I welcome the resolution adopted by a large majority in the plenary session in Strasbourg on 25 November , including important contributions from Azorean beekeepers which were communicated directly in a consultation that I carried out .
Nevertheless , the final text of the resolution falls short of my initial expectations , as some of the crucial aspects for producers , such as the issue of quality standards and labelling for imported honey , should have been more thorough .
It is probable that this did not happen due to a lack of awareness of some of the key problems faced by the sector .
This led , for example , to local labelling not being included in the final text of the resolution .
Yet this resolution does tackle important issues for both Azorean and national beekeeping in general , following work carried out in collaboration with the sector , on issues such as honey imported from third countries , which has serious quality problems and now has inadequate labelling ; the need to continue to ensure diversified agriculture in order to guarantee pollination ; and , lastly , the importance of joint quality standards and research within the EU .
The apiculture sector plays a strategic role in society , providing a valuable example of a ' green occupation ' , improving and preserving biodiversity and the ecological balance , as well as conserving plant life , and is a model of sustainable production in a rural environment .
At a European level , this sector is facing countless challenges and problems , particularly marketing issues , price volatility , difficulties in recruiting young beekeepers to the sector , decreasing numbers of bee colonies and an increase in mortality .
It therefore makes complete sense to step up support for this sector .
I am pleased that this resolution has been adopted , in which the EP welcomes the Commission 's report of 28 May 2010 .
It notes , however , that the current programmes come to an end in 2013 and is concerned about the numerous challenges and problems still facing the European apiculture sector , including , inter alia , marketing issues , price volatility , recruiting young beekeepers to the sector , the ageing profile of beekeepers in the European Union , decreasing numbers of colonies and the general difficulties emerging from multifactoral bee mortality .
Moreover , it calls on the Commission to respond positively to the requests from both Member States and operators , for example , by improving statistical data in relation to production forecasts , including the application of the same quality requirements for honey , and improving and harmonising monitoring and research programmes for apiculture .
I am very pleased about the adoption of the proposal by our excellent colleague and committee chair Mr de Castro .
The consequences associated with a reduction in the number of bees in the world are relatively unknown by the general public , even though bees play a fundamental role in the sustainability of our food chain .
We need an ambitious research policy so that we can gain a more detailed understanding of the mechanisms which contribute to the spread of the species , and so that we can obtain the necessary means to preserve them .
We cannot accept Chinese honey which is of lower quality and which does not meet our rigorous production criteria as an inevitability , as the only alternative to the shortage of honey that is slowly taking hold in Europe .
I regret the fact that my fellow Members in the European Parliament did not vote for all of the amendments that I tabled .
I deplore the fact that the shameful and unrestrained use of neurotoxins has been hypocritically supported in agreement with the large industrial chemical giants .
Einstein said : ' If the bee disappeared from the surface of the earth , man would have no more than four years to live ' .
Let us ensure that we never have to find out whether what he said is true .
By adopting the resolution on the situation in the beekeeping sector , we are taking a further step towards strengthening and improving the state of this sector .
The problems of this important sector , which continues to be undervalued , have a global dimension .
Bees are of crucial economic and environmental importance .
The high mortality rate currently observed among bee families is having a negative effect on agricultural production .
We therefore need new subsidy mechanisms in the next financial perspective after 2013 which will allow a greater amount of scientific research to be conducted into the reasons for the decline in bee numbers and which will also allow relevant steps to be taken to reverse this negative trend .
We should also give our support to information campaigns and training that encourage young beekeepers to become active in the sector .
I voted in favour of the report on a new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 as I believe that this new energy strategy is imperative in order to bring a competitive , sustainable and safe strategy into effect .
At a time when Europe finds itself ever more dependent on energy imports , I consider it vital that it continues in its dominant leadership role in energy matters by focusing on innovation and technology .
Making our energy strategy more sustainable will require a continued focus on renewable energy , through the introduction of increased competition within the sector in order to achieve the effective implementation of the internal market for energy .
That will lead to a reduction in costs and an increase in competitiveness for the economy , and will also create wealth and jobs , which are important in terms of a healthy trade balance .
I come from an outermost region which currently has a level of energy self-sufficiency of around 27 % , and which aims to achieve a figure of 75 % by 2012 .
The Azores have set more ambitious specific targets than the EU , with results that are already recognised at a European level , particularly with regard to geothermal energy , through an ambitious energy policy of partnerships between the region and the best national and international research centres .
The aim of the new energy strategy for Europe is to implement the Treaty of Lisbon with regard to a single energy market , supply security , energy efficiency , reducing dependency on imports and increasing internal energy production .
I support this resolution as the European Union needs to implement legislation in this area and global energy strategies quickly .
We require a long-term vision for our energy policy which will ensure that this market operates properly , provides support to state-of-the-art integrated networks , better utilises the Union 's energy efficiency potential , promotes research and development , as well as innovation in this area , and which puts benefits for consumers at the heart of European energy policy .
Consequently , I voted for this report , which marks a first step towards a comprehensive EU energy policy as part of the EU 2020 strategy .
Although Europe leads the field in alternative energy generation , we are still overly dependent on fossil fuels , especially oil .
This dependency has international ramifications , as most sources of fossil fuel are found outside the EU .
The Treaty of Lisbon has established new energy competences for the European Union , an extremely important area of competence .
In response , Parliament has adopted an energy strategy for 2011-2020 , which I have supported .
The strategy involves encouraging investment in this field and promoting initiatives focused on renewable energies .
The aim is , of course , to guarantee security of supply in the EU , which is why managing the gas and oil pipelines that currently supply the Union is considered a top priority .
The strategy therefore combines short-term energy security needs and plans to provide for future European energy requirements .
I supported this important document .
The inclusion in the Treaty of Lisbon of a specific chapter on energy now means that there is a firm legal basis for developing energy initiatives based on sustainability , security of supply , the interconnection of networks and solidarity .
The Union faces significant problems of delayed or incomplete implementation of energy legislation , which call for strong leadership from the Commission to bridge this gap .
Within the next decade , major investments will be needed in the internal energy sector , notably in new power plants , interconnections and grids , given that these investments will shape the energy mix for an even longer period , contributing to the creation of a sustainable and clean energy market .
It is very important to provide for clear multiannual funding for projects in the field of energy , ensuring that the Baltic Sea region is also integrated into a single EU energy market , and that we pay the same for energy sources as other EU Member States .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution by Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska , because I generally share her views on how the future energy strategy of the European Union should be oriented : towards greater autonomy in relation to third countries providing fossil fuels , towards an opening up of the Member States which are still ' isolated ' in terms of energy and which are not yet properly linked up to the European energy system , towards encouraging the development of renewable energies , and towards an external energy provision within the framework of the new European External Action Service .
We need a coherent European energy strategy that looks to the future .
The European Union 's energy security policy should allow it to anticipate crisis situations , similar to the 2009 gas crisis , and not only to react to them .
This must go hand in hand with meeting the targets assumed for cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % and reducing energy consumption by 20 % by 2020 .
This task is going to be far from easy , especially because the financial contribution , for the environmental targets alone , will reach EUR 58 billion .
There will be , in addition to this , the financial contribution for reducing the EU 's growing dependency on external energy resources .
Internal and external aspects need to be combined so that the EU is no longer vulnerable in terms of its energy supply and its policies must be adapted accordingly .
All the measures intended to ensure that the internal energy market operates properly should be accompanied by active diplomacy , aimed at strengthening cooperation with the main producing , transit and consumer countries .
It is absolutely imperative to draw up national plans containing preventive and emergency measures .
Coordinating these plans at EU level would ensure that they are effective .
I voted in favour of the report on energy strategy , which outlines the directions that future EU energy policy should take .
I would like to emphasise the role of nuclear energy in the current and future energy mix of the EU , including an implicit recognition of the need to extend the lifetime of existing facilities .
The strategy can be regarded as balanced from the perspective of individual sources , even though it does not once mention what is , in my view , the important role of coal when combusted in modernised power plants .
It is difficult to see how we can increase EU energy security and independence without coal as a stable primary resource capable of responding flexibly to sudden increases in energy demand .
The weak point is the excessively general nature of the report and the absence of accompanying legislation .
The specific and practical form of the strategy will also be hugely influenced by the action plan being drawn up for achieving a low carbon economy by 2050 , which is due to be published at the beginning of next year .
In view of the continuing absence of regional markets and market coupling , I consider the aim of creating a unified internal market by 2015 to be highly ambitious , particularly if we take into account the fact that the European Commission does not , as I see it , sufficiently monitor the proper implementation of current European energy legislation in all Member States .
The European Commission has also fittingly incorporated the so-called infrastructure package into the energy strategy , which should facilitate the construction of power networks throughout the EU .
Developing a real European energy strategy has now become imperative .
As Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska 's report explains , the European Union is labouring under a massive dependency on energy imports and serious shortfalls in its legislation .
Like the rapporteur , I would stress that the European Union needs to furnish itself with the practical and financial resources needed to realise its objectives , not least by providing appropriate funding for research and development in the field of energy .
I am also convinced that security of supply needs to go hand-in-hand with a strong partnership with Russia .
It is becoming ever more apparent that we need to expand significantly the construction of gas pipelines that carry natural gas from around the world to Europe .
We also need to improve the connections between networks in the Member States in order to improve energy solidarity .
The energy sector is a driving force behind economic growth .
Since 2008 , Europe has had a strategy for energy and combating climate change .
It is vital that this strategy is implemented .
However , the Treaty of Lisbon allows us to go further , opening the way to creating a true energy community within Europe .
We need to develop the internal energy market , build and forge links between energy networks , ensure energy security and energy solidarity and put the consumer at the centre of our concerns .
There is a need to increase public funding and develop more tools and programmes to encourage energy efficiency .
Scientific research and technology play a key role in achieving these objectives .
In view of this , I welcome the launch of the various European industrial initiatives under the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan ( SET Plan ) , and I call upon the Commission to put the rest of the measures in this plan into practice .
The eighth framework programme should also make research and the development of innovative technologies its priority in the field of energy .
It is therefore vital that there is adequate funding to support clean and sustainable technologies .
That is the only way in which it will be possible to maintain the competitiveness of our industry , and promote economic growth and job creation .
I voted against the report on the new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 .
The report is fully in line with the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy , which does away with the last vestiges of social Europe .
Strengthening the competitiveness of the EU , which is so strongly promoted in the report , demonstrably leads to cutbacks in wages and workers ' rights in this specific sector .
At the same time , in the midst of an economic crisis , with almost the entire European energy industry ( power plants , grids ) tending to be privatised , the report makes provision for more money for energy infrastructures , i.e. it indirectly subsidises big business .
Finally , I believe that the report 's attempt to link EU energy policy with its objectives to reduce climate change is a purely ostensible link , as any references are vague and do not describe a strong political will .
I voted for the resolution on the new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 .
The main aims featuring in this resolution are to move to a low carbon energy system and guarantee energy supply security for all Member States .
Both these objectives must ensure that the EU is competitive and energy is distributed at affordable prices on the basis of a secure supply .
I believe that the prerequisites for guaranteeing energy security are to extend the regulations applied in the EU 's internal energy market to neighbouring countries and to make efforts to diversify energy sources and transport routes for energy imports .
The European Union has set itself a number of highly ambitious objectives for the next decade , one of them being to increase energy efficiency by 2020 .
This objective will help boost the volume of investment in this area and , by extension , create new jobs in both rural and urban areas .
I believe that in this context , it is beneficial not only to grant financial incentives for projects of this kind , but also to launch public awareness campaigns about energy efficiency and the level of resources which can be used by consumer and energy-related products .
I voted in favour of the report ' Towards a new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 ' as I believe that there needs to be new strategic guidance for the sector in order to achieve the objectives set out in Article 194 of the Treaty of Lisbon , the 20-20-20 targets set out in the EU Energy and Climate Change Package , and the long-term objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by between 80 % and 95 % by 2050 .
The Commission has established three objectives for European energy policy : ( i ) to move towards a low carbon energy system ; ( ii ) to ensure security of energy supply ; ( iii ) to ensure that the EU 's competitiveness and the supply of energy to all consumers at affordable prices are strengthened .
I broadly agree with these three objectives , but I believe that a fourth , and perhaps more important , challenge is missing here : the reduction of energy dependence , particularly as regards fossil fuels .
Moreover , the target of reducing carbon emissions has to be considered with great care , so as to minimise the risks of carbon leakage and loss of competitiveness for European industries .
The Commission document entitled ' Towards a new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 ' makes an excellent contribution to a comprehensive EU policy for the energy sector in the context of the EU 2020 strategy .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides a firm legal basis for developing energy initiatives based on sustainability , security of supply , the interconnection of networks and solidarity .
We can have a new strategy for the energy sector in order to meet the objectives of Article 194 of the Treaty of Lisbon and the 20-20-20 climate package targets .
New initiatives in the energy sector should aim to move towards a low carbon energy system , where security of energy supply is guaranteed for everyone , while also ensuring the EU 's competitiveness and the supply of energy to all consumers at affordable prices .
The Treaty of Lisbon 's objectives of a single energy market , security of supply , energy efficiency and savings , the development of new and renewable forms of energy and the promotion of energy networks must be fulfilled .
This strategy must be carried out in a spirit of solidarity and responsibility , so that no Member State is left behind or isolated .
The EU energy strategy advocated in this report , and which is advocated by the Commission in its various communications on the subject , is closely linked to the definition of a Union policy described in the Treaty of Lisbon : ' completion of the EU internal energy market ' .
The rapporteur is calling for ' plans to be drawn up for a European Energy Community ' , insisting on the implementation and transposition by the Member States of the current directives on the internal market , and considering ' as a final measure , the resubmission of key provisions of current internal market directives in the form of regulations , to ensure full direct application across the single market ' .
As we have repeated , we completely disagree with this proposal as an energy solution for Europe , and have therefore voted against the report .
This is a strategic sector for a state 's economy and functioning , and it should be sovereign in defining its energy policies .
Moreover , the increase in dependence on imports for primary resources and consumer energy prices , coupled with disinvestment in energy infrastructure , have already revealed the failure of this private market strategy .
Only the public sector can guarantee universal access to energy , its effective management and efficiency , and reduced dependence on fossil fuels .
I agree with the aims of the motion for a resolution : creation of a single European energy market , security of supply , energy efficiency , development of new renewable energy sources , and support for energy grids .
I fully endorse the request for the Commission to adopt an ambitious energy efficiency action plan in order to reduce the EU 's dependency , combat climate change , increase job creation and counteract increases in energy tariffs .
It is also necessary to ensure that the integrated market is working properly by setting up an appropriate gas and electricity infrastructure system .
It should be stressed , however , that particular emphasis has been placed on certain projects , without explicitly mentioning others , that are also in the European interest and contribute to the aim of achieving energy security .
To achieve that aim , I believe we need not only to support certain infrastructure works , but also to have a neutral approach to all the various projects .
The European Union is currently a major player in the international energy market .
However , the EU has very few raw materials and is therefore forced to import in bulk .
This simple fact raises questions about security of supply and our continent 's dependency on the wider world .
These issues have been a real source of concern within the European Union for many years .
For this reason I , together with my fellow Members of Parliament , have voted to adopt a resolution which calls on the European Union to diversify its providers in order to avoid future supply problems and to create a more rigorous strategic approach within the sector .
By voting in favour of the resolution , I also wanted to emphasise that energy efficiency should be a priority for the European Union .
Indeed , this seems to me to be the best way of reducing the EU 's energy dependency , but also , and more importantly , of combating climate change - something which has now become an urgent necessity .
I agreed with this report and would firstly like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for the first energy strategy since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The strategy reflects the main challenges - solidarity in the field of energy and security of energy supply .
Firstly , the Member States must implement legislation that has already been adopted in the field of energy .
Secondly , a single internal energy market must be established , as well as a renewable energy market .
Thirdly , trans-European energy infrastructure must be upgraded and modernised .
Therefore , the EU must overcome any administrative and financial barriers and EU Member States must reconcile their interests and show solidarity .
The same rules must apply to every project , whether it be the Yamal pipeline , or the Nord Stream pipeline .
As we know , the EU 's dependence on countries supplying oil and gas is increasing .
The Eastern European Member States pay a heavy price for the monopoly - there is no competition , consumer rights are not protected and it is impossible to create a single market .
We are dependent on fossil fuels , sources of which are being exhausted , and therefore , it is especially urgent to develop not just renewable energy but to invest in increasing energy efficiency so that we can also mitigate the effects of climate change .
A major omission in current EU energy policy is the failure to direct EU funds into an area that still ranks , despite the recession , as one of the top priorities for European governments and citizens .
The focus in the field of energy should be on the consumer and the protection of his rights , and the EU must strive to ensure favourable energy prices for consumers and business .
I welcome the fact that , according to this report , the Commission and Member States are to ensure that the highest international safety standards are applied in both new and old nuclear power stations .
I also voted in favour of this clause .
However , I would like to clarify the fact that the discontinuation of nuclear power remains my ultimate goal .
Although we must move away from energy production using fossil fuels , nuclear energy is not the alternative .
The potential risk is still too great and the issue of the final storage of nuclear waste is still unresolved .
Promoting low carbon energy sources is a well-known argument used by the nuclear lobby to take the sting out of nuclear power .
However , climate change should not be used to justify the expansion of our nuclear power .
Energy policy is , at present , a particularly important area of the European Union 's activity .
Preventing energy crises in neighbouring countries and ensuring energy security in Member States should be a priority for the European Union institutions .
It is particularly important to ensure a balance between energy policy and environmental protection .
For this reason , we must promote the increased use of renewable energy sources to the greatest extent possible .
This will not only allow a reduction in emissions of harmful substances , but may also effectively limit the dependence of the EU market on foreign supplies of energy .
In order to ensure energy security , which is of great importance to all the citizens of Member States , it is essential to promote good relations between the European Union and third countries , particularly those that send supplies to Europe .
Of equally great importance is the diversification of oil and gas supplies , so that the European Union becomes less susceptible to energy crises in neighbouring countries .
A sustainable European energy strategy is the basic prerequisite for safeguarding energy supplies and must therefore cover all aspects of the provision of energy .
An optimum energy supply is also important for a flourishing economy , as it provides and creates jobs .
I welcome the fact that the report emphasises the potential of the biomass resources of the EU Member States for producing significant quantities of second generation biofuels .
The use of fossil energy must be significantly reduced in the next few years .
Biomass can play a considerable part in replacing oil and gas .
For independence and security of supply , the necessary resources must also be available in the field of energy .
Agriculture can make a significant contribution to achieving the EU 2020 goals .
We need to recognise the signs of the future and invest in renewable energy sources and green technologies .
I support the parts of the report which call for measures to develop a sustainable energy policy in Europe with international importance .
I voted in favour of the report on energy strategy since it makes a constructive contribution to the European debate on the subject and lays down guidelines for the future of European energy policy .
We all know that the European Union is today confronted with a host of challenges , just as we know that it is increasingly dependent on foreign energy imports .
The Treaty of Lisbon was the first step towards turning the tide , because it provides a strong legal framework and legal basis ( Article 194 ) for action on energy policy .
It lays down a set of clear objectives , including ensuring the functioning of the single energy market , security of supply and energy efficiency , and promoting energy networks and renewable forms of energy .
I therefore consider this document to be an extremely useful contribution to the efforts to create and implement a common energy strategy that can strengthen Europe in decades to come .
in writing . - I welcome this report on a new energy strategy for Europe which considers that any future strategy should seek to fulfil the Lisbon Treaty 's core objectives of a single energy market , security of supply , energy efficiency and savings and the development of new and renewable forms of energy and the promotion of energy networks ; furthermore , it should contribute to affordable energy prices for the benefit of all consumers , the enhancement of renewables in the framework of sustainable energy production , and the development of interconnected , integrated , interoperable and smart energy networks and lead to a reduced reliance on energy imports and an increase in indigenous energy production , while maintaining competitiveness and industry growth and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .
The Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 sets out general guidelines which seek to strengthen the recently defined internal energy market .
This report strengthens competitiveness and market instruments , without , however , being ambitious with regard to renewable forms of energy or reduced energy consumption .
It also fails to pay proper attention to microgeneration or equality in energy supply .
Finally , it binds European energy security into close cooperation with NATO .
I voted against it for these and other reasons .
This report is an ode to nuclear energy , the carbon market and the Desertec project .
On top of that , it advocates close collaboration with NATO .
In accordance with the principles of ecology and peace that I stand for , I am voting against this report .
The three objectives set out by the Commission on European energy policy are clear and ambitious : moving towards a low carbon energy system , ensuring security of energy supply , and ensuring that the EU 's competitiveness and the supply of energy to all consumers at affordable prices are strengthened .
A very strong financial and human effort is necessary in order to achieve these objectives .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides the European Union with a strong legal framework and a strong legal basis - Article 194 - with a view to taking action on energy policy .
A long-term vision and a new energy strategy are necessary to attain the 20-20-20 objectives of the climate and energy package between now and 2020 .
The European Union must demonstrate that it has will and ambition .
Today , the Union is increasingly dependent on energy imports .
This is why it is important for the European Union to integrate energy considerations into its policies and external actions .
In addition , we need to encourage long-term investments on Community territory .
Energy efficiency and energy saving must be the first priorities , in particular , through the adoption of an action plan for energy efficiency and a programme of incentives favouring renewable energies at European level .
The Union must also expand research and development efforts as much as possible .
Finally , we must pay very particular attention to the competitiveness of the European Union and to the economic accessibility of energy for European industry and private consumers .
In her report , the rapporteur deals with an improvement in Europe 's energy supply , something that is to be welcomed .
However , it would seem that this goal is to be achieved by increasing the influence of the EU over the energy sector .
Energy policy is something very specific from country to country .
There is little agreement in Europe concerning the use of nuclear energy and ' renewable ' forms of energy in particular .
For this reason , and because I believe that we should continue to decide for ourselves how we obtain our energy , I am convinced that energy policy is something that should be left up to the individual Member States .
I have therefore voted against this amendment .
I voted in favour of Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska 's report because I am aware that the road toward Europe 's energy future is currently strewn with obstacles and difficulties that must be overcome .
The challenges that Europe intends to determinedly and resolutely face up to are many : the European energy system needs substantial investment at a very sensitive time when it is still dealing with the economic crisis , which has affected numerous sectors .
In view of the EU 's current situation , I feel it is time to implement a new energy strategy with a view to achieving the goals laid down by the Climate Change Package ( 20-20-20 ) .
Better deployment of EU budgetary resources on EU energy and climate policies would be useful .
The creation of instruments for providing incentives for the development and modernisation of energy networks would also be an interesting strategy , which I would support .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution on a new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 as I , like the rapporteur , believe that by including a specific chapter on energy , the Treaty of Lisbon now provides a firm legal basis for developing energy initiatives based on sustainability , security of supply , the interconnection of networks and solidarity .
To this end , it is vital to address the problem of the delayed or incomplete implementation of energy legislation and the lack of comprehensive energy strategies with strong leadership from the Commission , alongside a convincing demonstration of Member State determination and support .
In view of this , the document entitled ' Towards a new Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 ' is a first step towards a comprehensive EU energy policy in the context of the EU 2020 strategy .
I would like to highlight the following points , which are included in the proposed EU strategy : ensuring support for modern integrated networks , ensuring security of energy supply , promoting energy research , development and innovation , and putting consumers and the public at the centre of EU energy policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon defines a set of clear objectives for energy policy : ensuring the functioning of a single internal energy market , security of supply , energy efficiency and the promotion of energy networks and renewable sources of energy .
The EU therefore needs to adopt a new strategy for the energy sector which allows these objectives to be met , along with the 20-20-20 climate package targets .
In the end , our group abstained in the vote on this resolution due to the excessive emphasis placed on burning coal .
Despite the fact that two key amendments fell ( regarding paragraphs 32 and 52 ) , the content remains difficult for our group to accept .
Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska 's report draws attention to a number of significant problems , such as the lack of a harmonised energy policy which takes account of the specific features of individual Member States as well as the need to import sources of energy from third countries .
Forecasts show that dependence on crude oil will be even greater in the future , which is why the energy strategy must have many aspects as well as an international dimension , going beyond the framework of the European Union .
In view of the close geographical proximity of Member States with Russia , the European Union should strive to achieve closer cooperation with our eastern neighbours under the right conditions .
Our efforts should also be concentrated on achieving the objectives of the Treaty of Lisbon and , as a consequence , on creating a single energy market , while at the same time guaranteeing security of energy supply .
To achieve these intentions , it is necessary to make investments in network infrastructure , because this would foster integration of regional energy markets , and also to modernise pan-European energy networks .
As Mrs Kolarska-Bobińska rightly suggests , the construction of new terminals , able to bring gas from all over the world , would allow new sources of gas imports to be found , particularly from regions which are rich in this resource , such as Central Asia .
The President of the European Parliament , Jerzy Buzek , and the former head of the European Commission , Jacques Delors , have also suggested making financial assistance available for development of infrastructure , because a modernised and extended energy network is a fundamental requirement for building a consistent energy policy .
in writing . - Maintaining a strategic approach to energy within the EU is becoming more and more essential as resources become traded as ' futures ' and regimes in other parts of the world continue to divert these scarce resources in their direction only .
Whilst I can agree that an effective solution might be energy saving , it is only a part of the wider approach necessary .
The development of energy technologies such as fusion and mixtures of sustainable energy resources are essential .
However , this will only be achieved by supporting energy security as a policy with other western agencies such as NATO .
An energy strategy for Europe is essential in order to implement new policies under the Treaty of Lisbon .
There are now sound legal foundations for drawing up energy initiatives based on sustainability , security of energy supply , and the interconnection of networks and solidarity .
The objectives of a structured plan , as submitted to Parliament , should include the implementation of a single energy market , and of security and efficiency of energy supply .
It is a fact that the situation facing the energy sector in Europe has to address many challenges , now and in the future .
The EU is increasingly dependent on energy imports , and energy production within the EU demands increased investment , at a time when the consequences of an economic crisis are still being faced .
I would like to emphasise the importance of making better use of the potential of renewable forms of energy in the EU , along with putting EU consumers and the public at the heart of European energy policy .
For the aforementioned reasons , I voted in favour of the document .
in writing . - With a projected 70 % of the EU 's energy being imported by 2030 , often from unstable regions , security of supply must be a priority for the EU , and this resolution sets out the EU 's strategy to deal with this dependence .
Energy efficiency should be a priority for the EU , in particular , as it is the most effective way of cutting costs for consumers across the EU .
The resolution also calls on the Commission to ensure that all current legislation is properly enforced , including a single energy market , and also reiterates the Parliament 's call for the roll-out of smart meters , all of which should improve the service that consumers receive , and allow them to better control the amount of energy they use .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that the European Union should make an active contribution to making the conference on climate change in Cancún promising and transparent , especially as regards funding intended for adaptation , forestry , the efficient use of resources , technology transfer , surveillance , reporting and checks .
The EU should therefore likewise facilitate strong political engagement with third countries by developing policies to build effective mechanisms for international cooperation on climate change , both within and beyond the United Nations framework convention on climate change .
It is also worth pointing out the historical responsibility borne by the developed countries for irreversible climate change and their obligation to assist the developing countries and the least-developed countries in adapting to these changes , including by providing financial support for national adaptation programmes of action ( NAPAs ) as important instruments for adaptation to climate change which promote ownership .
In the week preceding the climate change summit in Cancún , the European Parliament has adopted a resolution on the summit objectives .
The failure of the Copenhagen Summit , for which we had such high hopes , is still very much in people 's minds , and we all hope that the next chance to advance international cooperation on climate change will not prove another missed opportunity .
Unfortunately , I do not think that the resolution adopted in the last plenary session on Thursday is particularly helpful .
My colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and I wanted to maintain the target of reducing greenhouse gases by 20 % by 2020 , which would have given us a good basis for negotiations with the US and China .
However , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament succeeded in adopting the unrealistic target of 30 % .
I do not think that this kind of unilateral approach is good news for the impending negotiations in Cancún , and in my view , it is a pity that the resolution , which I opposed , has been adopted .
I supported this resolution .
Concrete commitments could not be reached at the Copenhagen conference on climate change .
Subsequent talks in Germany and China also failed to deliver the expected outcome and therefore , much hope is being placed on the conference in Cancún , where substantive steps need to be agreed - the conclusion of a comprehensive international post-2012 agreement - which should be in line with the latest developments in science and consistent with our intentions of halting the warming of the atmosphere by 2020 , and of limiting global warming to 2 degrees by 2050 , compared to 1990 levels .
I agree with the position set out in the resolution that the European Union should take a leading role in the climate negotiations and actively contribute to a more constructive climate conference in Cancún .
Only the European Union has approved binding climate change reduction targets and intends to adopt even more ambitious targets .
Therefore , it must be in the EU 's interest for other countries to make such commitments , because the EU 's economic growth and competitiveness depend on it .
A few days before the opening of the climate change conference in Cancún , the joint resolution voted on by Parliament calls on ' Heads of State or Government worldwide to demonstrate real political leadership and willingness during the negotiations ' .
We need specific and rapid measures , because the assessment is a harsh one : as things stand , our commitments are not likely to minimise damage due to climate change .
In short , our governments must do more , and they must do it more quickly .
The European Union must play a driving role in the negotiations by speaking with a single voice so that it can carry some weight when dealing with China and the United States .
As far as the objectives are concerned , we require more ambition .
We must adopt the objective of a 30 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in the EU by 2020 compared with 1990 levels ( paragraph 16 ) .
Although it is true that the fight against climate change has been set as one of the major political challenges for a number of years , we have not yet seen the results expected .
For example , on the 2020 objectives concerning energy efficiency and the 20 % renewable energy rate , the numbers do not add up .
Cancún is an opportunity to do things better ; let us not miss it yet again .
I voted for this resolution because the European Union must play a leading role in climate change negotiations , as trust in the international negotiations on climate change needs to be restored after the disappointing outcome of the climate conference in Copenhagen .
I support the European Parliament 's call to take concrete measures to halt deforestation and its proposal to establish an effective global emissions trading market .
I would like to stress that we must enhance natural removals of greenhouse gas emissions which promote the conservation of biodiversity .
Hopefully , substantive steps will be agreed in Cancún which should be in line with the latest developments in science in order to safeguard the survival of all nations , peoples and ecosystems .
Furthermore , it is very important to take substantive decisions in Cancún as regards financing and especially the degree of additionality in financing for adaptation , forestry , resource efficiency , technology transfer , monitoring , reporting and verification .
It is also very important to guarantee full transparency in connection with , and a strong political commitment to , the implementation of the fast-start financing .
The success of the climate change conference in Cancún is vital to the credibility of the negotiating process under the auspices of the United Nations .
It is therefore crucial that concrete commitments and realistic objectives are adopted .
Reaching an agreement on aspects such as policies for forest protection , the transfer of technology to developing countries and funding is vital .
If there is a failure to reach a global agreement , Europe should still remain open to considering a second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol , but should impose conditions , especially with regard to the environmental integrity of the protocol , the redesigning of the clean development mechanism and the undertaking of commitments by the major emitters worldwide , such as China and the US .
The initial form of the resolution on the Cancún climate change conference has been changed quite a lot and its content has been watered down considerably by incorporating the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Nonetheless , I voted in favour of it , because I consider that there is an urgent need for fast and coordinated action at international level to combat climate change and that the resolution as a whole still contains numerous positive points and makes an important contribution on the part of the EU to the Cancún conference .
The report criticises the lack of preparation for the conference , emphasises the need to reduce emissions by at least 40 % and calls on the EU and the Member States to implement the principle of ' climate justice ' .
It also highlights the historical responsibility borne by the developed countries and recalls their financial commitment and the objective of Official Development Assistance , with a baseline of 0.7 % of GNI .
The conservation of biodiversity and the ecosystem is the focal point and the right of access to drinking water and the need to preserve forests and develop a forestation policy are also recognised .
Finally , it rightly points out that the potential for energy saving is not being exploited and underlines the need to increase the energy efficiency of buildings and transport .
Climate change is a problem of global relevance and therefore requires joint responses .
A unilateral commitment is a positive sign , however , and is therefore desirable , but it is not enough .
Although the data confirm that it will not be the EU that suffers most from the rise in CO2 , that in itself does not mean we should have no sense of responsibility , including for what has been done in the past .
We cannot therefore back out of our commitment to make a tangible contribution to reducing emissions , although it is worth stressing that our efforts are essentially diplomatic in nature .
In particular , we need to form a consensus on certain basic issues and then tackle them together with the other players .
There may , in fact , be a very strong incentive to act as a free rider , but that should be discouraged in every possible way ; otherwise , the costs that our production system is already beginning to pay - and paying willingly , provided it gets results - will be in vain .
I voted for the European Parliament resolution of 25 November 2010 on the UN climate change conference in Cancún with a view to meeting the overall objective of limiting the annual mean surface temperature increase to 2 ºC ( ' the 2 ºC objective ' ) .
The consequences of failing to meet the 2 ° C target may be particularly serious .
Up to 40 % of species will face extinction , millions of people will be displaced owing to rising sea levels and more frequent extreme weather events , crop yields will decline , food prices will increase and global economic output will fall by at least 3 % .
The scientific arguments about climate change and its impact are glaringly obvious .
This is why it is paramount that a legislative framework is created which will monitor the proper implementation of these measures .
I think that the European Union and its Member States must define and implement a principle of ' climate justice ' and , therefore , introduce an equity clause in future international climate negotiations .
I believe that it would be the greatest injustice if the world were unable to curb climate change , because it is specifically poor people in poor countries who would suffer .
I am voting in favour of the bulk of the measures and proposals presented in this report .
Following the disappointing outcome of the climate conference in Copenhagen , it is necessary to restore trust in the international negotiations on climate change .
Once again , it is up to the European Union to take a leading role in the climate change negotiations and make an active contribution so that Cancún results in more constructive , transparent and bold commitments .
I also believe that the European Union should aim to step up its climate diplomacy activities , seeking strong political engagement with third countries by developing policies to build effective instruments and mechanisms for international cooperation on environmental protection and climate change .
In this attempt to achieve bolder and more ambitious results , I also believe that in the final phase of the COP 16 negotiations , the European Union should give its chief negotiator some flexibility to react to developments thrown up by the negotiations .
The European Union must speak with one voice and show that it is ambitious and persuasive during the climate change conference in Cancún .
The failure in Copenhagen must not be repeated .
We need specific and rapid measures , because the assessment is a harsh one : as things stand , our commitments are unlikely to minimise the damage caused by climate change .
The European Union must play a pivotal role in the negotiations by speaking with one voice to make its presence felt in its dealings with China and the United States .
The major target to be met is that of a 30 % reduction in EU greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 compared with 1990 levels .
We must also ensure that industrialised countries such as the United States make a commitment to developing countries in order to help them combat and adapt to climate change , by combating deforestation , desertification and so on .
It is time for our governments to take stock of the climate challenges ahead of us and to reach a political consensus that allows for the implementation of a true global policy for combating climate change .
The European Union has already adopted the ambitious objective of a 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions by 2020 during the French Presidency in 2008 .
It is already very difficult to gain acceptance for this objective from the other countries involved in the international negotiations on climate change .
Without international agreement , this European objective may also mean a loss of international competitiveness for European businesses in some sectors of the economy .
Proposing a new objective of a 30 % reduction in CO2 emissions in the European Union is therefore completely disproportionate , and that is why I voted against this motion for a resolution .
The position adopted by Parliament today does not put the European Union in a credible position when it comes to negotiating with its partners to reach an agreement during next week 's Cancún conference .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the Cancún climate change conference as I believe that Parliament should send a clear message that world leaders need to demonstrate their political leadership during the negotiations in order to progress to the level of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol .
Regardless of the debate on the causes of climate change , and on verifying whether human action has caused and can reverse it , it is now clear that this issue has very serious implications in extremely diverse areas of human life , and that it is threatening to cause imbalances at global level .
Therefore , we cannot fail to monitor it closely and with concern .
In particular , climate change has caused the worrying rise in sea level , forced migrations , and the fight for access to waterways and more fertile land , as in Sudan , pitting nomadic herdsmen against settled farmers .
The EU must actively participate in this global effort and do its best to monitor this problem and seek lasting solutions , which will ideally be able to reconcile scientific and technological progress , and the development of populations with environmental quality and respect for nature .
The Cancún climate change conference is an excellent opportunity to pursue this objective in order to establish more ambitious targets and reach a more solid and comprehensive collective commitment to combating the problem .
I support a binding agreement featuring an international system of sanctions for the climate summit in Cancún .
It is clear that such an agreement will only make sense if it is binding on the major global emitters : the US , China and India .
The EU has been a leader in combating climate change , and should be encouraged to build on this leadership , although without forgetting the tremendous efforts that our industries have already made to respond to the mandatory reductions in emissions within Europe .
It should be noted that the EU is responsible for around 15 % of global emissions , and it is estimated that this percentage will fall to 10 % in 2030 , while the US , China and India are responsible for half of global emissions , with this figure continuing to rise .
As a result , I cannot agree that the EU should unilaterally limit its CO2 emissions by 30 % , rather than the target of 20 % , if this is not going to be duly matched by other countries , notably the US .
That does not mean that the EU 's ambition should be scaled back .
On the contrary , I believe that , even if others do not go along with us , we should continue to focus our efforts on scientific research , technological innovation relating to non-carbon energy sources , energy efficiency and the creation of green jobs , in order to increase our competitiveness .
This resolution repeats some of the gaps , weaknesses and errors of the position that Parliament adopted at the Copenhagen conference on climate change , not recognising the reasons behind its spectacular failure .
The discussion is still overly focused on reduction targets , to the detriment of ways to achieve them , which discredits the whole debate .
There is insistence on a market approach , although market instruments have already shown their ineffectiveness and perversity .
It falls short of what is needed in the discussion on the distortions introduced by so-called flexibility mechanisms and the need for their abolition or recasting .
There is an obvious misunderstanding of the meaning and serious importance of the principle of a ' common but differentiated responsibility ' when placing the world 's major historical polluters , such as the US , the biggest global emitter per capita , which is resisting making serious commitments to reduce its emissions , on an equal footing with emerging economies such as China or India , with per capita emissions that are 10 and 4 times lower respectively than those of the US .

In terms of funding adaptation and mitigation in developing countries , the severe constraints that weigh on these countries continue to be ignored , such as the massive , unfair foreign debt carried by the least developed countries .
Notwithstanding some positive points , the general content of the resolution does not merit our support .
After the failure of the Copenhagen conference , we are at last hoping to move forwards .
I welcome the resolution on the Cancún climate change conference , particularly the amendments by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which state a sensible and pragmatic principle : no increase in the emissions reduction quota can be decided unilaterally by the EU in the absence of tangible commitments by the other major world players .
Europe must certainly continue to lead the fight against greenhouse gas emissions , but this cannot be done in the name of an environmentalist ideology that requires no joint acceptance of responsibility and ends up penalising hundreds of thousands of Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises , particularly during a crisis period .
I have voted against today 's motion for a resolution on the climate conference in Cancún ( COP 16 ) because I feel duty-bound to climate protection , by which I mean realistic climate protection that combines sustainability and economic development .
It is a major step for me to vote against a report I played a significant role in drafting .
However , the motion for a resolution is a ' green pipe-dream ' that pursues excessive and unrealistic targets .
We have succeeded in talking down some of the demands , such as limiting the rise in the average temperature to 1.5 ° C. If we had pursued this demand , we would have had to reduce our emissions to zero in the next ten years and strive for negative emissions in the short or long term .
We did not manage to prevail in respect of a unilateral rise in EU reduction commitments , despite the fact that this is not helpful to negotiations at present and that we lack investigations as to how specific reductions are to be achieved .
We must avoid making such demands , as we risk losing credibility among our partners throughout the world , particularly those who are still unsure about joining with us .
Credibility is our chief asset at present .
I am convinced that in our efforts to secure this , Europe must speak with one voice .
That is why I am supporting the Council and the Commission .
Hopes were dashed when the Copenhagen Summit failed to set ambitious targets to combat global warming .
The European Union now needs to be unwavering in its commitment to achieving a convincing result at the Cancún Summit .
To this end , Parliament has adopted a resolution which seeks to raise the European Union 's target for reducing greenhouse gas emissions from 20 % to 30 % by 2020 .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I feel that we have no more time to lose and that if we delay and prevaricate further , we will miss our chance .
The European Union needs to be the driving force within the international community if we are to achieve real results .
I voted against the final adoption of this resolution .
The unrealistic nature of the objectives that have been voted on is striking .
The EU 's unilateral adoption of an objective for reducing emissions by 30 % by 2020 would have grave repercussions in France in terms of competitiveness and jobs .
There are too many uncertain factors weighing on the negotiations for the EU to set itself such restrictive objectives .
Last year , Europe made the mistake of believing that it could impose its vision of things on its partners during Copenhagen .
If the EU makes these mistakes again , there will not even be any question of it participating at the negotiating table .
We will only be able to talk of 30 % when an international agreement on this figure is concluded .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the Cancún climate change conference because now more than ever , in the wake of the failure of the Copenhagen Summit , the European Union needs to be united in pushing for tough targets .
In particular , the text sets out a target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the EU by 30 % by 2020 , with a view to limiting the global temperature rise to 2 ° C. A realistic document , the resolution takes into account the fact that Member States have a ' common but differentiated responsibility ' which reflects their development and growth .
It also proposes the creation of a ' green climate fund ' which could be used to provide funding where required , with priority given to vulnerable countries .
I have voted against the resolution .
My explanation : was it even possible to count all the voices in the European Parliament that demanded that the EU speak with one voice in Cancún ?
Today 's vote has demonstrated that Parliament is still unable to do so .
One of the key negotiating positions of the EU is that we should not accept any new commitments unilaterally .
Parliament has rejected this by a slight majority .
That is why I voted against the resolution .
I hope that Commissioner Hedegaard will stick with the positions which have previously been agreed .
The Danish Social Democrats have abstained from voting on the obligation for a 40 % reduction .
The Social Democrats support 40 % in principle , but in this particular vote , they chose to support 30 % as a result that is achievable in practice .
This is also reflected in the final result .
I regret the fact that , in the context of the resolution on the climate conference , the call for a global tax on financial transactions , the revenue from which could be used , among other things , to combat deforestation and desertification , did not receive the support of the majority in the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , the conservative majority did not follow the recommendations of the social democrats on this issue .
I am pleased that we have adopted the target of limiting global warming to a minimum of 2 ° C , without ruling out from the negotiations the possibility of limiting the temperature rise to 1.5 ° C , in order to be able to ensure the survival of all countries , peoples and ecosystems .
in writing . - Climate change is a real and immediate challenge that the countries of Europe are facing .
It is vital that there is a worldwide decision made quickly that may help stem the worst results of climate change .
Therefore , I would like to see progress at the Cancún conference .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which sets out Parliament 's position in advance of the Cancún climate change conference .
It emphasises that substantive steps need to be agreed in Cancún to pave the way for the conclusion of a comprehensive international post-2012 agreement in South Africa in 2011 , which should be in line with the latest developments in science and consistent with at least achieving the 2 ºC objective , without prejudice to moving to a 1.5 ºC temperature increase limit in order to safeguard the survival of all nations , peoples and ecosystems .
It calls on the European Union once again to take a leading role in the climate negotiations and to actively contribute to a more constructive and transparent climate conference in Cancún .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the run-up to the climate conference to be held in Cancún from 29 November to 11 December , essentially because we need to arrive in Mexico with a clear , well-defined common position .
I welcome the European Union 's constructive attitude in agreeing to consider a second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol .
However , it should not budge one inch on the conditions put forward regarding emissions .
None of the actors in the international community should ever think of leaving Europe to its own devices , in the hope that it will solve the whole world 's problems by itself .
This resolution accepts some of the arguments made at the Cochabamba Summit .
I am very pleased about that , and I am astonished that it is not cited at all in the resolution .
It proposes to define and to apply the principle of climate justice and recognises , without citing it , the climate debt owed by the northern countries to the southern countries .
The objectives that it proposes in relation to reducing greenhouse gas emissions are in accordance with those stated by the IPCC .
Moderation in energy , whatever the word used , is finally on the agenda .
If the pollution rights exchange known as the ' carbon market ' and the establishment of a ' global carbon market ' were not one of the main pillars of this resolution , I would have been able to give it my vote .
Once again , there are great hopes surrounding the climate change conference in Cancún .
The countries with the greatest responsibility must continue to work towards reductions in greenhouse gas emissions .
This problem , which is a matter of concern all over the world , needs a fast solution .
The EU must be capable of taking a leading role in the fight against climate change .
Every country , from the US to the so-called emerging countries , including China , which are heavy polluters , must also accept its responsibilities in a fight that is leaving less and less room for new opportunities .
The sustainable future of humanity is at stake .
If nothing is done in time , we could reach the point of no return .
During the forthcoming climate conference in Cancún , globally binding limits are to be agreed for CO2 greenhouse gas emissions because the previous Kyoto protocol runs out in 2012 .
While the European Union is working to reduce CO2 emissions by 20 % by the end of the decade , Parliament is actually looking for a 30 % reduction .
We have not succeeded in achieving our climate targets to date , a situation that will not improve by setting a higher percentage reduction .
This is particularly the case when emissions trading simply allowed some of the emissions to be moved elsewhere .
Here in Europe , we have a high level of environmental awareness , something that is not the case in some of the so-called emerging economies .
One only has to think of China or India , for example .
I am quite sceptical in relation to the system used to date .
My scepticism stems mainly from the fact that more nuclear power stations are to be built in order to reduce CO2 emissions .
This would simply mean jumping out of the frying pan into the fire .
I simply cannot support such a proposal .
Climate change is one of the greatest environmental problems of our time and , in turn , is also causing numerous natural disasters .
Some time ago , we committed ourselves to reducing the emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere .
However , it seems that we may not achieve the targets set .
On the other hand , no targets can be reached until the world 's major polluters join the EU .
Therefore , it is irresponsible to set even greater targets until less ambitious targets have been achieved .
Furthermore , if we begin to reach higher targets , we will ram ourselves into a corner - as it has to comply with more stringent requirements , EU industry will be unable to compete on a level playing field with industry in countries that do not set such stringent requirements .
Therefore , although setting ambitious targets makes us leaders in the fight against climate change , it by no means contributes to the EU 's objective of becoming the world 's most competitive region .
I voted against the final document because , while I have no doubt that the EU can lead the way in terms of reducing climate change and we all know our commitments to nature , we must set goals that are as realistic as possible and move towards them in a consistent manner .
The fact that the European economy had to cut back on its production on account of the crisis , resulting in reduced levels of emissions , is not an argument for the 30 % reduction in CO2 emissions being called for by the EU Climate Action Commissioner , Mrs Hedegaard , now that the 20 % reduction can easily be achieved as a result of the economic crisis .
However , climate protection can only succeed if it is carried out globally .
There is little point in reducing CO2 emissions throughout the EU while , at the same time , shifting industries that are harmful to the climate and the hazardous waste from industrial nations to developing countries .
On the other hand , restrictive EU measures hold our economy back and impede our companies in international competition .
Therefore , we should say ' yes ' to climate protection , but not at the expense of our companies and not if we are the only ones taking the measures .
I therefore voted against this motion for a resolution .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the climate change conference in Cancún so that Europe may express its support for the climate change agreements in a conference of international importance .
The European Parliament hopes that the Heads of State or Government will give the greatest priority to the issue and agree on specific measures in which the EU itself can play a leading role by emphasising our commitment to the Kyoto Protocol .
Global warming is now scientifically proven , and so the target must be to stabilise global greenhouse gas emissions no later than by 2015 in order to halve emissions by 2050 .
This will keep the temperature rise down to below 2 ° C , thus saving countries , populations and ecosystems .
The climate change conference in Cancún ( COP 16 ) is crucial for all Europeans and for people all over the world .
We need a responsible and ambitious policy at this level from all political players .
The European Union has a key role and must lead ambitions on climate change .
In view of this , I voted against Parliament 's resolution as I believe that the targets it sets out are not ambitious enough .
Indeed , I cannot accept a target above 1.5 ° C in a future comprehensive international post-2012 agreement in South Africa , given the latest developments in science .
Regarding the commitments on reducing emissions , the increase must also remain below 1.5 ° C , which requires that global greenhouse gas emissions peak by 2015 at the latest and are reduced by at least 50 % as compared with 1990 by 2050 , and continue to decline thereafter .
These are not mere percentages , but targets that have been scientifically researched as possible and vital in order to create a decisive turning point in the path that we have gone down towards the destruction of significant parts of our planet 's biodiversity .
I voted for this resolution in the firm conviction that we are going to achieve a different result this year in Cancún .
Learning from the positive outcome in Nagoya in October and the negative experience from Copenhagen in 2009 , I think that the EU will speak with a single voice .
Based on its mandate , the EU and its Member States must continue to play a constructive role globally in order to achieve a legally binding post-Kyoto agreement .
NGOs and civil society must be fully involved in this agreement so that it is implemented properly and greater transparency achieved .
This is why I welcome the fact that 5 000 representatives of civil society have registered to attend the COP 16 proceedings .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that the European Union should demonstrate its strong commitment and determination in the context of the global effort to find solutions that can mitigate climate change and its effects .
Let us say straight away that the Cancún climate change conference is not going to be a success .
There is good reason for this pessimism , given the real lack of will displayed in these last few months by the main protagonists , the United States and China foremost among them , without whom a quantified and binding agreement cannot be envisaged .
For all that , it is not necessarily the case that Cancún will be an exact copy of Copenhagen and will cause as much disappointment among citizens .
In the resolution adopted at noon today , the European Parliament reminded us that we should aim for the objective of a 1.5 ° C temperature rise limit in order to ensure the survival of all nations , all peoples and all ecosystems .
This is a question of responsibility with regard to future generations .
The resolution reminds us that in order to be credible , the European Union must not only honour its commitments to provide USD 30 billion of aid to the poorest countries for the period 2010-2012 , but also show imagination in order to save the planet .
It must also provide new sources of financing : a tax on financial transactions , international taxes on business , national taxes on emissions and contributions on air tickets , proposals that I and 292 other MEPs supported .
in writing . - The ENVI resolution was fairly narrowly adopted ( final vote 292 / 274 / 38 ) with the following changes / remarks : the reference to ' without prejudice to moving to a 1.5 ºC limit ' was deleted with a narrow majority ( RCV Amendment 14 and Amendment 18 : 307 / 304 / xx ) ; the explicit mention that LULUCF and AAU loopholes could nullify all Annex I targets was deleted ( Amendment 16 : 316 / 301 / xx ) , but other paragraphs requiring robust rules that are designed to deliver emissions reductions from Annex I remained .
Without an electronic check a paragraph repeating the UNFCCC 4AR science and 40 % was said to have been defeated ( although in a separate vote on the same paragraph the part about 40 % being required by science for + 2 ° C had been maintained ) .
The paragraph reiterating ' the need to adopt a domestic greenhouse gas emissions reduction target for the European Union of 30 % by 2020 as compared with the 1990 level , in the interests of the future economic growth of the European Union ' was maintained ( PPE Amendment 20 rejected by RCV : 298 / 316 / xx ) .
All in all it remains a good resolution , containing many good messages regarding the Kyoto Protocol , limits to offsets and criticism of LULUCF and AAU loopholes as well as strong language on the historical responsibility of industrialised countries and the need to finance developing country climate efforts .
in writing . - As the move towards the conference gathers pace , it is clear that a real chance exists for the EU to make a positive contribution in Cancún .
Having listened to the Chair of the Committee , Jo Leinen , I am convinced that at its heart , a multilateral agreement can only be reached if the suspicion of BRIC countries can be removed .
Similarly , the commitments of many countries to meeting contributions towards helping developing nations has to be driven forward at the conference .
During yesterday 's vote in the European Parliament , I voted in favour of the resolution on the climate change conference in Cancún ( COP 16 ) .
The reason I did this is that the resolution deals with an extremely important subject - the fact that the EU must demonstrate shrewd political leadership in the climate negotiations .
Developing countries are affected particularly badly and therefore , world leaders must do their utmost to ensure that the climate negotiations do not jeopardise the Millennium Development Goals .
However , I would like to emphasise in particular that I voted against the wording in the resolution that urges the EU , in the negotiations , to propose a tax rate of 0.01 % on financial transactions .
This sort of tax is not the right way to go and it will not help the developing countries to combat and adapt to climate change .
There have been further serious incidents in Western Sahara recently .
This territory , which was under Spanish administration until 1976 , is still the subject of considerable tension between the Moroccan authorities and the independence movement .
Located between the Atlantic , Mauritania and southern Morocco , Western Sahara has been divided between the latter two countries since Spain 's withdrawal .
The resolution proposed by some of my fellow Members regarding the tragic events on 24 October 2010 was produced as a matter of urgency even though a degree of hindsight is essential in such cases .
I have therefore chosen to abstain from the vote and will monitor the ongoing investigation closely .
I support this resolution .
After more than 30 years , the Western Sahara decolonisation process remains unfinished .
The human rights situation , the acts of violence in the civilian camp , and the ongoing conflict and the consequences of this conflict on the whole region are cause for concern .
I share the concern expressed in the resolution over the attacks on the freedom of the press and information that many European journalists also endured .
There must therefore be an independent international investigation under the auspices of the UN to explain the deaths and disappearances of civilians .
It is also important to establish a human rights monitoring mechanism , release human rights activists and grant the press , independent observers and humanitarian organisations free access to Western Sahara .
I support the United Nations investigation into the issue of Western Sahara , and its position that Morocco should allow journalists , independent observers and humanitarian organisations free access to this particular region .
I am aware that Morocco is a strategic partner and ally of the European Union in combating radical Islamic fundamentalism .
However , I do not accept the Moroccan authorities ' attitude towards the serious , violent incidents that took place in the Gdaim Izyk camp in Western Sahara on 8 November , which caused the death of an as yet unknown number of people .
I am glad to be a member of an institution like Parliament , which has the protection and promotion of human rights as one of its basic principles .
In view of this , I recognise the need to call upon UN agencies to propose the creation of a mechanism to monitor human rights in Western Sahara .
I congratulate the UN Secretary-General and his personal envoy on their efforts to find a just , lasting and mutually acceptable political solution allowing for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara .
The situation of Western Sahara has been dragging on for more than 30 years without any apparent solution .
Along with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the conflict in Cyprus , it is part of a group of cases that are proving difficult to resolve and are lasting a long time .
Despite some individual initiatives for opening channels of dialogue , which are to be welcomed , today it seems clear that the opposing parties have not yet been able to take concrete steps towards a negotiated solution to the conflict .
The recent news of incidents that have taken place at the Gdaim Izyk camp are causing major concerns regarding respect for the human rights of the people of Western Sahara by the Moroccan authorities , and hints at a disturbing upsurge in this conflict .
I hope there will be a definitive end to this problem , and that a political and administrative solution can be found to the conflict , in order to reconcile the interests of the parties .
We are pleased that Parliament has strongly condemned the violent incidents that took place in the Gdaim Izyk camp in Western Sahara on 8 November , which caused the death of an unknown number of people .
We hope that the Commission and the Council will demand the measures that are proposed here , stressing the need for UN bodies to propose the creation of a monitoring mechanism for human rights in Western Sahara and demand compliance with the resolutions that have already been adopted , including self-determination for the people of Western Sahara .
As it says in the resolution , ' the United Nations would be the most appropriate body to conduct an independent international inquiry in order to clarify the events , the deaths and the disappearances ' .
The attacks on the freedom of the press and information that many European journalists have suffered are also regrettable , and the Kingdom of Morocco should be urged to permit free access and free movement in Western Sahara for the press , independent observers and humanitarian organisations .
Finally , we would like to stress the importance of increasing funding and supplying the humanitarian aid needed by the Sahrawi refugees who live in the Tindouf region , whose numbers are estimated at between 90 000 and 165 000 , with a view to providing their basic necessities of food , water , shelter and medical care , as well as an improvement in their living conditions .
The self-determination of peoples has always been a priority for the Northern League .
Today , we are voting on a motion for a resolution that aims to guarantee respect for human rights and acceptable socio-economic conditions for the people of Western Sahara .
We condemn the violent and unjustified reaction of the Moroccan Government , which bloodily put down a peaceful and democratic protest demonstration .
We therefore call on the Commission and the Council to suspend negotiations on the association agreement between the EU and Morocco .
I give my full support to the resolution based on these premises .
in writing . - I was delighted to be able to co-author , on behalf of the S & D Group , Parliament 's resolution on Western Sahara .
I am dismayed that protests in Western Sahara have been met by a violent clampdown by the authorities and I share the fears expressed in this resolution for the safety of Sahrawi human rights defenders .
The situation in Western Sahara remains one of the final vestiges of decolonisation and , after 30 years , needs to be resolved .
I welcome the call in this resolution for a just , lasting and mutually acceptable political solution in full accordance with the UN Security Council resolutions , and I would once again echo the UN in urging that there must be a referendum of the people in the region .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution on the unfortunate situation in Western Sahara .
I am shocked by the violent incidents which took place in the Camp of Gdaim Izyk and in the town of Laâyoune , as well as by the use of force on the very same day on which the third cycle of informal talks on the status of Western Sahara opened in New York .
I deplore the loss of human life and express my solidarity with the families of the dead , the injured and the disappeared and urge the setting up , under the aegis of the United Nations , of an independent and transparent committee of inquiry with a mandate to establish the responsibilities of the various parties for triggering the aforementioned events , and to indicate what casualties occurred .
I am also astonished that European parliamentarians and journalists were refused access to Western Sahara and call on the Moroccan authorities to allow the press and non-governmental organisations access to the region .
The situation in Western Sahara is very worrying , and Parliament should give a clear signal that it condemns what is happening there .
Acts of violence on both sides need to stop in order to make way for transparent dialogue in good faith , putting an end to a conflict which has already caused too many deaths and is still resulting in large numbers of displaced people and refugees .
The EU must continue to make an effort to provide humanitarian aid to these refugees so that they have the basic conditions for survival .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it sends a loud , clear message reinforcing the right of the Sahrawi people to self-determination , and condemns the atrocities committed by the Moroccan Government .
It is positive because it condemns Morocco 's violence in dismantling the Sahrawi Dignity Camp , the death of the young Nayem El-Garhi and the information blockade to which the occupying force is subjecting the Western Sahara , preventing journalists , NGOs and elected officers from gaining access to the area .
Although my group had asked for the EU 's association agreement with Morocco to be frozen due to infringement of the second clause , I have given my support to this resolution because it demands an international investigation conducted by the United Nations , it calls on Morocco to ' abide by international law regarding the exploitation of the natural resources of Western Sahara ' and ' insists on the necessity to call on UN bodies to propose the setting up of a human rights monitoring mechanism in Western Sahara ' .
For all these reasons , even though I would have liked a firmer and clearer condemnation , I voted in favour .
The reason why I voted in favour of this resolution on the current situation in Western Sahara is rooted in the commitment that has always been shown , with particular emphasis on the way the conflict between Morocco and the Polisario Front over Western Sahara has developed , above all , because of the obvious implications of that problem for stability in the region .
Clearly , Morocco has been invited on several occasions to maintain an open , flexible dialogue with no preconditions in order to obtain small but significant steps forward in the peace talks brokered by the United Nations .
I personally have always supported the efforts made by the UN and its envoy , Mr Ross , aimed at holding bilateral political , negotiated and sustainable talks between the two parties .
In many EU countries , including Italy , there is widespread sensitivity and awareness regarding the conditions in which the Sahrawi people live , with particular understanding for Morocco 's positions and points of view .
The Union , particularly the Mediterranean countries , has always been to the fore in terms of giving the Sahrawi people humanitarian aid , because the principle of solidarity towards people living in such problem circumstances is fundamental .
I voted as I did with a view to achieving a gradual improvement in the current situation through a reciprocal commitment to cooperation and dialogue .
I supported this resolution as I believe that the fight for human rights is crucial .
There have been reports from Western Sahara of instances of police violence against citizens who were holding a non-violent protest camp outside the city of Laâyoune against the social , political and economic situation and against their living conditions .
The police forces used tear gas and batons against the demonstrators in order to evacuate the camp .
This is more than a political issue with a neighbouring state .
We are looking at a violation of human rights that we must all condemn , without exception , and so I am voting in favour of this resolution and adding my voice to those of my fellow Members in urging all parties to remain calm and refrain from all acts of violence .
Following the multiple attempts by the Moroccan regime to prevent Parliament from expressing its opinion on the human rights situation in the Western Sahara , we must welcome the fact that on this occasion , the Moroccan lobby has failed .
I consider the constant interference by Morocco to be unacceptable .
Likewise , the text of the resolution is just a compromise between positions that are based on very different analyses .
I therefore wish to state our group 's position in favour of the Sahrawi people , and specifically our condemnation of the provocative and irresponsible way in which the Gdaim Izyk camp was dismantled .
We cannot place those who attack , torture and massacre on the same level as those who seek to defend themselves .
There needs to be an independent investigation , and freedom of access and movement needs to be given to those responsible for the media and information .
The EU , and especially Spain and France , must assume their historical responsibility and demand that Morocco ceases its inhibiting and intransigent attitude , even by freezing the numerous trade agreements and special relationships that exist between the EU and the Kingdom of Morocco , and by doing everything possible to ensure that the referendum on self-determination included in numerous United Nations resolutions is held .
The violent incidents that occurred in Western Sahara as the Gdaim Izyk camp was being dismantled and in the town of Laâyoune are very serious and must be roundly condemned .
The European Parliament is quite right to express its concerns about how the situation in the region has deteriorated .
As the United Nations has pointed out , the parties involved in the conflict need to agree to seek a realistic political solution that is fair , sustainable , acceptable to both sides and in line with the relevant UN Security Council resolutions .
However , it is unfortunate that the text was produced before Parliament had access to all of the facts and detailed information about the circumstances that triggered this tragedy , including the exact number of victims .
Journalists , independent investigators , observers and political decision makers need to be given time and access to the town of Laâyoune and the refugee camps in order to shed light on the events .
The distress of the Sahrawi people should in no way be exploited to incite further acts of violence .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the joint resolution on Western Sahara .
However , I strongly regret that the resolution fails to mention and criticise the illegal fisheries agreement between EU and Morocco , which allows European fishing fleets to operate in waters within the occupied Western Sahara territory .
I have voted in favour of the resolution on the situation in Western Sahara .
This joint resolution sends out a strong signal from the European Parliament condemning the recent resurgence of violence in Western Sahara .
On 8 November , the Sahrawi protest camps were violently broken up , as a result of which there were many deaths on both sides and many of the inhabitants injured .
The camps were a sign of the Sahrawi people 's peaceful protest against the repression , marginalisation and plundering of their natural resources ( including fish ) which they have experienced and the poor conditions in which they have been living under the Moroccan occupation .
The resolution calls for an immediate end to the violence and the establishment of an independent inquiry into the events at Gdaim Izyk and Laâyoune .
There are calls for the Moroccan authorities to allow journalists , humanitarian organisations , MEPs and independent observers free access to Western Sahara .
The increased repression of human rights activists and Sahrawi activists by the Moroccan authorities ( arbitrary arrests , charges and detention ) is very worrying .
These events will put a strain on the informal talks between Morocco and the Polisario Front which are scheduled to resume in early November under the auspices of the UN .
However , a just and lasting political solution is necessary to improve the situation of the Sahrawi people .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the joint resolution on Western Sahara , .
However , I find it extremely regrettable that the resolution fails to mention and criticise the illegal fisheries agreement between the EU and Morocco , which allows European fishing fleets to operate in waters within the occupied Western Sahara territory .
in writing . - ( FR ) Like my fellow Members , I have to condemn the recent events in Western Sahara and would like to extend my support and sympathy to all the victims ' families .
That said , I have chosen not to vote in favour of the resolution as it contains a number of factual errors , omits vital information and does not present an objective picture of the violence that occurred on 8 November 2010 .
The wording of the resolution should have been marked by diplomacy combined with practical and indisputable facts .
Instead , this unbalanced text contains a hasty and ill-informed assessment of the situation and , without giving any reasons , dismisses out of hand the independent investigation being conducted by the Moroccan authorities .
I am disappointed with this biased statement which was produced in haste - it will hamper the informal negotiations being held at the UN between the Kingdom of Morocco and the Polisario Front and has generated tension on the ground .
We have lost sight of where our priorities should lie , namely seeking a balanced and mutually acceptable agreement between the two parties that will allow the civilian population to see stability and security restored .
We must , at all costs , avoid the creation of a new front in the much-contested Sahel region and seek to preserve our strategic partnership with Morocco .
Ukraine has become a major geopolitical issue for Europe since the dissolution of the USSR .
Having regained its independence , Russia still considers it part of the ' near abroad ' region .
In wishing to take full advantage of its autonomy and focus on its strong historic links with the European Union , Ukraine has , for some time , expressed its intention of joining the European Union .
As a country with vast natural resources situated at the heart of a key strategic region , Ukraine should be seen as a potential lynchpin for the European Union .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution which welcomes Ukraine 's European outlook .
The resolution refers to the progress that is still needed in this fragile democracy .
It also highlights the efforts made and significant advances achieved in recent times .
The resolution is measured in tone but confirms that Ukraine has a European future .
I support this resolution .
There is concern that democratic freedoms , such as freedom of assembly , freedom of expression and freedom of the media , have come under threat in Ukraine in recent months .
The authorities should investigate reports of infringements of rights and freedoms and take measures to remedy them .
Furthermore , it is important for the authorities to refrain from any attempts to control , directly or indirectly , the content of the reporting in the national media .
Election rules remain an ongoing subject of discussion .
Therefore , it is necessary to take active steps to improve the election system and legislation in this area prior to the forthcoming Parliamentary elections .
Moreover , there is a need to strengthen the credibility , stability and independence of institutions and ensure that the governance of the state is based on the principles of democracy and the rule of law .
The Ukrainian authorities must also make more efforts to combat corruption .
I agree with Parliament 's resolution on further action by Ukraine to achieve political stability both within the country and beyond its borders .
Ukraine is an important partner of the European Union for the implementation of the European Neighbourhood Policy with Eastern Europe .
Therefore , it is crucial to continue to seek close cooperation , especially in the area of visa requirements .
Parliament calls on the Commission and the Council to draft an action plan on establishing visa-free travel for Ukraine .
In order to ensure long-term political stability both within the country and with neighbouring countries , it is important to implement constitutional reforms , which would help establish an appropriate balance between the executive and the judicial system .
Further reforms are also necessary in order to strengthen media freedom and pluralism .
State institutions are urged to take measures to ensure freedom of the press .
The European Union is firmly committed to helping Ukraine implement its reforms .
The European Union therefore continues to seek close cooperation with Ukraine , strengthening democracy in this country and accelerating its integration into the European Union .
I am critical of the local elections that took place on 31 October in Ukraine and would like the freedom of the press to be respected .
I deplore the last-minute change to the election rules prior to 31 October , along with the fact that the opposition parties were not allowed to put up candidates in the constituencies .
I agree with Parliament that restricting democratic standards should not be tolerated , and that freedom of expression should be upheld .
I would like to join with Parliament in condemning the government in Kiev for its failure in this sensitive matter .
In Slavonic languages , ' Ukraine ' means ' border country ' .
For the Russians , it was always a remote province , and now Ukraine is a border country for the European Union as well , as a result of the last but one enlargement .
For once , however , we do not want the name of a place to hold the fate of its people .
With the caution that respect for the democratic will of a people requires , the European Union is being consistent with its role as a global player by offering itself as a guarantor of freedom , democracy and pluralism in a situation in which respect for such values may enable the country to achieve the stability that it badly needs .
The enlargement process not only entails assessments of a strategic and commercial nature - although these aspects must also be seen as relevant - but , most of all , a constant , peaceful effort to expand the cultural sphere with reference to the universe of values that the EU represents .
For the last six years - ever since the Orange Revolution , which has its anniversary in a few weeks ' time - the country has been going through a period of democratic stabilisation .
We hope that our presence as a physical neighbour will provide support for a genuine democratic conscience to form and to be respected .
I am voting in favour of this motion for a resolution .
Relations between the European Union and Ukraine , one of the Union 's main partners among its neighbours to the east , are markedly important for stability , security and prosperity throughout Europe .
Aware that they share responsibilities in promoting stability , the EU and Ukraine have been stepping up negotiations and looking to arrange new cooperation partnerships .
These go beyond mere economic cooperation , as they also cover the areas of the rule of law and respect for human rights , where much remains to be done in Ukraine , as this recent setback to the electoral process has demonstrated .
I would also like to highlight the extreme importance of Ukraine 's European integration process for it to carry out the necessary economic , social and political reforms .
In the light of this , I believe that the conclusion of the association agreement is particularly pertinent with a view to the effective implementation of the EU-Ukraine association agenda .
Despite the initial actions of President Yanukovych and the subsequent statements by the Ukrainian authorities about Ukraine 's willingness to join the EU , to adopt European models for good governance , and to respect the human rights and civil liberties of its people , some caution is inevitably needed .
In fact , there are increasing reports of setbacks in freedoms of expression and association , along with political influence in the media and judicial authorities , as well as the actions of the security services .
I believe that if Ukraine is faithful to the promises of its political leaders , it would be able to begin along the path to membership , the first step of which should be to institutionalise freedom and the rule of law .
I believe that Ukraine is one of the EU 's crucial strategic partners , so I have to express my concern at the excessive powers granted to the security services to intimidate non-governmental organisations operating in the country and to control the Ukrainian media .
It is also worth pointing out the importance of allowing the Ukrainian opposition parties to take part in the elections without restrictions or discrimination .
I believe that we can only maintain our support for the prospect of Ukraine 's European integration to ensure a strategic partnership with the country insofar as it takes on board the recommendations of this resolution .
in writing . - I voted for the resolution on Ukraine .
However , I regret the fact that this House has postponed the vote already two times , which has resulted in a situation that the EU-Ukraine summit , for which the resolution was drafted , has taken place before our vote .
The European Parliament has seen it as its duty and privilege to take its own position before regular summit meetings with third countries to be able to convey its position in time to both parties .
The impact of a resolution adopted afterwards will be much weaker .
If such a delay was meant by some colleagues as an attempt not to disturb too much the new Ukrainian administration , it is certainly a short-sighted policy .
The EU is , and will be , open to all fields of cooperation , but the price of that cooperation can never be looking aside from the alarming attempts to destroy the major achievements of the Orange revolution - free elections and freedom of media .
I support the statement by Commissioner Gucht yesterday that there are common European principles on which we cannot compromise .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution on Ukraine .
I welcome the efforts made by the current governing coalition to re-establish political stability in Ukraine , which is an essential condition for the consolidation of democracy in the country .
A lasting political stability can only be ensured through constitutional changes that establish a clear separation of powers , as well as a proper system of checks and balances between and within the executive , legislative and judicial branches of power .
In view of the statements by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe / Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights ( OSCE / ODIHR ) Election Observation Mission , which considered that international standards had largely been met , the recent elections held in Ukraine are a sign that this country is continuing to develop positively by moving towards future integration into the EU .
However , it is crucial that the Ukrainian politicians and authorities are committed to bringing about political and economic stabilisation soon .
For this to be achieved , the necessary constitutional reforms must be implemented , with consolidation of the rule of law , the establishment of a social market economy and renewed efforts to combat corruption and improve the climate for business and investment .
The recent local elections in Ukraine extended the influence of President Viktor Yanukovych 's party to the regions .
Unfortunately , changes to the electoral system several months prior to the elections , partly switching it back to a majority system , have driven an even bigger wedge between the government and the opposition and have formed the basis for accusations against the government of undemocratic intentions .
The resolution also expresses concern at the recent increase in violations of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly and restrictions on freedom of the media .
I voted for the adoption of the resolution because it calls on Ukraine , which , in the long-term , is aiming for EU Membership , to adopt legislation governing media activities that complies with international standards and underlines the need to strengthen the independence and effectiveness of state institutions .
This is the only way to guarantee the functioning of democracy and the rule of law in the country .
I support the calls made by the resolution 's authors for Kiev to continue to modernise energy supply infrastructure and to implement projects for the diversification of energy sources alongside EU Member States .
I welcome the action plan on visa liberalisation which lays down practical guidelines for its swift implementation : improving the rule of law in Ukraine and implementing fundamental rights .
I believe that improving relations with a neighbouring state - an Eastern Partnership state in this case - entering into trade agreements , increasing information exchange , and helping citizens to travel within the various countries , is a fundamental area that the EU must never give up on .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on Ukraine for this reason .
I fully agree with the contents of the resolution which , with the implementation of the Action Plan , will establish conditions for liberalising short-stay visas in the EU and reinforce the Union 's position with regard to the country 's democratic development after the recent local elections .
The resolution will also allow Ukraine to take part in Union programmes and will define the implementation of new laws on gas now that Kiev has joined the Energy Community .
The new political context and institutional framework in Ukraine , as well as the readiness of newly elected President Viktor Yanukovych and the Ukrainian Parliament ( Verkhovna Rada ) to confirm Ukraine 's determination to join the European Union , are another step towards starting the accession process .
Under Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union , Ukraine may apply for membership of the EU , as can any European state that adheres to the principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which identifies proposals to be communicated to the Ukrainian authorities .
There is still some way to go towards institutional stability that recognises the full participation of all political players , leading to healthy transferrals of power .
I hope that the strong historical , cultural and economic ties that the EU has with the Ukraine will be consolidated and will , in time , allow the entry of the Ukrainian people into the Union .
In view of this , I would like to highlight the importance of strengthening cooperation as regards exchanges for young people and students and the development of scholarship programmes that will allow Ukrainians to become familiar with the EU and its Member States .
This resolution is a relative consensus , stating that Ukraine , in accordance with Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union , may apply for accession to the EU like any other European country that supports the principles of freedom , democracy and respect for human rights , fundamental freedoms and the rule of law .
It also stresses that Ukraine , which intends to join the European Union , has strong historical , cultural and economic links with the European Union and is one of its key partners among the neighbouring countries of the East , as it has a significant influence on the security , stability and prosperity of the whole continent .
After the government elections in Kiev at the beginning of the year , most people thought that it was ' the end ' of Ukraine .
The point is that the new Ukrainian Government is more pragmatic and open to reforms than was expected .
Close cooperation with Ukraine is important if there is at least the smallest chance of ensuring stability in the region .
In recent years , Ukraine has turned into a political football pitch with a struggle between Russia and the West for influence during the Orange Revolution and the last elections .
Whether Ukraine chooses Russia or the West is unimportant .
Now , the EU has the opportunity to implement a new policy on Ukraine that would include Russia .
My country , Lithuania , also has a role to play here .
Security and energy are two areas where there will need to be long-term cooperation to fix some of Kiev 's woes .
However , as Ukraine makes efforts to modernise its economy and better integrate into Europe , it is important for democratic principles and human rights to be respected .
Therefore , I sincerely hope that sustainable progress will be made at the EU-Ukraine summit in Brussels on 22 November .
The fall of the Soviet Union gave the people of Ukraine the first opportunity in their history to decide their future with freedom and national autonomy .
The states and people of Europe owe a debt of solidarity and support to the great people of Ukraine , who paid an enormous price in the Stalinist period and in the Second World War , through the loss of many millions of lives .
The Orange Revolution proved that the people of Ukraine wish to shape their future under democratic conditions where the rule of law is upheld .
This is something that should never be forgotten by those in Ukraine who have political , economic and social responsibilities .
The management of the recent regional elections and the events before and after the elections in Ukraine give one cause to wonder whether the actions of those with political responsibility in Ukraine really do reflect the principles of freedom , democracy and the rule of law .
The present resolution amplifies the position of the European Parliament whereby Ukrainians can be sure of the solidarity of the people of Europe , while also calling on Ukraine 's politicians to respect the will of their people to live by democracy , freedom and the rule of law .
As a signatory , I have voted in favour of this joint motion for a resolution .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that the European Union needs to take a leading role in combating climate change , thereby strengthening its economic competitiveness through energy saving and renewable energy , two sectors that can help improve its energy security and which have great potential in terms of industrial development , innovation , regional development and job creation .
Nevertheless , in order to carry out this role and reap the benefits of competitiveness , the EU will have to amend its trade policies , whether they are bilateral , regional or multilateral , as trade in goods and services is responsible for approximately 20 % of global greenhouse gas emissions .
It should encourage the paradigm shifts that are needed in methods of production and consumption and investment strategies .
It should also be active with regard to emissions from international transport and to climate-friendly technologies .
Despite the distance that the EU still has to go with this issue , important contributions have already been made , especially concerning illegal timber imports , biofuels and emissions in the aviation sector .
The trade in goods and services generates around 20 % of global greenhouse gas emissions .
I am in favour of pursuing commercial policies aimed at differentiating between products and services based on their climate impact .
I voted for this resolution as it identifies the next stages which will enable the European Union to continue along this path , strengthens the positive interaction between trade and climate protection and the tools ensuring consistency between trade and climate , and encourages fair international trade prices , thereby avoiding carbon leakage .
I want to emphasise that the European Union is unable to assume the leading role in the battle against climate change if it fails to strengthen the competitiveness of its economy through saving energy and developing renewable energy sources .
These are two sectors which have massive potential in terms of industrial development , innovation , regional development and job creation , and which can increase Europe 's energy security .
At the UN summit on climate change in December 2009 , the European Union was unfortunately unable to play the role it had hoped to .
As a trailblazer on sustainable development issues , I feel it is important that the EU extend its commitments to include international trade policy .
This is why , on the eve of the Cancún Summit , I and my fellow Members wanted to give a proactive mandate to the delegation that will be defending the European position .
We call on the European Commission to distinguish between imported goods on the basis of their ecological footprint and to establish a carbon monitoring scheme for all trade policies .
In view of the fact that combating climate change affects competitiveness , our resolution calls for all industrial sectors to be made aware of the danger of carbon leakage and for an end to subsidies on fossil fuels , particularly tax exemptions for the aviation industry .
I voted for this resolution .
In the fight against climate change , Europe 's priorities are energy savings and renewable energies .
These help improve EU energy security and offer major potential in terms of industrial development , innovation , regional development and , with the development of green energy , job creation .
However , this fight also has a negative impact on the competitiveness of the entire EU market .
International trade rules are crucial in combating climate change , but the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) agreement does not make direct reference to climate change , food security or the Millennium Development Goals .
I feel that changes in WTO rules are needed to ensure coherence and consistency with the commitments under the Kyoto Protocol and multilateral environment agreements ( MEAs ) .
This would ensure that all countries adhere to the same standards , because currently , by subsidising energy prices and applying no restriction or no quota on CO2 emissions , certain countries have a greater competitive advantage and have no incentive to join the multilateral climate change agreements .
I voted for this report because it identifies strategic objectives and stages the European Union could continue to follow as it seeks a better agreement on climate change .
I would like to underline that the European Union has already taken the first steps in the right direction : on imports of illegal timber , on agrifuels , and on aviation emissions .
I would like to point out that combating climate change is a factor in competitiveness , with Europe 's priorities being energy savings and renewable energies which help improve EU energy security and which offer major potential in terms of industrial development , innovation , regional development and job creation .
As the outcome of the UN climate summit in Copenhagen was a disappointing agreement , the European Union must now be more audible , united and effective .
It should devote more attention to targets for reducing emissions and supporting developing countries that are up to the level of scientists ' recommendations and Parliament 's requests .
Yannick Jadot 's report reminds us that trade in goods and services accounts for approximately 20 % of global greenhouse emissions , a fact that should be taken into account in efforts to tackle climate change .
Although the European Union has put ambitious climate policies in place , trade policies also need to reflect this political priority .
I have to join the rapporteur in deploring the fact that countries which subsidise energy prices and fail to limit or apply quotas to CO2 emissions may enjoy a competitive advantage .
It is a pity that these countries have no interest in subscribing to multilateral agreements on climate change and are therefore encouraging unfair competition .
The European Union 's trade policy is not an end in itself - it must remain a political regulatory tool .
We need to ensure fair competition and refuse to allow our efforts to address climate change to become a disadvantage in terms of world trade .
The European Union 's commitment to curb CO2 emissions cannot be advanced by statements of principle and ideological arguments .
Whatever the consequences of the problem , and without considering the often radical solutions that come out of more or less well-founded studies , we have a responsibility not to cause the environment to change because we are not entirely sure what problems we will encounter .
Trade policies must play their part in this context .
It is easy to ask the Member States to cut their emissions , but it is pointless if the most polluting production plants are relocated to countries outside our borders .
It is politically convenient to promote campaigns about consuming local products , but it makes no sense if raw materials or intermediate products are sourced from the other side of the world in order to produce them .
Acting responsibly also means fine-tuning trade policies on the basis of careful consideration of everything surrounding the issues .
Shutting our eyes means deceiving ourselves most of all .
I voted for this resolution as I feel that the rapporteur 's text is veering towards the European Union assuming bold commitments in the battle against climate change .
This resolution proposes an EU-level reduction of up to 30 % in greenhouse gas emissions .
I support this ambitious proposal , while believing that the EU 's efforts must be backed up globally by the efforts of the major industrialised countries .
Indeed , we need to find a way to involve as well the international state actors which are more reluctant to follow our lead .
In addition , as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I highlighted , by tabling amendments to the original text , the need to create a World Environmental Organisation and introduce environmental criteria in the reform of the GSP .
The EU 's trade policies have an impact on the climate and the EU 's responsibilities cannot be limited to reducing greenhouse gas emissions produced within the Union .
A large majority in the European Parliament voted in favour of this report , which seeks to improve the links between trade and climate action through proposals to discriminate against products in accordance with their environmental impact and to create a carbon monitoring scheme for all trade policies .
It is a pity that the conservatives were unwilling to support some of the more ambitious proposals , but the adoption of this report nevertheless constitutes a clear call to make ecological considerations an integral part of our economy .
I voted in favour of the report on ' international trade policy in the context of climate change imperatives ' since , bearing in mind that trade in goods and services is responsible for approximately 20 % of global greenhouse gas emissions , measures are required to curb global warming at the level of common trade policy .
Following the stalemate of the Copenhagen climate change conference , it is important that the European Union continues along the route it has taken up to this point in terms of making a serious commitment to sustainable development and trying to reduce carbon emissions without jeopardising European industry .
However , any European commitment to reduce emissions cannot lose sight of economic efficiency or jeopardise the economic sustainability of the Member States , which are currently undergoing an unprecedented economic crisis .
We cannot allow increased technology transfer to developing countries to be a way of addressing carbon leakage , and we cannot let policies designed to reduce CO2 emissions condemn European industry .
The outcome of the UN climate summit in Copenhagen was a disappointing agreement which will not be able to keep global warming below 2 ° C. On top of that , it is neither global nor binding .
The EU is far from being the main culprit for this failure .
The EU has , instead , been a leader in combating climate change , and should be encouraged to build on this leadership , although without forgetting the tremendous efforts that our industries have already made in responding to the mandatory reductions in emissions within Europe .
It should be noted that the EU is responsible for around 15 % of global emissions , and it is estimated that this percentage will fall to 10 % in 2030 , while the US , China and India are responsible for half of global emissions , with this figure continuing to rise .
In terms of EU international trade policy in the context of climate change , even if others do not go along with us , our objective should be to focus our efforts on scientific research , technological innovation relating to non-carbon energy sources , energy efficiency and the creation of green jobs , in order to increase our competitiveness .
Implementing most of the measures proposed in this report would not mean taking positive steps to combat climate change .
On the contrary , supporting the Treaty of Lisbon and ' free trade ' , implementing palliative controls on the environmental degradation caused by the liberalisation of trade , will only exacerbate the environmental degradation that is increasingly threatening our planet and its people .
What is at stake here is whether we accept the continuation of the unbridled exploitation of natural resources , workers and peoples in order to serve the dominant capitalist system , which is in permanent crisis .
As far as we are concerned , we do not support it , and we are therefore against the following : continuing to insist on controlling emissions through the emissions trading scheme , which has shown that instead of reducing emissions , it increases them ; greater opening up of the markets and the division of labour at global level , so that EU capital can get its hands on the resources of the countries of the developing world , thereby lowering costs and increasing profits ; and green capitalism , which associates ' climate protection and trade liberalisation ' and ' trade in environmental goods and services ' .
The EU has a responsibility to incorporate aspects of environmental policy relating to trade into its international trade policy .
I support the first steps in this direction already taken by the EU in its trade agreements .
However , there is still more to be done .
I was unable to give my support to Article 48 , however .
Agricultural subsidies are necessary for food security and independence for 500 million Europeans and , for me , this is of central importance .
The subsidies also enable diversity in farming and contribute to landscape conservation .
I voted against the report on international trade policy in the context of climate change imperatives , as I do not agree at all with the rapporteur 's opinion and reasoning .
Its demand to strengthen the objectives for reducing greenhouse gas emissions , regardless of the final results of the international negotiations , would put European businesses at a competitive disadvantage as a result .
The rapporteur 's proposal to compensate for this disadvantage through protectionist measures such as a carbon tax at the Union 's borders and regulated minimum prices for CO2 would increase the competitive deficit compared with other sectors downstream from the industrial production chain .
In addition , these measures would damage the Union 's external trade policy by making it more complicated to conclude future free trade agreements , whether bilateral or multilateral .
The Copenhagen conference a year ago showed that if the European Union moves forward unilaterally , its climate policy is doomed to failure .
This is because its economic partners will not allow European objectives or methods to be dictated to them .
The Union must support businesses in their efforts to reduce their energy consumption while maintaining their international competitiveness .
A more pragmatic approach in international negotiations would be a start .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which sets out how the EU 's trade policy might contribute to tackling climate change .
Mr Jadot wants the EU to assume international leadership on this matter and examine the possibility of a financial transaction tax , reform of the WTO ( particularly its anti-dumping rules ) , prevent the European Investment Bank from granting loans to projects that have a negative impact on the climate and end agricultural export subsidies - all of which I welcome .
Trade in goods and services accounts for approximately 20 % of global greenhouse gas emissions .
In many Member States , consumption-related emissions are higher than levels of production-related emissions .
The European Union has to fight these ' traded ' emissions .
This is the only way that we can effectively begin to combat climate change .
The EU cannot , for example , fund efforts to combat deforestation while , at the same time , incentivising the importation of timber products and biofuels .
The EU must transform its modes of production and consumption , and not restrict itself to outsourcing its emissions .
The EU has to adjust its trade policies towards some form of discrimination of products on the basis of their climate impact , thus stimulating the paradigm shifts required in methods of production and consumption , and of investment strategies .
Our trade partners ' climate policies cannot be jeopardised in order to boost Europe 's market share .
The EU must be active with regard to emissions from international transport and ensure access to climate-friendly technologies for developing countries .
The report indicates this course of action , so I voted in favour .
It is not easy to strike a balance between international trade policy and climate change imperatives , but an effort needs to be made to significantly reduce the levels of greenhouse gas emissions for which international trade bears responsibility .
However , this cannot be done at the cost of the loss of competitiveness for European industry , especially at a time of severe economic crisis and rising unemployment .
We need to establish policies that are environmentally friendly while also boosting the economy and reducing the alarming levels of unemployment .
This report is an attempt to find a solution to the problem of globalisation , a problem that the EU has itself created .
Cheap products are produced in countries outside the European Union under completely different conditions and are then imported cheaply into Europe , putting pressure on European wage levels and weakening our economy .
This report deals with the much higher levels of CO2 produced as a result .
However , it does not seek to impose an appropriate commercial disadvantage on the relevant products , but rather , on the contrary , favours giving away European technology and expertise to the world at large .
This will do nothing to reduce the globalisation problem , but will instead make it much worse .
It is for that reason that I have voted against this report .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution on international trade policy in the context of climate change imperatives , as I welcome the European Council 's ambitious goal of reducing Europe 's greenhouse gas emissions by between 80 and 95 % by 2050 compared to their 1990 levels , this target being necessary for the EU to regain its leading role in climate-related matters , which should stimulate other countries to enter into more ambitious commitments .
I would like to underline the importance of reaching an internationally binding agreement on climate protection , and I strongly support the launching of a public debate on the establishment of a World Environmental Organisation .
I also believe that it is vital to strengthen positive interaction between trade and climate protection , to make international trade prices fairer and avoid carbon leakage , to promote the differentiation of products according to their impact on the climate , to ensure that trade liberalisation does not jeopardise ambitious climate policies , to fully include transport in the trade and climate equation , and to strengthen tools to reconcile trade and climate and enhance EU consistency on climate and trade from the viewpoint of developing countries .
In order to play a leading role in the battle against climate change , the European Union must boost the competitiveness of its economy by saving energy and using renewable energy resources .
These are two areas which can increase its energy security and offer a high level of potential in terms of industrial development , innovation , spatial development and job creation .
At the same time , the EU needs to modify all its trade policies , whether bilateral , regional or multilateral .
This is necessary because trade in goods and services is responsible for around 20 % of greenhouse gas emissions .
This is a challenging project .
However , the EU has already taken the first steps in the right direction with regard to illegal timber imports , biofuels and aviation emissions .
The aim of this report , which is the product of numerous discussions held with businesses , associations , trade union representatives or with the Commission , is to identify the additional steps which would enable the EU to continue in this direction .
The United Nations summit on climate change held in Copenhagen produced a disappointing agreement that is not capable of limiting global warming to below 2 ° C. In the same way , the Copenhagen agreement is neither global nor binding .
The EU is far from being mainly responsible for this failure , but its lack of unity , its inability to speak unanimously , its inability to bring the targets for reducing emissions and supporting developing countries in line with the scientific recommendations and Parliament 's requests often made it an inaudible and ineffective entity .
Why are there so many problems ?
There is certainly not a single answer to that question , but a significant proportion of the problem is due to the fact that many countries have not yet experienced an environmental transformation of their economies on a large scale and continue to doubt the economic , social and democratic advantages .
This is despite the large numbers of studies and successful experiences in terms of energy transition and more sustainable agriculture and transport systems .
We are strongly opposed to this report because we cannot accept its biased approach , which runs completely counter to the economic interests of our society and businesses .
To think that Europe can solve the problem of CO2 emissions into the environment all by itself is a mere pipe dream .
After calling for too much at the Copenhagen conference last year , we have not learnt the lesson and are again preparing a document that calls for too much , this time for the forthcoming climate change conference in Cancún .
We are in no doubt as to the outcome if that text is adopted when it comes before this House : it will be thrown in the bin , just like the last one .
This report seems to be trying to sketch out the main points of the next document to be prepared in connection with the climate change summit ( COP 16 ) .
I cannot follow the logic behind the work of the European Parliament on climate change .
According to many MEPs , the Union should do more and more to reduce emissions - reductions of 30 % , 40 % , 50 % - while in the meantime , we are failing to implement the famous 2020 strategy .
All the more so as the rest of the world is failing to take note of the moves that Europe is making .
At Copenhagen , ' an agreement was reached between the Americans , the Chinese , the Indians , the Brazilians and the Africans ' .
The European Union was not even invited .
At Cancún , there will not be a ' binding ' agreement on the famous CO2 certificates for the good reason that the legislators of the United States , Canada and Australia do not want one , and that China , India , Brazil and others will not allow themselves to be straitjacketed in such a way .
The European Union should invest more in new technologies , and not in activities which only serve financial speculation .
Corporate social responsibility in international agreements takes us towards a better governance of the global economy , encourages a fairer , more social , more humane globalisation and aids sustainable development .
At a time of globalisation , I support this proposal , which aims to make international business practices more moral .
Globalisation and the financial and social crisis have increased the need for more stringent rules for the world economy , as international trade policy is currently designed to serve only the interests of a few economic players , which have taken advantage of market liberalisation to externalise part of their production and to diversify their supply arrangements , drawing on countries where production costs are low and regulatory regimes are less stringent .
I therefore accept the principles proposed in this report , which are aimed at conducting trade in a manner consistent with the EU 's objectives , especially its foreign policy .
This can be achieved through the implementation of corporate social and environmental responsibility in trade , so that they stop breaching the principles of social responsibility .
This is a form of social dumping which must be regulated by agreeing the proposals in this report , especially those that relate to mechanisms for judicial cooperation between the EU and partner countries , in order to prosecute multinational corporations for serious infringements of environmental rules or fundamental rights , and through the adoption of a new initiative by the Commission .
Since the end of the Second World War , the European Union has benefited massively from the opening up of international markets .
At the same time , the European social model that has been linked to globalisation in Europe has , unfortunately , had little impact on international trade negotiations .
This is the purpose of the resolution that I voted for this week .
With this resolution text , I wanted to urge the European Union to take a strong line on social dumping .
The resolution calls for the notion of corporate social responsibility , a concept recognised by the OECD , ILO and United Nations , to be incorporated in the generalised system of preferences .
It also invites the Commission to undertake new impact assessments to examine the effect that trade agreements have on European SMEs .
Lastly , the resolution states that all new agreements should automatically include a corporate social responsibility clause .
As in the field of sustainable development , the European Union needs to put its money where its mouth is , upholding its social model and using that to drive progress in tandem with globalisation .
I voted for this report because it sets out the European Parliament 's proposals which provide for concrete measures to promote corporate social responsibility in the context of the European Union 's commercial policy .
I would like to point out that the international economic and financial crisis has engendered a social crisis throughout the world , and this has merely increased the need for stringent rules to ensure that the world economy is more effectively supervised and that it does not develop to the detriment of our societies .
Thus , in Europe 's case , trade policy must be conducted in a manner consistent with all the Union 's objectives and , in particular , the objectives of its external policy .
Furthermore , it is very important for Europe to ensure that its common commercial policy does not undermine , but rather helps to safeguard , its social model and its environmental policy .
I agree with the European Parliament 's call for the European Commission to improve its sustainability impact assessment model , in order to properly reflect the economic , social , human rights and environmental implications , including climate change mitigation goals , of trade negotiations .
Moreover , the Commission should follow up on the trade agreements with the EU 's partner countries by carrying out , prior to and after the signing of a trade agreement , sustainability impact assessment studies , taking into account vulnerable sectors in particular .
The EU plays a crucial role in the efforts to create a new governance .
With this aim in mind , consistency must be promoted among the policies of international institutions .
It is becoming clear that the EU must reflect on the trade policies which it wishes to adopt when reviewing its trade strategy .
If it wants to send out a clear anti-protectionist message , it must ensure that international trade is fair .
The European Union must uphold its commercial interests while complying with and ensuring that others comply with its standards and values .
We must not forget that businesses are bound in Europe by strict social and environmental rules .
The EU must be able to require the same from its trading partners , particularly from emerging countries , and insist on quality and sustainability , particularly for food products coming into its territory , in order to preserve fair and equitable trade .
The Union must establish a dialogue with its partners and find common ground for conveying its values .
Based on this effort to be transparent and establish dialogue , in the light of the new powers it has been granted , the European Parliament has a key role to play , with its duty being to give the negotiations a political and moral mandate .
Amidst economic globalisation and international trade , there has been an increase in competitive pressure between countries , which has sometimes led to serious abuses of human rights and the environment .
I voted in favour of this report as I think it is particularly pertinent in ensuring that more sustainable policies are developed which take account of social and environmental issues , particularly by promoting corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) .
It is crucial that European corporations which invest and operate in other areas act in line with European values and internationally agreed standards .
In particular , this report proposes that future trade agreements negotiated by the European Union should contain a chapter on sustainable development which includes a CSR clause , which I consider to be crucial .
It emerges from the report under examination that the aim is to incorporate into business attitudes those values that have always marked out the European Union and its precursors .
The aim is highly commendable , provided it is implemented correctly and does not place burdens on our businesses that hinder their competitiveness , as this is already constrained by rules that are too inflexible in areas such as labour rights and environmental standards ( although no one in the Member States questions the social benefits that come with the bloating of cost structures ) .
I therefore believe we have to act cautiously , as this is not the right time to add burdens unless everyone acknowledges the need for them and is willing to accept them .
Foreign investment is a major economic issue for emerging and developing countries .
However , poor social and environmental legislation in these countries means that there is a danger of unreasonable working conditions , human rights violations and environmental damage .
This is why the European Parliament has called for a corporate social responsibility clause to be included in the trade agreements signed by the European Union which would apply to undertakings that invest in developing countries .
The clause would require these undertakings , their subsidiaries and supply chain to give clear and demonstrable commitments regarding the social and environmental impact of their business .
The clause would also allow victims to initiate legal proceedings .
This is the best solution for ensuring better social protection and environmental standards the whole world over .
I voted for this report because it advocates the need for a new regulatory approach to international trade .
These standards , which are more effective and better implemented , should contribute to the development of more sustainable policies that really take social and environmental concerns into account , not just profit for companies at any price .
The principles that guide corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) are fully recognised at international level , and focus on the expectation of responsible behaviour by companies , which presupposes respect for the legislation in force , especially as regards taxation , employment , labour relations , human rights , the environment , consumers ' rights and also their involvement in the fight against corruption .
I therefore think it is very positive that the EU is now incorporating a chapter on sustainable development , which will include CSR clauses , into future trade agreements .
The European Union supports the objective of promoting corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) .
The Union must ensure that the external policies it implements make an effective contribution to the sustainable and social development of the countries concerned .
It must also ensure that the actions of European corporations , wherever they invest and operate , are in accordance with European values and internationally agreed norms .
Pursuant to Article 207 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the EU 's common trade policy must be conducted ' in the context of the principles and objectives of the Union 's external action , ' and , pursuant to Article 3 , it should contribute , among other things , ' to the sustainable development of the Earth , solidarity and mutual respect among peoples , in particular , the rights of the child , as well as to the strict observance and the development of international law , including respect for the principles of the United Nations Charter ' .
I voted in favour of the report on corporate social responsibility in international trade agreements .
Globalisation has given rise to fierce competition between countries which , in turn , has led to unacceptable practices by many multinationals in developing countries : failure to respect core labour standards , human rights violations and environmental damage .
Parliament is calling for a clause on corporate social responsibility to be included in all international trade agreements signed by the European Union .
This clause would require the regular publication of reports detailing the social and environmental impact of each undertaking 's activities , taking into account all subsidiaries and the supply chain .
The report calls for the creation of legal cooperation mechanisms between the EU and signatory states and under trade agreements in order to guarantee recourse to the justice system for victims where multinationals and their subsidiaries fail to comply with social and environmental legislation .
I agreed with the report because , as you know , the expansion in international trade is justified if it contributes to economic development , to job creation and to improved living standards .
Only then is trade liberalisation regarded as something positive and accepted .
By contrast , when it destroys jobs or undermines living conditions , social rights and the environment , it gives rise to very vocal opposition .
The common commercial policy cannot therefore be reduced to a set of measures designed to serve only the immediate interests of a few economic actors .
The economic and social impact of trade liberalisation varies very substantially from country to country and that impact must be managed and sometimes offset , because liberalisation is a process in which there are always winners and losers .
The expansion in international trade is universally beneficial only if certain conditions are met , hence the need to manage the liberalisation of trade , including practical arrangements and the volume of trade , a need which has come to be felt even more strongly as the globalisation process has accelerated .
Europe , and the international community as a whole , are thus faced with an imperative : they must incorporate genuine guarantees concerning sustainable development and labour rights into the rules governing international trade .
That imperative , which is consistent with the objectives of both the United Nations and the European Union , chimes exactly with public expectations in Europe .
Hitherto , the link between trade and corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) has been tenuous at best .
Incorporating CSR principles into the rules governing international trade would enable the EU to exert pressure on undertakings to improve their behaviour and on the States which sign trade agreements with it to comply with labour and environmental standards .
I voted in favour of the report , as I believe that companies engaging in trade have a certain responsibility towards the people that work for them .
Firstly , the inclusion of social responsibility clauses in the trade agreements with third countries creates equal conditions for the companies in the EU and in these third countries and provides protection for the workers .
However , when the clauses are laid down , the principle of proportionality must be taken into account .
They must represent a balance and must not be set out in such a way that they impede trade to such a degree that it first has a detrimental effect on the workers and , subsequently , on consumers too .
The economic and social impact of trade liberalisation varies from one country to another and must be kept in check in most cases .
The common commercial policy must be consistent with the European Union 's overall objectives and not merely serve the short-term interests of major economic operators .
I voted for this report as I think that the integration of corporate social responsibility principles into international trade regulations will provide the Union with the opportunity to exert a certain pressure on businesses and on states which sign trade agreements with the European Union to ensure compliance with labour standards .
This will allow us to ensure that the external policies we implement will actually contribute to sustainable social and economic development , while businesses will comply with our internationally agreed regulations and values .
in writing . - I welcome my colleague Harlem Desir 's report on corporate social responsibility .
He considers CSR to be an effective tool for improving competitiveness , skills and training opportunities , occupational safety and the working environment , protecting workers ' rights and the rights of local and indigenous communities , promoting a sustainable environmental policy and encouraging exchanges of good practice at local , national , European and world level .
He does , however , make it clear that they cannot supplant labour regulations or general or sectoral collective agreements .
Corporate social responsibility can be illusory and , while limiting certain types of abuses , it can give the impression that the other types are acceptable .
Even so , it can provide a conceptual and legal framework for state intervention in production , and the social and ecological conditions under which it takes place .
On this objective , I support this report .
The principles governing legislation in force , especially as regards taxation , employment , labour relations , human rights , the environment , consumers ' rights and also their involvement in the fight against corruption , must be adopted by all companies operating in international trade .
The incorporation of these kinds of clauses into future trade agreements to be negotiated is therefore paramount .
This report also seeks greater regulation of business by the European Union .
However , the European Union has frequently shown that its restrictions do not strengthen business or improve quality of life , but tend to be more counter-productive .
Happily , the rapporteur is aware of how important it is to put a cap on the worst excesses of globalisation .
He demands quite specifically that international trade should only be liberalised to the extent that will benefit all levels of society and provided that this improves the quality of life .
It is for that reason that I abstained from voting .
After the climate , energy and food crises , the international financial crisis , which has resulted in a widespread social crisis , simply adds the demand for strong rules to ensure that the global economy is better integrated and does not develop to the detriment of society .
International trade , which lies at the heart of globalisation , does not escape from this demand .
For people anywhere in the world , the development of international trade is , in fact , justified only where it contributes to economic development , employment and improved living standards .
It is only on that condition that an opening up to trade is seen as positive and acceptable .
Conversely , it arouses very strong opposition when it destroys jobs or affects standards of living , social rights and the environment .
Trade policy cannot therefore be reduced just to the immediate interests of a few economic operators .
For Europe , trade policy must be consistent with all the Union 's objectives , particularly those of its foreign policy .
It is , in fact , one of the levers of foreign policy intended to help regulate globalisation .
The European Parliament resolution on corporate social responsibility in international trade agreements is intended as a warning and a step forward on the path towards a new social model based on ethics and social responsibility in the world of business .
The failure of the welfare state as we know it requires the creation of new realities , and corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) can be a driving force behind a new paradigm for change .
Indeed , global problems have been exacerbated by the financial crisis and its social consequences .
The principles governing CSR are fully recognised at international level , whether by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) , the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) or the United Nations ( UN ) .
Promoting CSR is an objective supported by the European Union , and it is one that I endorse .
In view of this , I would also like to stress my support for a Trade and Decent Work Committee within the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , which would provide a forum for the discussion of issues including labour standards , especially as they relate to the employment of children , and CSR , as it relates to international trade .
In this resolution , the EP states that global challenges have been heightened by the financial crisis and its social consequences , and have raised global debates regarding the need for a new regulatory approach and issues of governance in the global economy , including in international trade .
It gives the view that the new , more effective and better executed rules should contribute to the development of more sustainable policies that genuinely take social and environmental concerns into account , and states that globalisation has increased competitive pressure between countries to attract foreign investors and competition between businesses .
At times , this has resulted in governments tolerating serious human rights and social abuses and significant damage to the environment in order to attract trade and investment .
Since its inception , the European Union has been striving to achieve its goal of creating a single market .
Competition law has helped to underpin those efforts .
Far from seeking to favour large corporate groups , competition policy is actually intended to protect smaller operators from practices that distort competition .
Agreements between undertakings - on supporting research programmes , for example - can conceal a restrictive trade practice designed to eliminate a rival .
Yet , the dynamism of the European economy is partly linked to that self-same ability to cooperate .
Consequently , the European Commission has adopted a pragmatic policy approach .
The Commission regularly sets out categories of agreements allowed to circumvent the strict competition rules where this will prove beneficial .
The European Commission is involved in wide-ranging consultations now that these regulations are up for review .
Overall , the proposed legislation has taken on board the positions expressed by the European Parliament and is in line with our views on the subject .
I have therefore voted in favour of the text .
The two block exemption regulations , the specialisation BER ( Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 2658 / 2000 ) and the research and development BER ( Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 2659 / 2000 ) will expire on 31 December 2010 .
The Commission intends to adopt two new block exemption regulations amending the previous ones and certain guidelines so that stakeholders would help to analyse and understand whether their cooperation agreements are in tune with competition rules .
There is currently a new set of rules derived from Commission and Court case-law in need of codification .
I supported this resolution , in particular , the European Parliament 's aim of ensuring legal certainty for stakeholders .
I feel that when establishing guidelines , the EU should take into account the experience of the EU national competition authorities and competition authorities worldwide .
I feel that it would be beneficial to begin international negotiations on convergent competition rules worldwide , given that many agreements and practices are covered by different competition regimes , which prevent stakeholders from competing in the market on a level playing field .
A healthy market economy cannot do without constant , continual monitoring of the state of competition within it .
Such monitoring , however , cannot take the ideological form of a set of parameters applying to everyone .
In fact , the situation in every market niche should be examined on a case by case basis in order to carry out a fair evaluation of them in terms of respecting those principles which , if applied mechanically , would end up generating paradoxical and anti-economic situations .
The Commission therefore deserves praise for trying to keep control of horizontal cooperation in specialisation agreements as well as in research and development agreements , two somewhat sensitive sectors , the particular features of which justify the special treatment they receive .
Horizontal agreements between companies , accepted in line with legal provisions , are a form of business collaboration that is often essential into order to create considerable economic benefits which ultimately end up benefiting the market and consumers .
They are normally cooperation activities that do not involve any coordination in competitive behaviour by the market parties , so they have no effect on competitiveness , but promote gains which would otherwise be impossible .
For this reason , they are exempt from implementing Article 101 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
This is especially relevant for the specialisation agreements , and the research and development agreements set out in Regulations ( EC ) No 2659 / 2000 and No 2658 / 2000 , which the Commission is now proposing to revise .
At a time when Europe needs investment in research and development and should be investing in innovation , it is vital that the legal prerequisites for the creation of the necessary synergies between companies operating in the market are put in place , in compliance with competition law .


In accordance with Articles 101 ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) , 103 ( 1 ) and 105 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , forms of horizontal cooperation are allowed between companies , provided that these agreements contribute to improved production or distribution of products , or to promoting technological or economic progress , and that there are benefits for consumers .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that , given the significant legislative changes since the adoption of the regulations and horizontal guidelines , and the subsequent experience which the Commission has gained in the application of these rules , there is a need to codify a new set of rules issued by the Commission that takes account of European Court of Justice case-law in this area .
I agree with the proposal because horizontal agreements usually raise more competition concerns than vertical agreements and therefore , I am pleased that the Commission is maintaining a more restrictive approach on setting the market share threshold as regards horizontal agreements .
I also take the view that such an approach should not , however , lead to a more complicated regulatory framework .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
I welcome the fact that the Commission has opened two different public consultations in connection with the review of the competition rules applicable to horizontal cooperation agreements .
The resolution stresses the importance of listening to and considering as much as possible in the decision-making process the views of the stakeholders in order to achieve a realistic and balanced regulatory framework .
The review of the competition rules applicable to horizontal cooperation agreements is crucial in order to increase collaboration between companies , especially in terms of R & D , and thus helps to create synergies for greater development in all areas of cooperation .
We must , however , bear in mind that the purpose of this type of cooperation is not to flout competition rules .
Horizontal cooperation agreements can bring considerable economic advantages .
Thus , competitors share the risk , costs are saved , investments , know-how and product quality improve and variety and innovations can be more quickly implemented .
On the other hand , horizontal cooperation agreements can reduce competition if the competitors set prices , fix outputs or force the division of the markets .
Clear agreements which ensure stability would therefore be very welcome .
I am abstaining from the vote , because some points are still not worded sufficiently clearly .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the review of the competition rules applicable to horizontal cooperation agreements as it takes account of the Commission 's activity , particularly its transparency in its dealings with Parliament and the spirit of openness with which it began this process of revision , aiming to listen to all the stakeholders .
Legal certainty should be considered whenever a piece of legislation is reviewed .
In accordance with the resolution , I believe that it is crucial that once the final new regulatory framework has been adopted , a summary note and new Frequently Asked Questions should explain this framework in detail to all market players .
I share Parliament 's concern that this should be regarded as an integrated regulatory framework on the protection of intellectual property rights .
Intellectual property rights make a key contribution to innovation , so it is vital that they are respected .
In this resolution , the EP welcomes the fact that the Commission has opened two different public consultations on the review of the competition rules applicable to horizontal cooperation agreements .
It highlights the importance of listening to and examining the points of view of the interested parties as much as possible in the decision-making process in order to achieve a realistic and balanced regulatory framework .
It also calls on the Commission to clearly indicate at the end of the review process how it has taken into account the contributions of the interested parties .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Iraq - in particular , the death penalty ( including the case of Tariq Aziz ) and attacks against Christian communities
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Iraq - in particular , the death penalty ( including the case of Tariq Aziz ) and attacks against Christian communities .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 12 November , a German newspaper ran the headline ' Iraqi Christians hunted to death ' .
The picture accompanying the article showed a Christian family sheltering in a church in the capital Baghdad .
The family had taken refuge in this house of worship after Islamic terrorists had begun a determined attack on the homes of Christians .
The revolting bloodbath of 31 October during a service in the Syriac Catholic cathedral was certainly , therefore , no isolated incident .
The Christian minority in Mesopotamia has been exposed to outright religious persecution for years .
That is the sad reality in Iraq .
Witness the massive exodus of Iraqi Christians .
Since 2003 , their numbers in Iraq have dropped from 850 000 to 350 000 , 115 000 of whom have been internally displaced .
What can these courageous ' hangers-on ' - in quotation marks , because Iraq is where they belong - expect from Europe ?
After all , this is a Christian minority whose historical roots in Iraq can be traced back to the 1st century AD and include the world 's oldest churches and monasteries .
I would plead for three concrete European relief efforts for Iraqi Christians .
First of all , support Iraqi Christians who have fled to the Kurdish region to build a new life .
Give them a future within their own country .
The same is true for the Christian minority in the plain of Nineveh .
European aid for vocational training , jobs for young people and loans for new businesses .
Secondly , the European institutions should urge the Iraqi Government - and this is a matter of extreme urgency - to drop the statement of the holder 's religion from identity cards , because this omission would significantly increase the personal security of religious minorities , especially Christians .
In addition , the existing practice of declaring the holder 's religion on identity cards is currently resulting in discrimination in the job market and in people converting to other religions , amongst other things .
Thirdly , at parliamentary level , I would ask our Delegation for Relations with Iraq to show the five Christian members of the Iraqi Parliament our willingness to assist them in word and deed in this precarious period .
Anyway , Madam President , Commissioner , I , of course , welcome all parliamentary contacts between Europe and Iraq designed to support this young democracy and I am also very pleased that my fellow member , Mr Mauro , will soon be presenting a report on the European Union and Iraq to the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
That is very important .
Finally , the Council and the Commission - the Council is not actually represented here , but never mind - I am counting on you continuing to make vigorous efforts to persuade the Iraqi authorities to do what they can to ensure at least the bare survival of Christian communities and churches in the historic land of Mesopotamia .
Madam President , since the Iraq War , this country , instead of being liberated from a military dictator , is sinking into violence .
The spectacle of the hanging of Saddam Hussein was not in any way a means of reducing this violence .
On the contrary , it has exacerbated tensions in this country .
You know that the European Union fights incessantly against the death penalty .
We believe that by abolishing the death penalty in Europe , we have contributed to making a step forward in the progress of humanity .
That is why we find it disgraceful that Tariq Aziz , who worked with Saddam Hussein , and two of his assistants , may be hanged .
This is not because of the personality of Tariq Aziz , who , as I knew very well , was , in fact , a remarkable personality who unfortunately participated in a totalitarian system .
However , I think - and I say this as a personal opinion - that , especially at the last moment , he made major efforts to try to open up his country .
Yet it is not the case of Tariq Aziz that is important .
We cannot have the hanging of Tariq Aziz on our television screens tomorrow as a symbol of the liberation of Iraq .
That is why I am calling on my fellow Members to vote for this resolution , which also includes a section , which I agree with , on the persecution of Christians in Iraq .
author . - Madam President , the death penalty violates the right to life as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
It is the ultimate denial of human rights .
Nonetheless , in 2009 , 18 countries carried out death sentences .
Iraq executed more than 120 people and Iran carried out as many as 388 executions .
The countries which use the death penalty - including the United States and China , and we can continue the list - say that people are executed in the name of justice .
The death penalty has nothing to do with justice .
The European Union is strongly committed to working towards the abolition of the death penalty everywhere and is striving to achieve universal acceptance of this principle .
This resolution is an important reminder of the fact that we need to continue the fight against the death penalty .
We appeal to the government of Iraq to abolish the use of the death penalty .
Madam President , dark clouds of Islamic extremism are gathering over the whole world and , in particular , over the Middle East .
In Pakistan , Asia Bibi has said that , despite her reprieve , as far as the extremists are concerned , she is still a threat .
Unfortunately , she will have to emigrate to another country .
Christians in Iraq , too , have already fled en masse .
They are systemic victims of the extremists .
In Iraq , a religious community that has lived there much longer than the extremists have is being driven away in a very brutal fashion .
That is why the Christians deserve our support .
They must be allowed to remain together , so that they can practise their faith .
I therefore call on the Commission to give this issue top priority .
Strong European support is badly needed to moderate groups in Iraq .
Then , we might be able to prevent Islamic extremists from shutting and locking the church doors in Iraq for good .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance fully supports two points in the resolution .
First of all , we need to continue our fight against capital punishment , as well as our appeals for the capital sentences passed on Tariq Aziz and two other former officers to be revoked .
Secondly , every person in Iraq must be allowed to practise their faith in the country , and we condemn any attack on that freedom .
We are pleased with those two points , but my group is less pleased with what is missing from the resolution .
It appears that the European Parliament refuses to discuss the many human rights abuses in Iraq , for which we , as Member States of the EU , have been partly responsible .
Foreign troops have allowed Iraqi security forces to mistreat prisoners , and even torture and murder them .
In March this year , the United Kingdom stood convicted of this by the European Court of Human Rights .
The recent revelations by Wikileaks have confirmed that these practices have occurred and they are unacceptable .
For these reasons , we would have liked to have seen a strong condemnation of these practices committed by both American and European troops .
Nor would a reference to the call of Navi Pillay , the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , for a thorough investigation of , on the one hand , the allegations of illegal abductions and , on the other , of abuse and murder in Iraqi prisons , have been out of place in the resolution .
The investigation of the matter recently launched by the United Kingdom should be followed more widely and the Member States who have contributed their forces to the area must hold their people accountable for their misdeeds .
The Commission and the Council , too , should insist on this ; remaining silent is no longer an option .
Madam President , I think we all agree that the attempt to execute Tariq Aziz , Prime Minister of Iraq during Saddam Hussein 's regime , is clearly a tragic farce .
This is a man who is already in prison for life .
We do not disagree with that , but I do not think that we can discuss and condemn this attempt at execution without , at the same time , mentioning the more than 900 death sentences that have already been carried out by the Iraqi Presidential Council .
We are compelled by the obligation to assign equal weight to those who are very well known as to those who are less well known .
Obviously , we also agree with the condemnation of Islamic terrorism against Christian communities , but we cannot silence the 30 000 who are being detained without charge in Iraq due to the military occupation , nor can we ignore the way in which this has provoked conflict and problems within Iraqi society .
The problem with this resolution is that it takes account of so little .
My group therefore has its own resolution .
Madam President , during this debate on the situation in Iraq , on the sentencing to death of Tariq Aziz and on the situation of Christians in Iraq , I wanted to reiterate the total opposition of my group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , to the death penalty .
However , I would also like , above all , to express the indignation of my group about the sharp deterioration in the situation of those Christians residing in Iraq , and to express our strong feelings about the recent deadly attacks that struck the Christian communities in Iraq , notably , the cowardly hostage taking in the Syriac Cathedral of Baghdad on 31 October , which left 58 dead .
We also , of course , want to express our solidarity with the victims and their families .
On the occasion of this debate , we would like to appeal solemnly and seriously to the Iraqi authorities to do everything to ensure the safety and integrity of the Christians in Iraq ; to protect all places of worship in Iraq , to guarantee the religious freedom of the Iraqi Christians , but also that of all religious communities and all religious minorities , and to work on reducing interethnic violence .
What is really at stake here is peace , national reconciliation in this country and the defence of our values of liberty and tolerance .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the death sentence for Tariq Aziz and the drama of the persecuted Christians are subjects that should perhaps have been kept logically separate .
Yet , perhaps it is good that we are debating them together , because what we want to say in this resolution is that we want justice in Iraq and justice for Iraq .
We want justice in Iraq because those Christians who have fallen victim to the fundamentalist aims of many of the groups fighting for power are certainly innocent .
We want justice for Iraq because the process currently under way to restore stability and democracy to that country does not deserve to have its face scarred by the killing of a man who may be guilty , but who surely does not deserve to be put to death .
I therefore believe that the instrument of a resolution may have even more practical effects if we also carry these judgments and topics across into the content of the agreement between the EU and Iraq .
This agreement can , in practical terms , stipulate that we impose conditions for there to be economic agreements , and these conditions involve respect for human rights and respect for Iraqi Christians .
( PT ) Madam President , Iraq and the Iraqis inherited and suffered a whole catalogue of horrors at the hands of the dictator , Saddam Hussein .
Following that , since 2003 it has suffered terrible violations of human rights , including arrests , abductions and extrajudicial killings under the foreign military occupation .
This makes it particularly significant that President Talabani has said that , as he is a socialist and a humanist , he would refuse to sign the execution order for Tariq Aziz .
I think that it is crucial that we state in Parliament that we are opposed to the death penalty , regardless of whom the person is and whatever their religion , and that we are not merely striving for the abolition of the death penalty that has been handed down to Tariq Aziz because he is a Christian .
Obviously , I and all my fellow Members completely deplore the attacks against the Christian community in Iraq , a community that makes up part of the Iraqi cultural tradition and that the Iraqis , more than anyone , value and know how to preserve .
However , we cannot forget that those who have suffered most from the terrorist and sectarian violence in Iraq are , in fact , Muslims , whether they be Shiites , Sunnis or others .
It is more important than ever that we , the European Union , apply ourselves to our relations with Iraq and discuss this issue with our colleagues in the Iraqi Parliament , particularly the need to abolish the death penalty .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , in Iraq , the death penalty was suspended after the US-led invasion in 2003 but reintroduced in August 2004 .
Since then , hundreds of people have been sentenced to death and many have been executed .
Bringing perpetrators of human rights violations to justice is crucial for a stable future in any country , and that includes Iraq .
Politicians and former politicians should be no exception , as they bear ultimate and often direct responsibility for such violations .
It is well known that the human rights violations in Iraq , under the responsibility of Saddam Hussein , Tariq Aziz and the like , assumed grave proportions .
Fair trials and due process are indispensable in ensuring reconciliation and taking a constructive step towards a better future .
The European Union is a community of values and a unique place in the world , especially when it comes to the death penalty , which we have abolished altogether .
In relations with other countries , whether the United States , China , Iran or Iraq , we appeal to them not to deny people the ultimate right - the right to life - as a form of punishment .
Jalal Talabani has stated that he will not sign the order for Tariq Aziz 's execution , and we welcome that sign .
It should be part of a society based on the rule of law , in which the human rights of all citizens are respected , and the EU is ready to help the Iraqi Government develop in that direction and ensure the just accountability of human rights perpetrators .
The stability of Iraq is fragile and may well be disturbed by state-endorsed executions .
Signing and ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , as well as Protocol 13 to the Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , would help to solidify Iraq 's stance against human rights violations .
It would also be a welcome step towards its inclusion in the international community .
Madam President , my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , has not participated in the joint resolution on this subject , nor in the Tibet resolution .
These Thursday afternoon sittings are taking a more and more surreal turn in this House , both in the emptiness that we observe and in the subjects addressed and the way in which they are dealt with .
The prisms through which some here constantly look at this or that country or this or that subject go against the universalist and indivisible conception of human rights as detailed in the international texts that we claim to stand for .
This way of seeing and doing things damages the credibility of the European Union in this area , and plays into the hands of those who say that the Europeans have a Western vision of human rights , and that they are seeking once again to impose their model on others .
Ladies and gentlemen , I join you in denouncing death sentences , including that of Tariq Aziz , and executions , which are very numerous in Iraq , but which also affect women and children .
I would have liked us to denounce in the same way the situation of thousands of people detained without reason , without trial and tortured .
I would have liked us to denounce the abuses of power committed by the Iraqi forces and by the occupying forces , and also to denounce child soldiers and - especially today , on the International Day of Violence against Women - the violence to which women in Iraq fall victim , in the context of this conflict .
I would also have liked us to denounce the way in which the United States has abandoned the Ashraf camp without concerning itself with the hundreds of people who lived there .
For all these reasons , Madam President , the GUE / NGL Group will abstain on this resolution , as it will on the one concerning Tibet .
( DE ) Madam President , on 10 November , five people were killed in a bomb attack against Christians and just a few days previously , there was an attack on a Catholic cathedral .
One hundred people were taken hostage and 40 died as a result .
In recent years , 900 000 Christians have fled Iraq .
These events offer a sad illustration of the situation for Christians in Iraq and in the entire Middle East region .
These are not isolated incidents , but rather a global trend that is being played out on Europe 's borders , as well as in Egypt and also , occasionally , in Turkey .
The EU should be able to exert enough pressure to combat discrimination against Christians .
We only have to think of the northern part of Cyprus , where approximately 150 churches have been destroyed or converted into mosques since the Turkish occupation and where only one church remains where the Christian population is permitted to celebrate one mass each year .
Remember , this is not Iraq I am talking about , but an island in the Mediterranean on the edge of Europe .
I believe that it makes sense to introduce a permanent system for monitoring Christian persecution .
Concrete actions would have to follow ; for example , the consistent inclusion of clauses prohibiting the persecution of Christians in international trade agreements with the EU .
We cannot have a situation where we want to do business but are content to turn a blind eye when Christians are persecuted .
I would like to close with a few words about the former foreign minister , Mr Aziz : Even former members of the Saddam Hussein regime are entitled to the due process of the law .
Revenge executions have no place here .
Even these former ministers deserve a fair trial .
This cannot be accepted , particularly in a young country that aims to become a democratic state .
For this reason , I would call on the EU to take the appropriate steps and to proceed clearly .
( NL ) Madam President , in the safe environment of the European Union , we see faith and going to church as a private matter .
In Iraq , however , being open about your Christian faith has almost become a mark of exceptional courage .
Today , we have rightly condemned the horrific attack of Sunday , 31 October , but in the meantime , new attacks have taken place , once again claiming human life .
Last Monday , two brothers were killed in the town of Mosul .
My fellow Member , Mr Belder , has given you the numbers of the ever dwindling group of Iraqi Christians who remain in Iraq , at least 100 000 of whom have also become displaced in their own country .
This , surely , seems to be a targeted strategy by some groups to drive away this population group .
Commissioner , we , the EU , cannot afford to just stand and look on .
First of all , the Union should , of course , address the Iraqi authorities , who , sadly , are still in a weak position , and support them in taking action .
However , I would like to go a step further and , indeed , as Mr Mauro has said , include as a priority in the partnership agreement with Iraq which we are debating now a safe living environment for Iraqi Christians in Iraq .
As Vice-Chair of the Delegation for Relations with Iraq , I will continue to monitor the situation and will be happy to hear what the Commission thinks about this .
( FI ) Madam President , it is a shocking and intolerable state of affairs that again , many innocent people have had to suffer in Iraq on account of their religious beliefs .
Attacks against religious communities are always indefensible everywhere they take place .
The right of religious groups to assemble and practise their religion must be unconditional .
The European Union is not just concerned about Christians .
Freedom of religion and conscience must apply to everyone equally .
Safeguarding this universal human right is also the best guarantee we have that conflicts can be prevented before they start and be resolved .
This resolution is , in my opinion , a message that the European Parliament robustly supports the Iraqi people , urging them to act against violence and terror and fight resolutely for democracy and universal human dignity .
Madam President , more than 50 Christians have been murdered in Iraq by extremist groups in one month .
It is a special responsibility of the new Iraqi Government to guarantee safety , justice and equal rights to all religious communities .
Only in this way can Baghdad win respect and build trust , not only internally , but also in relations with the EU .
The situation in many countries of the Middle East , from where traditional Christian minorities are forced to flee , is alarming .
Most Iraqi Assyrians are now internally displaced people .
I think it is highly important that , in conducting our common foreign policy , Ms Ashton should regularly raise the problem of religious freedom and that future EU treaties with third countries should include a clause on respect for religious freedom .
( LT ) Madam President , over the past year , the Christian community in Iraq has experienced an escalation in religious violence and persecution .
Christians are fleeing Iraq , terrified of bombings and massacres .
While condemning the horrifying terrorist attacks , if truth be told , I would like to say that the US invasion exacerbated the situation in this regard , and it is therefore the responsibility of the USA to improve the situation .
In general , religious and national divisions and mutual hatred in Iraq have reached such proportions that the country is in serious danger .
The democratic world expects the Iraqi Government to abolish the death penalty as soon as possible .
I welcome the Iraqi President 's decision not to sign the execution order for Tariq Aziz , but we will watch closely how the Iraqi Parliament behaves in this case .
( DE ) Madam President , it is a scandal that , after 2 000 years of the presence of Christian communities in the geographical area now known as Iraq , these communities are threatened with disappearance , particularly in view of the intervention by the West in recent years and the fact that these events are taking place under a democratic government that has the support of the European Union .
We cannot tolerate this .
Apart from the general issues of religious freedom , this is an absolute scandal and I welcome the fact that a number of Christian bishops from Iraq are to travel to Strasbourg in December in order to inform us in detail of the situation of their religious communities .
We must be clear that it is not enough to make the occasional tired gesture , but that we have a genuine responsibility here .
Eighty percent of Europeans are Christians .
Naturally , we are in favour of religious freedom in general , but who is going to look after the interests of these people if we do not ?
These are people who even survived the vile regime of Saddam Hussein in their country , but whose very existence is now under threat .
That is why the European Parliament must focus its human rights work in this area .
I would call on Baroness Ashton to do the same and to keep us regularly informed of the situation of these Christians .

( PL ) Madam President , there is no end to the murder of Christians ; today in Iraq , Nigeria , Egypt and Afghanistan , yesterday in Sudan , India and Indonesia , and tomorrow , if they have not already been killed , if they have not already fallen victim to pogroms , violence , rape and aggression , they will have to live like pariahs , hiding their faith even in places where their cultural , political and economic roots are much older than the appearance of Islam on their homeland .
Despite the appeals of Western Muslim intellectuals , nothing is happening in their countries to ensure their security .
The only thing they are guilty of is following the same religion as Europeans and Americans .
In 2010 , Islamic fundamentalism has destroyed Arab followers of Christ before our very eyes .
No group of people deserve such a fate .
It is worth saying that there is not a single country founded on a Christian culture in which Muslims would be treated as badly as the Christians living in Muslim lands .
Parliament should prepare a report on the situation of Christians in Muslim countries , and the European institutions should put the issue of persecution on the agenda when they engage in talks with these countries .
( SV ) Madam President , there is nothing more illogical than the death penalty - to kill someone in order to show that it is wrong to kill .
The people in Iraq have suffered extreme oppression .
First , the dictator , Saddam Hussein , abused and oppressed people whose opinions differed from his own and people who criticised his regime .
Now the people are being subjected to an occupying power that is more interested in building up power based on arms than in democracy .
The abuse and oppression of those who criticise the occupying power continues .
Now , the abuse and oppression is continuing against Christians .
There must be an end to abuse and oppression in Iraq .
We have a responsibility in this regard .
You could call this ethnic cleansing .
That is what we are talking about here .
People are being forced out of Iraq .
We must therefore ensure that we do not force them out of the EU .
That is our duty .
We must not send Iraqi people back to certain suffering and oppression .
( PL ) Madam President , I am sure that the Iraqi Government has the best of intentions , but we all have to do more to protect the Christian community in the country .
That community is today being discriminated against , attacked and even murdered for one reason only : to finally eliminate it from the land on which it has lived for almost two thousand years .
The European Union should act with greater courage in this matter , paying no heed to the self-censorship imposed by political correctness , which is visible even in the text of the resolution that we will shortly adopt .
The protection of Iraqi Christians today does , of course , entail care for those who are being resettled and accepting them into our countries , as well as political changes in Iraq .
However , this must - and this is my appeal to the Commission , to Baroness Ashton - this must be the slogan , the main slogan of our diplomacy in the world .
Freedom of religion , in particular of Christian communities , should be the flagship of European diplomacy .
( FR ) Madam President , Christians are , without doubt , one of the most persecuted religious groups in the world .
In the Middle East , they are seen by some extremist groups as - I quote - ' legitimate targets ' , and the end goal is their departure , pure and simple , from this region , a region which saw the birth of Christianity , and a region in which their historical presence is essential for a certain kind of balance .
The events in the Baghdad cathedral are merely the culmination of a situation that we have been observing passively for far too long .
The European Union , as a global player and a business partner of various countries in this region , must strongly express its indignation with regard to this situation .
Discrimination , of whatever kind , cannot be tolerated .
Democracy will only be victorious in this region when the most fundamental human rights , such as religious freedom , are respected .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament must speak out loud and clear against the attacks on Christian minorities in Iraq .
This is a chapter in a long story of discrimination and martyrdom that has lasted 2 000 years , and it is incredible that it is still continuing now in the third millennium .
I agree with the need to support the moderate Iraqi groups and the Christians who have fled to Kurdistan , and also with the need to remove the references to religious affiliation from identity documents .
However , what I would like to denounce today is something that I feel is the most absurd aspect of this sad affair .
The symbol of the Christian faith is the cross , which appears to be a symbol of death but is , in fact , a symbol of freedom because , for Christians , Christ 's death on the cross freed mankind from sin and from darkness .
It is truly incredible that there are people who are not free to worship a symbol of freedom because they are slaughtered as they leave a church merely for having been inside .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the European Commission shares the deep concerns of this Parliament - so explicitly and clearly expressed by the honourable Members - as regards the human rights situation in Iraq .
The Foreign Affairs Council on Monday expressed its outright condemnation of the recent terrorist attacks , notably those which targeted places where civilians congregate , including Christian and Muslim places of worship .
The Council , adopting conclusions put forward by High Representative / Vice-President Ashton , also stressed that the new government in Iraq will need to dedicate itself to the pursuit of national reconciliation .
This means it should represent the interests and needs of all Iraqis , regardless of creed and ethnicity .
The protection and promotion of human rights , including those of persons belonging to minorities , must be a top priority .
In its dialogue with Iraq , the European Union frequently voices its human rights concerns , including not only the freedom of religion or belief but also on the death penalty .
Ten days ago , the EU made an urgent and direct call on the authorities in reaction to the decision by the Iraqi High Tribunal to sentence to death five representatives of the former regime , including Tariq Aziz .
The EU recalled its firm opposition to the use of capital punishment under all circumstances , seeking a global moratorium on the death penalty as a first step .
Human rights have a prominent place in the partnership and cooperation agreement which we hope to sign with Iraq soon .
That is the direct answer to Mrs de Lange .
Since 2003 , an important part of EU cooperation with Iraq has focused on strengthening the rule of law and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms , for example , through EUJUST LEX and Community assistance .
Substantial funds have also been dedicated to providing protection and relief to the most vulnerable Iraqis .
Many of them are , for obvious reasons , internally displaced and now live in areas with dense minority group populations .
Our work has ranged from promoting awareness and enforcement of human rights among vulnerable groups to the rehabilitation of schools in areas already mentioned in the discussions , such as Nineveh , which has a large Christian population .
Humanitarian assistance also continues to reach the most vulnerable inside and outside Iraq .
EU aid cannot directly target specific ethnic or religious communities , but it should and it can , help the most vulnerable Iraqis , wherever they live .
We do not underestimate the challenges facing the Iraqi Government .
It is no easy task to root out the extremists who seek to create sectarian tensions through acts of barbarity .
Security , development and the preservation of human rights are closely linked .
The EU remains committed to helping Iraq as best as it can to secure progress on all three issues .
The Iraqi people deserve no less .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I join my colleagues in this Parliament in the condemnation of the ongoing murders , executions and human rights violations occurring in Iraq .
The situation for Iraq 's Christian minority is one of life and death : nearly 50 Iraqi Christians were killed in a ruthless massacre in Our Lady of Salvation Church on 31 October 2010 .
Human Rights Watch estimates that , since 2003 , almost half of the Christian population of Iraq , hundreds of thousands of people , have had to flee the country .
We must continue to fight for them to stay alive and be free .
We must stand for minority rights and continue to oppose murder , violence , segregation and any discrimination based on ethnicity or religious belief .
I call on the Commission and the Council to raise the issue of Christians ' safety in Iraq as a matter of urgency , as the EU continues to move towards closer cooperation with the Iraqi Government .
2 .
Tibet - plans to make Chinese the main language of instruction
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Tibet - plans to make Chinese the main language of instruction .
Madam President , in October , we witnessed the peaceful protests of thousands of Tibetans against the Chinese authorities ' plans to change education policy .
The current bilingual model , which allows ethnic minorities to study in their own national languages alongside Chinese , is to be replaced by one in which Chinese is to be the basic language of instruction .
The Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party in Qinghai province , Qiang Wei , said in a press article that standard Mandarin will be the main language of instruction in primary schools by 2015 .
Due to the need for Tibetans and representatives of other ethnic groups to function effectively in the Chinese labour market , they should be able to study Chinese , but not at the cost of not being able to have an appropriate education in their own language .
It should be remembered that the rights that the Tibetans are fighting for derive from Article 4 of the Chinese constitution and Article 10 of the Regional National Autonomy Law .
The Tibetans are therefore asking for the rights already granted to them to be respected , and Parliament should emphatically support them in their attempts to preserve their own culture , a basic element of which is language .
I think that the words of Dokru Choedaka , a campaigner for the Tibetan language , ring true for all of us when he says that schools and language are the fabric of national identity .
author . - Madam President , culture and cultural expressions underpin people 's values and identity .
In the words of Aristotle , it is not about outward appearance but about inward significance .
Culture , when used as a tool to impose values and to wash out diversity and freedom of expression , is like a weapon .
It is therefore a very troubling development that Mandarin Chinese has been introduced as the main language of education and official documents for Tibetans .
If China intends to wash out the Tibetan culture this way , it is acting against its own stated intentions of harmonious relations among the countless cultures , ethnicities and identities the country knows .
The Chinese authorities should also allow access to Tibet by foreign media without the need for special permits and allow uncensored communications and access to information - also on the Internet - throughout the entire country .
Not only economic development but also cultural diversity and respect for human rights contribute equally to wealth .
The EU should consistently prioritise human rights , especially for ethnic and cultural minorities , in its relations with China .
Madam President , the large European countries really are devoting a great deal of attention to improving economic , investment and business relations with China .
This means that Parliament has an even greater role to play in speaking openly about human rights and about the fact that they are being broken .
I think that today , Parliament must place a very strong emphasis on the rights of people living in Tibet to their own language , to unhindered contact with the outside world via the Internet - we are living in the 21st century , after all - and to be able to talk to foreign journalists , because the ban on foreign correspondents visiting the region is lamentable .
Finally , I would like to say that imposing the state language on Tibet is something I find deeply disturbing .

Madam President , Article 4 of the Constitution of the People 's Republic of China guarantees all citizens and nationalities the right to use and develop their own spoken and written language .
Given this , we are very justifiably concerned about the news which we recently received that the status of the Tibetan language as a language of instruction might be being weakened .
I know that there are protests in this huge country against the fact that the forms of the Chinese language spoken in Shanghai and Canton are disappearing in the same way , and this is another cause for concern .
It is important that the People 's Republic of China should acknowledge that the preservation of Tibetan culture is crucially dependent on its language , and that the Tibetan language should be kept as the first language of instruction and also used in universities .
Of course , genuine bilingualism is an important objective .
It needs to be recognised that it is only sensible that the Tibetans also study Chinese , but making it the first language of instruction is bound to be problematic , as it will mean that Tibetan culture will suffer .
It is also important that China at long last ratifies the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that it signed years ago , because that would do more to guarantee the protection of ethnic and religious minorities and the preservation of their languages and cultures .
Madam President , when we rise to speak in the European Parliament , we can use our native language .
The Chinese Government is planning to withdraw this fundamental right from the Tibetans , threatening them with a loss of identity .
Thousands of Tibetans have campaigned against the possible end to bilingual policy in peaceful protests in schools and universities .
On 27 October , I received a petition in front of the European Parliament building in Brussels from Tibetan schoolchildren seeking our solidarity .
China 's ambassador , Mr Song , yesterday emphasised that bilingual education in Tibet was an important measure to support Tibetan culture .
While I have heard what he has to say , I am not sure I believe him .
After all , he has not denied the numerous media reports indicating that Mandarin Chinese is to be the main language used in educational institutions in the Quinghai region .
Cantonese and Shanghainese are also to be replaced by Mandarin throughout the education system and even on the radio , this despite the fact that the government claims that Mandarin is only spoken by half of the Chinese population .
Article 4 of the constitution and Article 10 of the law on regional autonomy emphasise the freedom of all ethnic groups to develop their own written and spoken language .
Commissioner Lewandowski , I would urge you to ensure that this worrying development is raised during dialogue between the EU and China .
Please send a group of experts to the region on a fact-finding mission to establish where the threat to the bilingual system lies .
The Tibetan language can be supplemented by Chinese , but certainly not replaced by it .
Madam President , nobody can complain today about a lack of knowledge or information about what is happening in Tibet , yet despite this , we still make almost no attempts to stop the Chinese destroying the Tibetans as individual people and as a whole nation , together with their wonderful culture and beautiful , authentic religiousness .
Today , we are talking about the destruction of the Tibetan language and its replacement with Mandarin .
After all , many of us in this Chamber and many of our ancestors have very often paid a high price fighting for their national languages against the will of an invader or dictator , because we knew that the loss of our language is the loss of the last hope that one day we will be able to be ourselves in our own country .
Thanks , too , to these experiences , which have been the fate of many Europeans , we must demand that those who negotiate with China on our behalf , talking about the development of technology , investments , trade and so on , do not avoid the subject of the habitual violation of human rights in China .
In negotiations with the Chinese Government on human rights , and here I join all those who have made appeals before me , I ask that the issue of human rights is not relegated to the background , irrespective of whether we are currently in an economic crisis or not .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , throughout the history of Estonia , we have struggled to maintain the language of the indigenous people .
After restoring our independence in 1991 , we finally enjoyed the liberty to speak our language and treasure our culture and identity .
It pains me to see the people of Tibet repressed and their language , identity , culture and religion condemned to extinction .
The People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) is using the same method of achieving marginalisation of Tibetans that the Soviet Union used on Estonians .
The Sinicisation of Tibet , just like the Russification of Estonia during the Soviet occupation , is being carried out by relocating non-indigenous people to the established territory of the indigenous people .
As long as the Han Chinese population of Tibet is increasing , the Tibetans have every right to feel intimidated .
The intention of the Chinese authorities to introduce Mandarin Chinese as the primary language of instruction in schools violates the rights of the indigenous people of Tibet .
I would like to see that violation brought up and resolved as a priority item within EU policy towards the PRC .
Madam President , I am opposed to this resolution .
My group has allowed me to speak against it , despite the fact that most of my colleagues do not share my opinion .
As has been pointed out , the Chinese ambassador has responded to the criticism expressed .
It may be that his letter does not answer every question , but why is it that we are first looking to pass a resolution rather than seeking dialogue ?
Can we really take ourselves seriously if we first adopt a resolution and then say , as the previous speaker put it - now let us send someone on a fact-finding mission to find out how bilingualism is under threat .
I do not believe it is plausible to speak of the death of the Tibetan language .
It is not within the remit of this Parliament to decide how much Hungarian is taught in schools in Slovakia or Romania , but yet it feels entitled to decide whether maths should be taught in Tibetan or another language .
I do not know whether this is wise .
Finally , I believe it is a mistake to link the question of language policy with the Dalai Lama , even though the two issues are quite separate .
I do not believe that by taking such a step , we will be helping to ensure that people are not prevented from using their own language .
( PL ) Madam President , language is the most important attribute of identity and the main tool of social communication .
Today 's debate on the attempts by the government of the People 's Republic of China to introduce Chinese as the only mandatory language in the teaching system in Tibet is an attack on the culture of that nation .
Up to now , Tibetan has been the official language in Tibet and in those regions in China where Tibetans are the main ethnic group .
For Tibetans , its use and development are one of the most important ways in which they exercise their de facto autonomy .
The need to understand Chinese as well is understandable for those who are going to look for work outside of Tibet , but an appropriate and adequate solution seems to be the introduction of Chinese as a subject to be taught , and not the replacement of Tibetan with Chinese as the language of instruction .
For this reason , we should express our opposition to the attempt to take the Tibetans ' basic tool of communication away from them .
By taking away from Tibetans the ability to learn their own language , the Chinese are slowly but surely breaking down Tibet 's autonomy and bringing about the loss of its cultural heritage .
Madam President , I would like to ask our fellow Member a question , if he accepts it .
Why , in this context , is the position of the Chinese ambassador on this matter more relevant than our desire to talk about what is happening in Tibet ?
If I have understood correctly , the reason is that he believes that we must heed what the Chinese Embassy says rather than what our own convictions tell us .
( DE ) ( The speaker is answering a blue card question from Cristian Dan Preda in accordance with Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) .
Madam President , I am much obliged to my fellow Member for asking this question , as it gives me the opportunity to repeat what I said before .
I did not say that you should believe the Chinese ambassador .
What I said was that we would be well advised to take our job seriously and to seek dialogue , and then to discuss a resolution .
It makes no sense to suggest that we should adopt a resolution now and then send experts to China to find out whether , and where exactly , bilingualism is under threat .
I believe that if we want to do something about the effectiveness of human rights , then we do not need simply to express pious intentions , but must also engage with the issue in order to avoid damaging an already difficult situation .
( HU ) Madam President , I am pleased to support the joint motion for a resolution , since it clearly expresses principles which I , as the representative of an indigenous national minority , share entirely .
I therefore support the principle that a ) the oppression of minority languages fundamentally infringes on the right to freedom of citizens belonging to that minority ; that b ) instruction in the mother tongue is the most suitable for learning ; and that c ) local authorities and communities should be given legal competence to make decisions about the language used in teaching ..
I would like to call the attention of all Members who support the motion to the fact that , unfortunately , these principles are not fully respected in certain EU Member States , either .
Evidence of this is the Slovak language law and the Romanian education law currently in force , which allow for instruction in certain subjects only in the state language .
I could name a few more EU countries .
I will not do this now .
I am a committed supporter of monitoring infringements of rights outside the European Union , but at the same time , I think it is important that practices disadvantageous to national minorities within the territory of the EU are not passed over in silence .
( CS ) Madam President , in my speech , I would like to mention the wish expressed by the People 's Republic of China for harmonious relations between all 56 of the ethnic minorities living within its territory .
In relation to this , I firmly believe that it is necessary to support the preservation of Tibetan , which is one of the four oldest and most original Asian languages , and which is one of the fundamental roots of Tibetan identity , culture and religion , and which , together with Tibetan culture as a whole , also represents an irreplaceable part of world cultural heritage , bearing witness to an historically rich civilisation .
I trust that China will consistently apply Article 4 of the constitution of the People 's Republic of China , and Article 10 of the Act on Autonomous National Regions , which guarantee the freedom of all nations to use and develop their own spoken and written languages .
I firmly believe that every ethnic minority has the right to retain its own language and literature .
A fair bilingual education system will contribute towards better cooperation and understanding , especially if Tibetans learn Chinese and Han Chinese people living in Tibetan areas are , at the same time , encouraged to learn Tibetan .
As the submitted joint draft resolution includes all of the points I have mentioned , I have decided to support it .
( SK ) Madam President , China is a great power in economic and military terms , and the Chinese administration in its behaviour towards its citizens has long given the impression that cultural , social and democratic principles as they are recognised around the world will be selectively applied in China and only insofar as they suit the administration in terms of controlling the country .
I do not believe that our indignation will change the Chinese Government 's determination to implement its own education policy in the country .
Despite this , I think it is necessary to deliver a serious warning to our Chinese partners that the Tibetan people have the right to retain their identity and their language , and that the mother tongue has an irreplaceable role in the education of children .
China should do the same in Tibet as Slovakia does for its Hungarian minority , with Hungarian minority children able to study in Hungarian from nursery school through to primary school and secondary school .
On the other hand , I would like to point out to Mr Sógor that Slovak children in Hungary have to learn in Hungarian from nursery school through to primary school and secondary school , and that they have Slovak only as a foreign language .
( HU ) Madam President , as a representative of the Jobbik Movement for a Better Hungary , I welcome and support the European Parliament 's motion for a resolution against the plans by the People 's Republic of China to make Chinese the official language in Tibetan schools .
Although the Chinese occupiers guaranteed Tibet 's autonomy , they are progressively excluding the Tibetan language from education and official fora .
China 's poor human rights record also raises the risk of conflicts developing in Tibet because of the forcible introduction of the Chinese language .
Tibetans must be guaranteed the right to be educated in their own language and to deal with official matters in the Tibetan language .
Their fundamental human rights must be guaranteed , including the right of assembly and the civil right to demonstrate .
Sadly , we need not go far to find similar cases , since crude attempts at assimilation are a real and current problem in Europe , too .
We only need to think of the way Romania treats Transylvanian Hungarians or Csángó Hungarians , or of the exclusionary , discriminatory Slovak language law .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the Tibetans must be allowed the right to speak in their native language , Tibetan .
It is a right that we all have .
Otherwise , they will lose their cultural identity .
On account of the situation in Tibet , I believe that bilingualism , in other words , learning Tibetan and Chinese , is the appropriate solution .
After all , bilingualism promotes the development of children in many different ways and is certainly to be supported .
( PL ) Madam President , the Tibetan language is part of the long history of a nation which has fought for years to preserve its own culture , and it is an element that closely binds the community together .
For this reason , maintaining and preserving bilingualism at all levels of teaching in schools in Tibet is the only and best solution .
The Chinese Government is a signatory to the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples , thereby committing itself to observe the fundamental rights of national minorities on its territory .
All of China 's actions aimed at banning the use of Tibetan in schools should be condemned by the international community .
I believe that steps should be taken that will allow the observance of the fundamental rights of the Tibetans in China to be more effectively monitored .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the abrogation of the bilingual system in Tibet is an illiberal act that runs counter to respect for the cultural identity of a minority and respect for human rights .
Trade agreements or business contracts with China cannot act as trade goods to distract Europe 's attention away from the serious discrimination from which the Tibetan people still suffer .
The Tibetans have the right to continue to be and to feel like a people , at least , and to do so they must be free to nurture their own traditions , history and language : in short , to keep their own identity , an essential part of which is language identity .
The plan to eradicate Tibetan culture , which has not yet been brought to a successful conclusion under the symbol of the hammer and sickle in decades of persecution against the Tibetan people and monks , cannot now be artfully completed by eliminating the Tibetan language and imposing Chinese .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , we are discussing an issue which exists in almost all countries where minorities live - namely , the preservation of a language , culture , and equal access to education .
That is about reconfirming our values , Mr Bütikofer .
Before addressing the issue of Tibet , allow me a quick word on our bilateral relations with China .
Our strategic partnership is strong , which permits us to tackle all issues , including the most sensitive ones .
We have constructed an impressive framework of high-level interactions where we regularly address the global challenges that our citizens are facing without , however , neglecting the issues where our views may differ .
The overall situation in Tibet is one of those where we differ .
The moves to institute Chinese as the main language of instruction in Tibetan areas raise complex and sensitive issues .
China needs to strike the right balance so as to allow the effective instruction and preservation of the Tibetan language , as a living language for maintaining education in the Tibetan language and as the mother tongue in Tibetan areas while , at the same time , teaching Chinese in parallel to give Tibetan students decent chances of future employment .
The remoteness of Tibetan areas does not make this task any easier .
We sincerely hope that China will ensure that Tibetan is used as the main language of instruction in schools in Tibetan areas and ensure the protection of minority languages in the other parts of China in the same way .
Seeking the view of experts and avoiding discrimination and the influence of ideology are good recipes for the way forward .
The EU is ready to share its expertise , should China so decide .
We hope - and here is my direct response - to have a frank discussion with the Chinese authorities on this very issue at the next round of the EU-China human rights dialogue .
It is most important that China should allow open public consultation in order to allow those affected by any changes to language policy to freely express their opinions , which would have to be taken into account .
We have followed also with deep concern reports of the detention of several Tibetan students and teachers who peacefully demonstrated in protest against the government 's education reform plan .
We urge China to release the detainees and to enter into discussions with Tibetan civil society on the merits of the proposed reform .
As a final point , I would like to recall the EU 's long-standing position with regard to Tibet .
The preservation of Tibet 's unique culture , language , religion and traditions and the need to achieve a system of meaningful autonomy for Tibet , within the Chinese constitution , remains a top priority for the EU .
These are issues that we are persistently trying to address in the framework of our political dialogue with China .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Despite the consistent involvement and commitment of many world leaders , institutions and NGOs in calling on the Chinese authorities to avoid the use of violence against the Tibetan people , these pleas unfortunately seem to fall on deaf ears , thus compromising international relations .
The European Parliament has , for many years , demonstrated its support for and solidarity with Tibet , a country that has always struggled against the oppressive and discriminatory policies of the Chinese authorities , which have threatened the territorial and cultural independence of the Tibetan people for years .
Beijing 's latest act of oppression was the decision to introduce Chinese as the compulsory official language in Tibet , even though the people speak Tibetan and consider Mandarin to be a foreign language .
Cultural genocide is going on as we speak , because this decision expresses the clear intention to wipe out this people , not only geographically but also culturally , by preventing younger generations from learning about their own culture and , first and foremost , their linguistic heritage .
Faced with China 's inflexible and rigid attitude to Tibet , I would like to call on the European Parliament to maintain a position of intransigence with regard to the severe violations of human rights and minority rights committed by the Chinese authorities and to ensure that the people of Tibet know we are behind them and ready to help .
In adopting this resolution , the European Parliament , the voice of European citizens and democracy , is sending a clear message to the Chinese authorities : that eradicating and subjugating one culture to benefit another is an act that is not worthy of any truly great and modern country .
The Tibetan people have a wholly legitimate request : that their history and language should be respected .
Tibetan culture is not the only one threatened by this unreasonable decision - Cantonese and other languages will also fall victim to the policy of standardisation .
Given that the Chinese Constitution specifically recognises each citizen 's right to express him / herself in his / her chosen language , how can the political authorities justify this legal U-turn ?
The European Union 's motto clearly sums up the message that we have a duty to pass on to the Chinese authorities through this resolution : united in diversity .
3 .
Burma - conduct of elections and the release of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi
The next item is the debate on seven motions for resolutions on Burma - conduct of elections and the release of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi .
Madam President , we sometimes have good news , even in emergency situations .
I would therefore like everyone to remember the emotion that overcame us when we saw the liberation of Aung San Suu Kyi on the television .
It is true that we have a particular link with this remarkable woman , who won one of the first Sakharov Prizes here , in 1990 , and who , over 20 or 21 years of her life , spent nearly 15 years in prison .
She is the symbol of a political woman who can remain in a tough country like Burma , free and always showing resistance .
It is absolutely extraordinary .
However , this event must not make us forget , first of all , that her freedom is fragile .
She has already been freed before and then put under house arrest again .
Second , let us not forget that the elections that have just taken place in Burma were really a farce , a travesty of democracy .
Before the elections , laws were voted in to repress freedom of expression .
Some people , such as monks , were prevented from being able to vote .
There are still 22 000 prisoners of conscience in Burma today , and it remains one of the worst dictatorships in the world .
We therefore ask the Burmese authorities to respect rights of association and freedom of expression and to free political prisoners , and we trust this remarkable woman , whom we are awaiting in the European Parliament , or whom we will visit if she cannot receive her Sakharov Prize , to maintain a spirit of freedom in this shattered country .
author . - Madam President , on 13 November , less than a week after the disputed national elections had been held , Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest after spending 15 of the last 21 years effectively imprisoned for her pro-democracy thoughts .
As an Iranian woman said in the movie The Green Wave , after being released from Evin prison in Tehran : ' The moment I stepped outside I realised I had just moved from a small prison to a bigger one : that prison is called Iran ' .
People should not live in small or big prisons for their thoughts .
The EU will see to and encourage further freedoms for all Burmese citizens and remains concerned about Aung San Suu Kyi 's wellbeing and safety , as she is being kept under surveillance by state security services .
The welcome move of her release needs to be reflected in further expansions of freedoms to all citizens , which are systematically curbed through the 2008 constitution and the military junta .
Elections such as those which took place in Burma this month , even if held in a climate of fear and repression , are often used by regimes to claim legitimacy and to suggest that a democracy is in place .
However , any government derives its legitimacy from providing for the wellbeing of its citizens , and democracy is always more than ' one man , one vote ' .
It is enshrined in democratic institutions , good governance , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
Madam President , all those who deluded themselves that the so-called elections organised on 7 November - which were a farce - would bring us closer to democracy in Burma must feel disappointed .
It is true that a week after the elections , the Nobel Peace Prize winner , Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , was released .
However , nothing suggests that the same fate will meet the other political prisoners in the country , numbering over two thousand .
In fact , several days ago , we received information that the military junta ruling Burma had suspended the publication of a further nine journals , restricting the already limited freedom of speech in that country .
For this reason , further pressure is needed from the international community .
First and foremost , the European Union should concentrate on putting pressure on China , as without China , the ruling junta in Burma could not hold on to its power .
Finally , I would like to thank Parliament 's President , Mr Buzek , for inviting Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi to the Sakharov Prize award ceremony next month in Strasbourg .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the images of the Burmese opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi following her release from house arrest are still fresh in our minds .
They show a person who is unbowed by years of isolation , leaving us in no doubt that she will continue to campaign for democratic change in her country .
Any step in the direction of democratisation and an improvement in the extremely problematical human rights situation is to be welcomed .
However , this is not going to be an easy process .
The constitution now in place in Burma , following the undemocratic elections , puts the president above the law and guarantees an amnesty for past human rights violations .
This must be criticised in the sharpest terms by the European Union , as must the continued serious human rights violations against ethnic minorities , who are frequently driven from their lands and forced into slave labour , many of their children being recruited as child soldiers .
We must redouble our efforts to bring on board countries that have a significant influence on the government in Burma , such as China and India .
We must persuade them to exert their influence in the interests of the people of Burma .
They need to implement the undertakings they gave in respect of human rights by ratifying the ASEAN Charter ; this charter calls on Member States to take action to combat systematic human rights violations .
Madam President , let us begin with the elections .
As we know , and as has already been mentioned here in Parliament , the elections have taken place in a climate of fear and intimidation .
They were an utter farce and served no purpose other than to give a civilian gloss to the military junta .
Many people were barred from voting .
Thousands of Burmese - 1 000 according to the very generals of the military junta - have taken refuge in Thailand , where 100 000 Burmese are already living , and where there are now greater risks of armed conflict along the Burmese border .
This serves to remind us that while the release of Aung San Suu Kyi obviously fills us with joy and hope now that we will be able to meet this remarkable woman , as has already been mentioned , and receive her here in Parliament , we cannot divert our attention from the most important matter for Burma , namely , the liberation of an entire people and the more than 2 000 political prisoners , along with the lifting of a general climate of intimidation and fear .
The European Union should not , therefore , lower its guard .
We need a great deal of focus , of concentration and of stubbornness : we absolutely must not allow ourselves to be complacent .
At this juncture , I believe that it is worth saying that certain Member States need to be firmer and , above all , more consistent in advocating human rights .
The businesses that many Member States are continuing to maintain in Burma must be brought into line with the EU 's human rights commitments .
I recall , for instance , that the oil company TOTAL has holdings in Burma that make up 7 % of the Burmese junta 's budget .
Parliament will continue to be focused and united on this issue , and I hope that the Commission and the Member States will also continue to take this approach .
Madam President , speaking for myself and my colleague , Mrs Andrikienė , we are very pleased to learn that our Sakharov laureate has been released .
However , we must not forget that there are still at least 2 200 other political prisoners being held in terrible conditions under the Burmese military dictatorship .
As was stated earlier , the whole country is like an open prison .
That is why we now need to be very critical and vigilant .
Was this all just a cosmetic operation or have the brutally manipulated elections exposed the true nature of the regime ?
We must now use all the mechanisms available to us to press for change .
This change can be regarded as an acid test .
We must press for our Sakharov laureate to be allowed to travel here in December to collect her prize after a delay of 20 years and for her to be permitted to return to her homeland unmolested .
Only then will we have the slightest cause for hope that things are changing for a people who have been suffering under a corrupt socialist dictatorship for decades .
Madam President , first of all of course , I , too , want to welcome the release of Aung San Suu Kyi , the opposition leader in Burma , after so many years under house arrest .
I would also like to express the hope that this release will be followed by the release of more than 2 000 political prisoners because , as Mr Posselt mentioned , we will otherwise view this as just a token gesture .
I must also tell you that I want us to support Aung San Suu Kyi in rebuilding her party , the National League for Democracy , which was illegally disbanded in May .
She certainly has a huge job to do .
This is why I believe that international pressure must continue because the military junta has not committed to a process of democratisation , but is going in the exact opposite direction to this process , given that the elections held in November were neither free nor fair .
This is why I believe that we must not diminish our focus on this area .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , I am delighted at the level of European Union unity that has been shown on the matter of Burma .
I have read the Council statement , Baroness Ashton 's statement and indeed our own President 's statement .
No one has been fooled by these deeply flawed elections in Burma ; everyone has welcomed the release of Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest ; but everyone has also condemned the lack of other freedoms that is still imposed .
However , Madam President , if we play our cards right , these elections could - and it is a big ' could ' - be a new start in Burma .
If , as other colleagues have said , we can now persuade the junta to release all political prisoners , if we can persuade the junta to allow Aung San Suu Kyi complete freedom , both in terms of movement and in terms of political public statements , and , finally , if the new Burmese parliament and government start to improve human and fundamental rights in the country , and to improve the social and economic conditions of the people of Burma , then perhaps , in a few years time , there will be grounds for our institutions to start negotiating and engaging with the Burmese regime and to see a better future for that country .
Madam President , what has happened is that the authorities have released one very well-known person , as if to show the world that the country is democratic , that it has become a convert to human rights , while behind the façade , there is nothing ; no real , concrete changes .
We are dealing with a theatre - and thank God that that noble woman regained her freedom .
However , behind this theatre lies a tragedy , as we said ; several thousand people who are still in prison .
The slogan ' release the political prisoners ' therefore still stands in Burma .
I think that the message from the most well-known political prisoner in the region , who has just been released , is so important that it radiates across the whole of Asia .
It is to her that Chinese dissidents are already appealing .
I think this is worth underlining .
For this reason , Parliament must fight for human rights and for the freedom of political refugees in the region .
( RO ) Madam President , the European Parliament already requested in February 2010 the release of Aung San Suu Kyi , who had been living under house arrest since 1990 .
The Burmese authorities ' decision to release her a few months after this vital request was made by MEPs marks a first step in the right direction .
However , we cannot regard this particular situation as marking a restoration of human rights in Burma , given that there are numerous pro-democracy activists still in prison .
The Treaty of Lisbon stipulates that the European Union strives to promote peace , its values and the wellbeing of its peoples .
We understand common values to mean respect for human dignity , freedom , democracy and human rights .
It is the European Union 's duty not to restrict itself to promoting these values only within its own territory .
This is why I urge a message to be conveyed of solidarity with Burma 's citizens who are suffering repression from government authorities and fighting a daily battle for respect for their fundamental rights .
( FR ) Madam President , on 7 November , the first elections for 20 years took place in Burma .
At a time when we should have been able to rejoice at seeing such a process finally implemented , we are once again forced today to condemn this country , in which there should be human rights and freedom of expression , among other things .
Elections must be synonymous with the choice that one expresses through a vote .
How can we speak of choice when the opposition parties are not allowed to speak , when they cannot express themselves freely or accurately represent whole populations ?
We are talking once again about Burma here , a country which is not free , but which has been in the hands of the military junta for many , many years .
As the whole world knows , this is about a fossilised power which will stay that way as long as no genuine free and fair elections are organised .
The liberation of Aung San Suu Kyi is a step in the right direction .
We must recognise it and praise it .
Let us hope that it can be followed by other actions , as has been said here previously , particularly with regard to the many other political prisoners .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the moment , we are all still celebrating the release of Aung San Suu Kyi and we all have in our minds the images of the crowd that enthusiastically welcomed her on her return home , where she met children whom she had left when they were little and who are now more than grown up .
It is a time of great enthusiasm , a celebration for the people and the opposition in Burma , but one fact will certainly emerge from all this .
Our interlocutor today is undoubtedly the military junta , which can no longer delay explaining whether the release of Aung San Suu Kyi was an act of propaganda , a stalking horse or , conversely , the first step on the way to recognising her right , and therefore the right of all other Burmese political prisoners , to freedom of expression , and a step towards free and democratic elections .
That is what Europe must request and demand .
To our delight at Aung San Suu Kyi 's release , we must necessarily add a strong request to that effect .
( PL ) Madam President , we all remember the years when Lech Wałęsa was released from prison and when Nelson Mandela was released after so many years .
It gave hope ; hope for a free world , that all the pressure on those governments had had an effect .
The release of the Burmese opposition leader , Mrs San Suu Kyi , is also a great challenge for us .
Without the efforts of the international community , without pressure being exerted on the ruling junta in Burma , democracy will not reign there .
I remember the times when the leaders of the free world came to Poland during the Communist dictatorship , and all of them , alongside official visits , also visited the leader of the underground movement , Lech Wałęsa .
This policy should also be followed now .
I am pleased that Mrs Ashton will soon go to Burma and meet Mrs San Suu Kyi .
I also hope that a European Parliament delegation will soon be able to speak with her in Burma and Strasbourg .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , like all of us , I would like to pay homage to Aung San Suu Kyi , whose freedom has just been restored .
Awarded the Nobel Prize and Parliament 's Sakharov Prize , she remains a symbol of fortitude and hope for the better future which the people of her country deserve .
It is essential that Aung San Suu Kyi has unrestricted freedom of movement and speech .
It is equally essential that all remaining political prisoners be set free - more than 2 000 of them , according to Mr Posselt and Mr Preda .
This would allow for a credible transition to a more inclusive system of government .
Burma / Myanmar has seen elections which were not up to international standards , notably as far as conditions for competing opposition parties were concerned .
However , the fact that civil society could partially organise itself politically is welcome , notwithstanding the difficulties .
We acknowledge the decision of certain opposition parties not to participate , but also the fact that some other parties , including from ethnic groups , did participate .
Their resolve to seize what they saw as an opportunity was commendable .
Elections in themselves do not make a country democratic .
Nevertheless , they can offer the opportunity for a new beginning and they do , at least , introduce a degree of pluralism into the system .
In spite of the evident flaws , if the elections mark the beginning of a positive process , this will be a welcome development .
We have repeatedly said that the EU was willing to engage with the government in order to use the opportunity of elections to begin a new and positive phase in the history of the country .
From now on , we need to observe closely how accountable the new parliament and government will be to society ; whether the new institutions will ensure respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms ; and whether they will deliver better policies to improve the economic and social situation of the citizens .
To improve the human rights situation in the country , a meaningful dialogue between all stakeholders must be established .
Such a dialogue should usher in - apart from the long overdue transition to a civilian , legitimate and accountable system of government - a political system based on the rule of law and on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The EU has repeatedly stated that it stands ready to support such a process .
We will continue to use all the means at our disposal - dialogue and engagement , United Nations channels and restrictive measures , but also assistance - to help persuade the new government to improve its record .
Human rights aspects are built into our aid programmes .
Moreover , we seek links with civil society and parts of the administration and we will try to engage with the government on its responsibilities for attaining the Millennium Development Goals .
Promoting our values - namely human rights , development and dialogue - is , and will remain , the cornerstone of our policy .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I welcome the release of Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest by the Burmese authorities .
However , we should not ease our stance against the military junta .
Instead , we should continue addressing the violations of human rights and civil liberties as vigorously as ever .
The fact that there are 2 200 political prisoners lingering in appalling conditions in detention facilities and that the Burmese military is responsible for continuing extrajudicial killings , forced labour , sexual violence and other human rights violations cannot be undone by releasing one political activist , no matter how prominent .
Aung San Suu Kyi , recipient of the Sakharov Prize in 1990 , has famously asked us to use our liberty to promote theirs .
I would like to use this opportunity to call on the EU and its Member States to use its full economic and political influence to speed up the regime transition in Burma .
in writing . - The situation in Burma has come to a critical juncture .
It is important that the European Parliament stays the course with its relations with Burma .
We need to focus on the government 's treatment of the citizens when 40 % of the population belongs to an ethnic minority that was forced to flee to Thailand after the recent election .
The release of Aung San Suu Kyi is a positive .
However , history has shown us that the Burmese Government has a habit of reverting back to its old ways where any or all opposition is imprisoned .
Currently , more than 1 000 ' political prisoners ' are still being held .
The blatant disregard for free elections is a clear indication that the new government has little or no interest in providing a true democracy for the people of Burma .
The UN proposal for further dialogue with Burma should be supported by this Parliament and we should continue our efforts to protect all the citizens of Burma from future injustices .
It is my belief that our steady vigilance and open dialogue is crucial to the people of Burma and a clear signal of unity among this Parliament and other global organisations must be sent .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
1 .
Iraq - in particular , the death penalty ( including the case of Tariq Aziz ) and attacks against Christian communities (

Madam President , can I ask Mr Mauro to go into a bit more detail on the real extent of the amendment that he has just tabled , and particularly the reason why it focuses exclusively on Christians ?
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would point out that it is not my intention to say that Christians are more a minority than other minorities .
The fact is , however 