Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 25 November 2010 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Statements by the President
I would like to make some preliminary remarks before our sitting .
I would like to remind you that last Thursday , the Conference of Presidents decided that tomorrow , on Tuesday at 16 : 00 hours , a debate will take place on the Jędrzejewska and Trüpel reports on the new draft 2011 budget .
Voting on the reports is planned to take place on Wednesday .
Secondly , there will also be a debate tomorrow on the outcomes of the COP 16 climate conference .
The international community achieved a certain amount of progress in Cancún .
Quite a large delegation from the European Parliament also took part in the negotiations , and those fellow Members are here today among us .
Together with Commissioner Hedegaard , we will consider how satisfactory we find the agreement that was worked out , and what the next steps should be in connection with this matter before the conference in the Republic of South Africa .
Thirdly , on 21 October , we found out the winner of this year 's European Parliament Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought .
As you will remember , the winner is the Cuban dissident Guillermo Fariñas .
Unfortunately , it will be difficult for Mr Fariñas to travel and receive his prize in person next Wednesday , despite the fact that I intervened personally in this regard in a letter to the President of Cuba , Raul Castro .
We anticipate that Mr Fariñas ' difficulties in travelling to Strasbourg will be noted by Lady Ashton , who will take this fact into consideration in further relations with Cuba .
We still hope that our prize winner will manage to reach us .
If he were to fly out from Cuba in the next few hours , he could still make it to our Wednesday sitting .
Fourthly , I would also like to remind you that 30 years ago , on 13 December 1981 to be exact , martial law was declared in Poland , as an attempt by the Communist authorities to suffocate the increasingly powerful Solidarity movement .
Thousands of opposition activists were arrested and over 100 people lost their lives .
Nearly three decades after those events , let us remember those who were brave enough to risk their lives to liberate Europe from the yoke of Communism .
Finally , and fifthly , in connection with Mr Bloom 's behaviour at the plenary session of 24 November , and bearing in mind that he has not taken advantage of any of the three invitations extended to him to apologise for his words , I have decided , on the basis of Rules 9 and 153 of the Rules of Procedure , to place a sanction on him in the form of the loss of the right to receive any subsistence allowance for a period of seven days .
I have already informed Mr Bloom of my decision .
Now for some announcements : the signature of legislative acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure .
I hereby inform you that on Wednesday , the President of the Council and I will sign the next 10 legal acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure in accordance with Rule 74 of the Rules of Procedure .
The titles of these legislative acts will be published in the minutes of this sitting .
Secondly , Mrs Gruny has informed me in writing that her mandate as a Member of the European Parliament has expired due to her election to the French National Assembly .
Parliament takes note of this and , under Article 7 ( 2 ) of the Act concerning the election of the representatives of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage and Rule 4 ( 1 ) and ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , confirms that there will be a vacant seat as of 14 December 2010 .
Finally , and thirdly : I have received a request from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe for Mr Cornelis van Baalen to be nominated to the Interparliamentary Delegation for relations with Afghanistan in place of Mr Haglund .
Are there any comments ?
I do not see any .
The nomination has been adopted .
Signature of acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Composition of interparliamentary delegations : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 9 December 2010 , pursuant to Rules 137 and 138 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Wednesday
I have received a request from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) that Mr Szájer 's report concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commissions ' exercise of implementing powers be added to the order of business .
Mr President , as you rightly said , our group is asking for the regulation on implementing acts to be put on the agenda .
I feel a little awkward doing this , because it is not only my group 's request ; several other groups support this idea .
We had a unanimous vote in the Committee on Legal Affairs on this report and on the various common understandings and statements that were annexed to it .
I would like to remind colleagues that the Lisbon Treaty entered into force a year ago .
This regulation on implementing acts follows a year of very hard negotiations in an area where the new delegated and implementing acts are a very important issue for this Parliament .
After one year , I think we can fully exercise this right .
This is why it would be good to discuss and adopt this new regulation .
I would also like to inform you - as our colleagues know - that there was a very difficult situation in the Council with two blocking minorities .
It is therefore a very delicate act , which is why I think that the right thing to do is to get through it as soon as possible .
All Parliament 's rights are met in this report .
I ask for the support of all the other groups .
Thank you , Mr Szájer .
Is there support for this proposal ?
( DE ) Mr President , we have no objection to this topic being placed on the agenda .
However , I should like to draw your attention to the fact that members of some committees - and not just from our group , I think - still have concerns regarding the specific rules .
Certainly we need a deadline for the submission of amendments , so that we can vote on Thursday at the latest .
I would just like to say , however , that some discussions are still ongoing and I cannot say in advance whether or not our group will be voting in favour .
The debates are yet to come .
However , we have no objection to this topic being on the agenda .
I propose that we should proceed as follows . We will hold the debate on Wednesday and the sitting will close at 21 : 00 .
The deadline for tabling amendments will be 10 : 00 on Wednesday .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
( Parliament agreed to the proposal )

( FR ) Mr President , my group , in fact , wishes to see the two oral questions concerning both the report of the Van Rompuy task force and the six Commission legislative packages on economic governance reinstated in the order of business .
Firstly , for an institutional reason , since Article 9 of the Treaty of Lisbon gives us this prerogative and this authority to have applied the horizontal social clause and , in particular , the study on the social impact for the sweeping measures , the sweeping directives and decisions that have consequences for our citizens .
Mr John Monks , the General Secretary of the European Trade Union Confederation , has just written about his concern at seeing austerity plans having a direct impact on the incomes of wage earners , their wages and also their pensions .
The political reason for making this request , Mr President , on behalf of my group , is that we must show that , at a time when we are discussing market regulation , we are not only giving our verdict on the markets , but also voting and legislating in favour of our fellow citizens .
I should like to see this House feel able to support the reinstatement of these oral questions .
Who would like to speak in favour ?
Who will come forward to speak in favour ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is precisely because of the relationship which must exist between the three Institutions - the Council , the Commission and Parliament - that I deem it appropriate to support the Member 's motion .
Does anyone want to speak against the proposal ?
I do not see anyone who wants to speak against .
We shall therefore proceed to the vote .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
President . - These two oral questions will be added to the order of business on Wednesday afternoon .
The sitting will continue until around 21 : 00 .
( The order of business was adopted )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( ES ) Mr President , last month , I organised a hearing in this Parliament concerning the victims of terrorism , which was attended by the President of Parliament and various Members of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
The victims have turned to us , as their representatives in Europe , to guarantee them their right to justice which has been trampled on so many times in their own countries , such as Spain , where the Rodríguez Zapatero Government continues to lie to the Spanish people about a negotiation process with a terrorist group which has still not relinquished its arms .
It is because of this that such grave incidents as the Bar Faisán tip off , in which the terrorists were warned of the operation in progress to arrest them , have still not been thoroughly investigated .
Democratic governments cannot turn their backs on the victims of terrorism ; they have already paid the highest price in the fight for liberty .
Parliament must push for a European Charter which recognises the legitimate demands of the victims , such as not negotiating with terrorists and ensuring that they serve their prison sentences in full .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the last working week of the year , I would like to give you a summary of my experience with the administration of the European Parliament .
In agreement with the opinion of the European Ombudsman dated 6 December , I would like to say that the team and staff of the European Parliament deserve praise for their work in the advancement of equal opportunities and , in particular , in the improvement of the situation of persons with disabilities .
I hope that in the future , there will be no going back on these issues .
I would like to thank three people .
First , by reason of the adaptation , I would like to thank Mrs Erica Landi and Mr Pierre Debaty , Heads of Unit for Training .
I would like to thank Mrs Rosa Brignone , Head of Unit for Equal Opportunities and Diversity , for providing employment for 61 people with disabilities at the European Parliament .
This programme can provide them with work while offering them appropriate assistance .
I would like to ask Mr Buzek to continue to pay attention to these programmes for the sake of the future of the European Union .
( HU ) Mr President , it fills me with satisfaction that the Romanian winner of the European Year Journalist Award 2010 awarded by the European Commission is a member of the Hungarian national community in Romania .
The winner of the award earned the Commission 's recognition with a report written in Hungarian , her native language .
Hungarian is not an official language in Romania , but for the Hungarian community of one and a half million living in that country , it represents the language in which they learn about events that are happening in the world around them .
I am thankful that the Commission understood that it cannot be cause for disqualification if someone does not enter the competition with a publication written in the official language of their country .
However , I also have a feeling that something is missing , as national communities that do not speak an official language of the EU - such as Catalans , Basques , Corsicans , and the list goes on - did not have the opportunity to enter the competition while informing their communities in their native language .
It is time to take into account the European reality , multilingualism , and the coexistence of cultures in all Commission decisions .
( ES ) Mr President , as can be seen from the terrorist arrests under Mr Rodríguez Zapatero 's Government , it goes without saying that the accusations that have been made today against the Spanish Government are clearly inconsistent .
However , moving on to my point , the centenary is being commemorated of the poet Miguel Hernández , an irreplaceable loss in the Spanish civil war and an extraordinary voice which springs purely from the heart of the people .
A herder of ' goats and sorrows ' , he was a contemporary of Neruda and Aleixandre , winners of the Nobel Prize .
In this forum , which should be one of liberty , tolerance , peace and culture , I read : ' I am an open window that listens , / through which to see the gloom of life . / But there is a ray of sun in the fight / that always leaves the shadow vanquished ' .
In these gloomy times , let us continue in the hope of the poet 's ray of light , which will vanquish the darkness , the darkness of that time and for always .
Paraphrasing Miguel Hernández , ' We have to speak about many things ' , or from the poetry of Vallejo , quoted in Stockholm this past week by Vargas Llosa , ' Brothers , there is much to do ' , in this Europe ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Mr President , the European Commission published a report last week about the implementation of the 2007 strategy on nutrition and obesity .
This report highlighted not only some of the specific actions taken in the battle against unhealthy diets and obesity in the European Union , but also the fact that many of the strategy 's stipulated objectives have not been achieved .
The strategy envisaged undertakings to extend and support nutrition education among children .
However , too little has been done at EU level to meet these undertakings .
For example , the European School Fruit Scheme contains educational elements , but is targeted at only a limited number of children .
Although it is still having a positive impact , we feel that it is fairly restricted .
Another major issue is food advertising aimed at children .
In 2007 , the Commission drew up codes of conduct for regulating the marketing of food products targeting children .
Unfortunately , even now , some Member States have direct advertising of unhealthy foods aimed at children , as well as extremely different interpretations of the guidelines regarding the code of conduct .
( SL ) Mr President , today , I would like us , here in this Chamber of the European Parliament , to pay attention to and , in a sense , heed the warning about the Middle Eastern peace process which 26 former top statesmen and women of the European Union have addressed to the global public .
I am talking about figures who each individually command international authority and who are therefore able to attract publicity .
I think that it would be right for us , in this very House , to pay particular attention to the wording of this warning , which calls on us to work harder to strengthen the peace efforts in this region and , if necessary , take a tougher stance in bringing Israel to the negotiating table and ensuring peace , not only in the region , but also in the state of Israel and for its citizens .
( EL ) Mr President , the European support mechanism puts the Commission under additional obligations to defend the European rule of law .
However , I was surprised to see that precisely the opposite is happening .
I have in my possession a written reply from Commissioner Rehn concerning the Memorandum with Greece .
He personally has co-signed this reply , which states that the initiative and responsibility for the terms rests solely with the Greek Government .
I have in my possession another written reply from Commissioner Almunia , stating in no uncertain terms that he does not consider it necessary to provide information which we requested from him about the exercise of parliamentary control .
The Commission appears to be deliberately creating grey zones in the application of the European rule of law and European policies for a series of countries .
Democratic control is being side-lined , inasmuch as national governments are hiding behind the Commission and the Troika on the most basic measures , while the Commission is referring these matters to the national governments .
Thus , from guardian of the treaties , the Commission is turning into the guardian of an informal state of emergency which it personally has tacitly declared .
At this difficult juncture , putting the support mechanism into action cannot mean taking the European rule of law out of action .
( EL ) Mr President , the anti-grassroots policy of the European Union , of the International Monetary Fund , and of the bourgeois governments in the Member States , has escalated into a war on fundamental wage , labour and social rights which the working class fought long and hard to win .
Mass unemployment , poverty , the abolition of national collective agreements , drastic wage and pension cuts , higher retirement ages , the abolition of heavy and unhealthy professions , higher VAT , grassroots incomes slashed by 25 % in the private and public sectors , public corporations being sold off and an escalation in autocracy and the savage suppression of the working class and grassroots movement .
Typical examples are the imposition of the repulsive measure of the policy of calling up unemployed seamen in Greece , the state of emergency at the expense of unemployed air traffic controllers in Spain , the beatings handed out to pupils and students in England and the questioning of fundamental grassroots freedoms in general .
At the same time , however , we have seen a package of subsidies and insulting tax breaks ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Mr President , a difficult year both for mankind and for Europe , a Europe tested on its common currency and cohesion , is coming to an end .
New protection and support institutions have been designed and applied in order to defend the common currency and support two main countries with completely different economies : Greece and Ireland .
I believe that all of us , especially the European leaders , have learned from this crisis and that there is now a greater feeling of solidarity between us .
I trust that this is so .
I believe , therefore , that the right moves will be made to maintain social cohesion in 2011 , without the extremes caused by untempered budgetary austerity .
I must stress that the opposite economic policy applies in the United States .
We have to understand that measures need to be taken in the euro area to create conditions for smooth recovery on the markets in Greece , Ireland and Portugal and to avoid similar problems in Spain .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the two-thirds majority government in Hungary launched an offensive against democratic institutions in the past six months .
In this process , they abolished the former parity-based media supervisory body , and set up in its place one consisting of delegates of the government party .
The so-called media constitution recently adopted in Hungary also gives the government the possibility to censor certain websites if they so choose , even along the Chinese censorship model .
The president of the media authority , Annamária Szalai , proudly boasted of this in an interview .
As an example , she mentioned the most widely read right-wing news portal , www.kuruc.info , which , due to the anonymity offered by the Internet , was in the lead in exposing the infringements committed by the former government .
I ask the European Parliament and the Commission to urge Fidesz to put an end to the anti-democratic processes currently taking place in Hungary as soon as possible .
All that is left for the Hungarian opposition is the power of the public eye , and now they intend to deprive us even of that .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , more than a month has passed since Asia Bibi , a Catholic peasant woman from Pakistan , was convicted of blasphemy .
We cannot fail to remember the importance of protecting inviolable human rights , amongst which we count , in our Charter of Rights , freedom of expression .
In countries such as Pakistan , the charge of blasphemy has already led to the deaths of 46 people in the last 10 years , fuelling more and more religious intolerance and , hence , Islamic fundamentalism .
These people were all killed outside prison following the charges of blasphemy , or were found dead in prison .
Asia Bibi 's life is at risk , not only through the application of Pakistani law , but also at the hands of fanatics .
Pakistani law therefore fuels this climate of persecution and unjust deaths .
To conclude , I urge the entire international community to make strong calls for the law on blasphemy to be abolished from the Pakistani criminal code and to ensure that anyone convicted of crimes which restrict freedom of expression is released as soon as possible .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today is the launch date of a declaration signed by myself and four colleagues calling for the equitable distribution of agricultural subsidies among the old and new Member States after 2013 .
Under the current common agricultural policy , all farmers in the European Union have to meet the same obligations , which entails costly investments .
However , while their obligations are equal , their entitlements are not .
I therefore believe that as from 2013 , the direct payments system must guarantee the fair treatment of all farmers throughout the European Union .
We must put an end to the historical model , define common criteria and take on board the specific needs of agriculture in individual regions .
In addition , we need to build up a system allowing funds to be transferred from the second to the first pillar so that a greater proportion of agricultural producers in the new Member States can benefit from support measures and instruments .
It is time to put an end to the way the CAP separates the old from the new Member States , and it is my sincere hope that you will all support this cause .
( PT ) Mr President , the tornado that hit Portugal last Tuesday caused enormous damage in the region of Tomar .
Unfortunately , this type of natural disaster is becoming increasingly frequent .
It is important to make available emergency mechanisms that will enable rapid intervention to aid the affected populations .
The role of the EU is vitally important , as it has mechanisms and instruments at its disposal , such as the Solidarity Fund , that are intended to respond to this type of problem .
However , it is absolutely crucial for these mechanisms to be activated and applied in a way that is quick , flexible and simple .
I therefore call on the Commission and Council to make the Solidarity Fund more flexible so that it can be applied as quickly as it should be in this case and in other similar ones .
( RO ) Mr President , in the period prior to Romania 's accession to the European Union , the European Commission closely monitored the situation regarding international adoptions and recommended a halt to these activities following the disclosure of abusive adoption practices .
However , in 2009 , in the context of the conference organised by the European Commission and Council of Europe on the subject of the challenges in adoption procedures in Europe , I sent a letter to Jacques Barrot which I wanted to use to draw attention to the repercussions of reopening the international adoption market .
I also called for the European Commission to be consistent .
Following an investigation carried out by a Romanian newspaper , we are presented with the possibility that an abuse of power has been committed by the European Commission , demonstrated by it imposing the conclusion of the conference 's official report , which recommends setting up a European Adoption Agency .
I think that the European Union 's image will suffer as a result of the guardian of the European treaties being involved in falsifying an official document .
This is why I am waiting for a clear , reasoned response from the European Commission , which will remove this question mark hanging over its vertical structure .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for more than a month , a group of 250 people , including 80 Eritreans , have been held hostage by traffickers in the Sinai Desert in Egypt .
Part of this group had previously been turned away from the coasts of some European countries .
The kidnappers are demanding USD 8 000 ransom for their release and , in the meantime , are subjecting them to the most atrocious forms of abuse and deprivation .
Six people have already died , and rumours are also circulating about the removal of organs to be sold on the black market .
It is time for the international community and the European Union to say ' Enough ! ' ; it is time for some straight talking about the guarantee of the right to asylum everywhere ; and it is time for some governments to reconsider their illusory return policies .
The Pope has asked for this , and so too have foundations , associations and political figures .
We call on you , Mr President , together with Commissioner Ashton , to take immediate action to stop this ordeal .
( HU ) Mr President , beginning with January , Hungary will be the third new Member State to take over the rotating Presidency of the EU .
It will be a major test and a challenge for Hungary .
It will take place simultaneously with the beginning of the EU 's economic governance , the first financial semester , and the amendment of the Treaty of Lisbon for the establishment of a permanent crisis management mechanism .
We hope that the accession negotiations with Croatia will be completed , and that Romania and Bulgaria will become part of the Schengen area .
The democratic parties of Hungary , with the exception of the far right , are in agreement and in cooperation to ensure the success of the Hungarian Presidency .
However , this Parliament must also address the contradiction that while the Hungarian Presidency should be a guardian of the observance of fundamental freedoms in the EU , the current government in Hungary is imposing severe restrictions on democracy , the freedom of speech and the rights of the trade unions .
I hope that the Hungarian Government will behave in a different way in Europe than it does at home .
Mr President , one of the issues addressed at the EU-Russia Summit last week in Brussels was the rule of law in the Russian Federation .
I would like to remind you that the verdict in Mikhail Khodorkovsky 's and Platon Lebedev 's second trial will be delivered on the morning of 15 December .
Members of the international community , including the EU , have been observing the trial very closely , and I am convinced that the outcome of the trial will allow us to draw some concrete conclusions about the rule of law in Russia .
As the next meeting of the EU-Russia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee is being held this week in Strasbourg , I would hope to raise this issue with colleagues from the Russian State Duma and Federation Council , and I would like to encourage my colleagues here in Parliament to do the same .
( GA ) Mr President , the European Union has had an important role in the promotion of the peace and reconciliation process in Northern Ireland and in the country 's border regions .
The European Union has invested a total of EUR 1.3 million in three PEACE programmes since 1994 .
Since 1989 , the Union has invested EUR 349 million in the International Fund for Ireland .
The International Fund for Ireland has given support to over 6 000 projects in Ireland .
EU support has enabled communities in Northern Ireland and the border region to take advantage of the opportunities arising from the peace process .
Building peace and reconciliation is a long-term process and I strongly believe that there is still a need to continue with Peace III and International Fund for Ireland ( IFI ) support .
I welcome recent moves by the US , supported by the UK and Irish authorities , to examine the possibility of continuing the IFI programme beyond 2010 in a limited and targeted way .
In conclusion , continued support for the peace programme is absolutely essential .
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome what was agreed at COP 16 in Cancún .
However , we should not delude ourselves that we are where we need to be .
Targets need to be set now that are much firmer , clearer and binding .
The governments must build on the work of Cancún to achieve an ambitious , binding agreement in South Africa next year .
We must also act at home .
There must be immediate agreement on a reduction of at least 30 % in CO2 leakage in Europe - not only for the sake of international agreement but for our own sake also - so that we can be competitive from now on .
Europe must guarantee that we will be much more efficient as regards energy consumption .
We failed to achieve that with the 20 % energy efficiency target not being legally binding .
That must be changed now .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to draw your attention to the problems facing Bulgaria 's road hauliers , who will be left seriously out of pocket if we allow additional air pollution , noise emissions and other charges to be imposed .
The sector is in crisis , and increasing these charges risks not only intensifying the crisis but leaving the industry no scope for fleet renewal .
As a Bulgarian citizen , I oppose the calculations made by the Commission , which has failed to take into consideration differences in the territorial locations of individual Member States .
Bulgaria is on the periphery of the European Union , and Bulgarian hauliers will be hardest hit by these additional charges .
If we look at the research , we will see that the Bulgarian economy will lose under all these scenarios .
Fellow Members , I hope that the European Parliament has the political will to prevent the problems with countries along the borders of the European Union from deteriorating .
( BG ) Mr President , a few days ago , President Barroso warned that Europe is facing a rising wave of populism and nationalism .
He appealed to political leaders to combat manipulation based on people 's fears and the irrational arguments which he believes have allowed populism to thrive in many countries .
His statement gave me grounds to draw attention to the risks to democracy in the former communist countries .
It is there , more than anywhere , that European leaders must be uncompromising in any attempt to undermine the right to private property .
The partial nationalisation of the personal contributions into professional pension funds and their transfer to state social security is one example of this .
Europe must also remain on guard as regards the right to free choice and prevent it from being undermined in any form whatsoever .
Above all , European leaders have to be uncompromising towards attempts to manipulate public opinion and the widespread use of special surveillance equipment and the official revelation of secret information to put pressure on people and to undermine human rights .
( GA ) Mr President , this is a very important question .
Clearly there is a big difference between the profit being made by the farmers and the profit being made by the supermarket chains .
In my own country , there are about 22 000 people employed in the dairy sector .
The dairy market in Ireland alone is worth EUR 1 billion annually .
I do not think that the European Union is doing enough to help farmers ; and I am not talking about the grants - the grants are good .
There are many things wrong with the market .
For example , farmers ought to be paid for their produce within 30 days .
This does not happen at all .
In addition , the supermarket sells milk at a discount , but it is the farmer who loses money .
I am disappointed that those problems are not going to be dealt with .
We must do a lot more to protect farmers against the power of the supermarkets .
( RO ) Mr President , fundamental rights form the basic principles of the European Union .
It is the main duty of all European institutions to monitor the observance of these rights .
In Romania , a Member State of the European Union , we are witnessing serious violations of fundamental rights .
After bankrupting the country economically and socially , the current Romanian Government is now implementing ridiculous measures , amounting to a serious violation of the fundamental rights recognised in the European Union - the right to a pension , trade union rights , the right to a salary and the rights of young mothers .
In addition to this , I wish to point out that preparations are also under way in Romania to amend the law on the protection and promotion of the rights of persons with disabilities .
Approval of the bill being tabled by the Romanian Government will only serve to make life more difficult for people with disabilities , making them dependent on the state , instead of enhancing their protection and promoting their social inclusion .
This will have a far-reaching detrimental impact on the interests and dignity of people with disabilities .
( LV ) Mr President , I should like to ask you what the expression ' test pilot ' means ?
It means the pilot who tests the aircraft during flight .
What is a ' test passenger ' ?
This concept was recently invented by the Latvian airline airBaltic .
It is a pity , however , that airBaltic failed to inform passengers that they were participating in tests .
For instance , airBaltic seats passengers in the aircraft and , later , while they are in the air , it turns out that the aircraft has technical problems , as a result of which it makes an emergency landing .
In my opinion , an aircraft should be made ready pre-flight , not during the flight , especially when it contains passengers .
Recently , airBaltic has registered a very large number of emergencies .
I should like to draw the attention of Members and the European Commission to the problem of air safety .
A frivolous attitude can result in tragic consequences . Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , I have now been told on two occasions that an oral question concerning the referendum on the future of South Sudan will not be reinstated in the order of business .
I should remind you that , according to the comprehensive peace agreement of 2005 , South Sudan has the opportunity , at the end of a five-year period , of voting whether or not to remain as part of the Sudanese state .
The referendum is scheduled to take place on 9 January next .
However , a number of unresolved issues , namely , the drawing up of electoral lists , the settlement of differences concerning the border between the North and the South , not to mention the security measures to be taken if the need arises , should have been the subject of an exchange of views in this House .
If we keep on endlessly postponing the debate , we shall deprive ourselves of our right to provide political momentum .
That is my point of view .
I persist in believing that it would be more judicious to try and prevent conflict situations than to stand by and wait for tragedies to erupt .
( PT ) Mr President , recent Eurostat figures show that Portugal is one of the countries with the highest levels of job insecurity : 22 % of workers are in precarious jobs , while the European Union average is 13.5 % .
Women and young people are the worst hit .
More than 23 % of people under the age of 25 are unemployed and poverty has reached 18 % in Portugal ; this is also increasingly taking account of poor workers who do not earn enough to escape poverty .
How is it therefore possible to understand the unacceptable pressure that the European Commission is putting on the Portuguese Government to change labour legislation and render it even easier to make people redundant ?
What is needed is increased support for the creation of jobs with rights and decent wages .
( PT ) Mr President , despite the austerity budgets , despite the International Monetary Fund , despite the Stabilisation Fund , and despite a penalty-based mechanism for economic coordination , the attack on the euro continues through the speculative attack on the sovereign debts of several countries .
It must be acknowledged that the error can only be in the political decisions that have been taken .
Every time that Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy speculate in public , the speculators immediately thank them and speculate accordingly .
It is clear that every time that they say ' no ' to Eurobonds in particular , the speculators thank them because they are grateful for the price ; the price of this speculation is division in Europe .
This is a Europe without solidarity and a Europe in which the peripheral countries are becoming increasingly peripheral .
This must change , Mr President .
( DE ) Mr President , I have long been an advocate of the euro , but now its future is at stake .
The Heads of Government in Europe do not have the courage to finally stop throwing good money after bad .
It is time to stop saying : ' Let 's put the problem off for a couple of years ' .
Instead , we need to finally be brave and responsible enough to take a debt haircut .
Only then will the banks be able to be held accountable .
It will hit people like us too - via our pension funds and life assurance .
However , where this is concerned , we need to bite the bullet now , rather than prolonging the agony .
This is where the great problem lies .
In this connection , I should like to call on all my fellow Members to become involved in the initiatives from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , particularly as regards financewatch.org , so that in the future , we will actually be able to find ways of proceeding against the banks , against the lobbyists who are unfortunately still dictating matters here , and to get independent information .
( RO ) Mr President , the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area is of paramount importance to the stability of the EU 's eastern border .
Secondly , what may be just as important is that this is a natural step after both countries received fully-fledged member status of the European Union in 2007 .
However , this decision must be based on technical practicalities and not on sentiment or passion .
There are some governing parties in the European Union which believe that they can win certain electoral arguments if they oppose this decision and lay the blame with Romania and Bulgaria for the fact that there are problems with Roma integration at EU level .
On the other hand , if the report concludes with a favourable outcome and the inspection carried out recently in both Member States indicates that both countries are prepared for joining the Schengen area , I would say that it is extremely important for us to continue supporting them , especially as we gave them a positive assessment not that long ago .
( PT ) Mr President , following yet another conference on climate change , I think that , being honest with ourselves , the most that we can manage to say is that it was better than the Copenhagen conference because some results were achieved and some progress was made .
It was better because a compromise was reached , once again under the umbrella of the United Nations .
It was better because the European Union came out of the Cancún conference better off and it was a much more transparent process than the previous one .
However , this alone cannot be seen as a consolation and we must recognise that it is still very little .
There is a basis for continued work , but we must also recognise that this basis , while positive , remains founded on promises .
Governments need to go a great deal further to meet the public 's needs and to meet the needs of a real crisis with real victims .
I am pleased that we will be discussing this in greater depth here tomorrow .
Commemorating the Universal Declaration of Human Rights will serve little purpose if we continue to neglect those rights .
We should already know that the market does not solve everything and that it is time to put people first .
( PT ) Mr President , a few days ago , in the US Congress , Representative Ron Paul asked a crucial question : when a war starts with a lie , is it more important to keep the secret or let the public know the truth ?
I share the concern of our fellow Member on the other side of the Atlantic regarding the WikiLeaks case .
There are secrets that are justified and necessary .
The problem arises when secrets become the rule rather than the exception and , in recent years , we have seen the growth of a culture of secrecy that is only deepening , circumventing democratic control , and which is now fiercely defending its privileges , as we have seen in the reactions of some governments and companies to the WikiLeaks case .
In the wake of political pressure , Amazon , Visa , MasterCard and even a Swiss bank that previously had deals with WikiLeaks have pulled out of them .
A French minister has demanded that France should not allow this website to operate on French territory .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is no legal basis for such pressure in the slightest .
Trust is a two-way street and governments can only demand public trust when they are prepared to trust the public .
( NL ) Mr President , it is exactly six months today since the federal parliamentary elections in Belgium took place .
I need to point this out , because we have never before been in a situation where an EU Presidency has been held by a caretaker government for the full six months .
The Council is not politically represented here today .
That is slightly unfortunate , because this surreal situation is worth mentioning .
The artificial construct that is Belgium is still as ungovernable today as it was six months ago and there is nothing that can be done about that , because Flanders and Wallonia have evolved into two different countries with totally different political and socio-economic cultures .
Mr President , the situation in Belgium has reached a total impasse , so much so that the European Union had better prepare itself for the emergence of two new Member States : Flanders and Wallonia .
( RO ) Mr President , the recent amendments made to the Labour Code in Romania will exacerbate further the situation of employees , already hit hard by recession .
The period of notice required from employees who have resigned and trial periods are going to be extended , which means that employment contracts can be terminated without notice during or at the end of this period , during which more than three people can be employed in succession for the same position .
However , the most abusive measure , which blatantly flouts basic human rights , aims to suspend by law an employee 's individual employment contract while taking part in a strike .
I simply wish to protest against this attempt to turn employees into the bosses ' slaves .
I would also like to call on Europe 's political forces and institutions to intervene and halt the decline in the status of employees in Romania .
That concludes the item .
EU-Georgia agreement on facilitation of issuance of visas - EU-Georgia agreement on readmission of persons residing without authorisation - Visa liberalisation scheme in Serbia and Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia - Implementation of the EU-Russia visa facilitation agreement ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the recommendation from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the draft Council decision concerning the conclusion of the agreement between the European Union and Georgia on the facilitation of the issuance of visas ( 11324 / 2010 - C7-0391 / 2010 - 2010 / 0106 ( NLE ) ) ( Rapporteur : Nathalie Griesbeck ) ,
the recommendation from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the agreement between the European Union and Georgia on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation ( 15507 / 2010 - C7-0392 / 2010 - 2010 / 0108 ( NLE ) ) ( Rapporteur : Nathalie Griesbeck ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on implementation of the EU-Russia visa facilitation agreement by Kristiina Ojuland , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - B7-0568 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on implementation of the EU-Russia visa facilitation agreement by Manfred Weber , Simon Busuttil , Elmar Brok , Alojz Peterle , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party - B7-0656 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on concerns about the correct application of the EU visa liberalisation scheme in Serbia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , by Simon Busuttil , Manfred Weber , Anna Maria Corazza Bildt , Monika Hohlmeier , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party - B7-0654 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to introduce these two reports this evening ; reports , which I shall be presenting jointly , on the agreements between the Union and Georgia .
The first concerns facilitation of the issuance of visas and the second the readmission of persons residing without authorisation .
By way of reminder , the first agreement on obligations relating to readmission provides for complete reciprocity to be applied to national citizens and nationals of third countries .
It establishes readmission procedures - readmission requests , information , documents provided , proof , means of proof , deadlines , means of transfer , transport , transit , etc . , unlike the case of the European Union-Pakistan readmission agreement , which you perhaps remember , and which I strongly opposed a few months ago .
In this case , I should like to express my total satisfaction with this agreement , for the reason that it does indeed respect human rights and it should be possible to guarantee its application , since Georgia is a signatory to the Geneva Convention on Refugees and the European Convention on Human Rights .
These are two prerequisites that are essential , in my view , for approval to be given to such an agreement .
The second agreement focusing on facilitation of the issuance of visas makes it possible for Georgian citizens , in particular , those who travel , such as students , journalists and so on , to obtain short-stay visas for travel to the European Union more easily , and thus to simplify significantly all the requirements for documents to be submitted in support of this type of application .
I should also like to remind you that , obviously , these two agreements go hand in hand , as , on the basis of the common approach , in principle , an agreement on facilitation of the issuance of visas can only be concluded if a readmission agreement exists .
There are therefore two important points to be raised .
We have here an essential stage in the strengthening of relations between the Union and Georgia , which has , in recent years , demonstrated a clear desire for closer relations with us .
These agreements are a first step in terms of privileged relations , a strong signal on the part of the Union towards Georgia .
Of course , these agreements are also of interest at the regional level .
They will contribute to the efforts the Union has made to strengthen cooperation with other countries in the Southern Caucasus region as well .
I certainly believe , as we all do , that this is also a way of encouraging Georgia to implement all the necessary reforms that the President , just a few days ago , reminded us were needed in the areas of liberty , security and justice .
This will perhaps allow us to fight together still more effectively against clandestine immigration and to promote the development , in a nutshell , of democracy .
I therefore call upon you , ladies and gentlemen , to approve these two agreements concluded with Georgia .
However , in conclusion , I should like to remind you , Commissioner , that although we cooperate very well with one another , a few months ago , when we were discussing the readmission agreement with Pakistan , you gave a solemn declaration to the effect that you would commit yourself to producing an evaluation of current readmission agreements and also a regular report to Parliament on these agreements , both those already concluded and those still under negotiation .
I should like you to confirm once again , whether solemnly or otherwise , before this House , that we shall therefore not be kept on the sidelines , or too little involved or poorly informed , concerning the commencement and the progress of negotiations on agreements since your declaration .
I believe that this is essential if we are to move forward together effectively in line with our values .
author . - Mr President , I must say that I am very happy that this debate on the EU-Russia visa waiver agreement is taking place today in this House , because this issue has been on the joint political agenda between the EU and the Russian Federation for so long now .
I welcome any political progress that was made in this regard at the summit last week .
However , I will remain vigilant over the way it is put into practice .
Concerning the question to the Commission on the implementation of the EU-Russia visa facilitation agreement that I tabled on behalf of the ALDE Group , I wanted to learn what progress has been made so far and whether we are , at the moment , in a position to expect a breakthrough in tackling technical questions such as the requirement for EU citizens to register with the authorities within three days if staying in a private home in Russia .
I fully support the intended visa waiver agreement as a measure to enable Russian citizens to travel to the EU with minimum formalities , but I would expect the Russian side to apply the same stance to citizens of the European Union .
Another concern that one must address is security on the external borders of the Russian Federation , especially keeping in mind the illegal immigration flows from the south and elsewhere .
The Russian side should secure full control over its borders , just as the European Union must exercise thorough border checks .
The future visa waiver agreement must exclude any additional threats to the European Union .
Madam Commissioner , I very much look forward to your response .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) would also like to use today 's debate to take a general look at the visa policy of the European Union .
Firstly , it is important to emphasise , to make ourselves aware , of the great value of this visa policy to the European Union .
Since we are a common Europe , a common space for people , we are able to create a common visa policy .
Our visa policy is therefore also a sign of European unity - a very successful sign of European unity - and it is important to point that out , particularly in times of crisis .
Secondly , we are calling for clear rules of play when it comes to visa facilitation .
The technical standards that are to be maintained - at external borders and when issuing passports and identity papers - are clearly set out .
We cannot make any political concessions as regards the upholding of these standards .
In 2010 , we found that in the Balkans , there was initially a focus on technical standards , but political arguments were then advanced with increasing vigour .
When it comes to visa facilitation , however , one cannot stop at one country ; we have to view the area as a whole .
Yes , it is always difficult for us to weigh things up in an individual case .
However , the core of the issue is that the technical standards must be upheld ; the criteria must remain .
I therefore also support our Commissioner when she says that these standards that we are demanding must also be implemented in reality .
That is an important task of the Commission , because only then will our visa policy be accepted by our citizens .
Thirdly , I would like to mention that we welcome the fact that the last European Justice and Home Affairs Council discussed enabling visa facilitation to be rapidly lifted or withdrawn from individual states if they fail to implement the standards .
The example of Serbia showed us that the result was a great influx of asylum seekers .
Moving on to my final point , for the time being - when talking about Ukraine and Russia - our group is highly sceptical as regards opening the doors quickly , because we have just seen in the case of Serbia that there will also be negative effects .
We should therefore proceed with great caution when it comes to visa policy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , I will address all the questions .
Thank you for placing this very important debate on the agenda .
Let me start by thanking Mrs Griesbeck for her support and her work in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the EU-Georgia agreement with the adoption of a favourable opinion .
Following the crisis in Georgia in the summer of 2008 , it was decided at an extraordinary meeting of the Council of the European Union to step up relations with Georgia , including visa facilitation measures .
As you mention , Mrs Griesbeck , it is standard EU policy that a visa facilitation agreement cannot be offered to a third country without a readmission agreement , so the European Council 's decision implied that the two should be negotiated and concluded in parallel .
I am very grateful to Mrs Griesbeck for having also noted the important step forward in relations between Georgia and the EU that these two agreements represent .
The agreement is very much along the lines of a standard EU readmission agreement , covering nationals as well as third country nationals , and also safeguarding - as was said - respect for human rights through a ' non-effective ' clause and an article on data protection .
The agreement also provides for the establishment of a joint readmission committee , tasked with monitoring implementation of the agreement .
This is an important step towards smoother mobility between the people of Georgia and the European Union .
Georgia has already waived the visa requirement for EU citizens , and this agreement will facilitate mobility for Georgian citizens .
The agreement will indeed make it easier , cheaper and quicker for Georgian citizens - more than 60 000 per year - to obtain a Schengen visa .
It will bring other concrete benefits : a 10-day deadline will be set for the processing of applications and the visa fee will be reduced from EUR 60 to EUR 35 .
There will be certain categories of applicants who will be free of charge : students , journalists , children , pensioners , the disabled , etc .
They can also benefit from a simplified supporting documents requirement and a multi-entry visa if they need to travel .
Also , holders of diplomatic passports will be entirely exempted from visa obligations , which will further strengthen official contacts between the EU and Georgia .
Mrs Griesbeck mentioned the evaluation .
This has been slightly delayed , but I will present it by the beginning of next year - I hope no later than February .
I will be happy to discuss it with the Civil Liberties Committee and Parliament .
You also made reference to the programme for Pakistan .
This has only been operational for 13 days so it is a little early to evaluate it , but we will , of course , be happy to keep you updated .
Concerning the issue raised by Mrs Ojuland of the visa facilitation agreement between the EU and Russia , this has been in force since 1 January 2007 .
It is one of the eight visa facilitation agreements that we have concluded .
Particularly important elements are that it applies on a reciprocal basis to EU citizens also , as they are currently under a visa obligation for travelling to Russia .
It is also an important agreement in quantitative terms .
According to statistics provided by Russia , more than 1.5 million visas were issued to EU citizens in 2008 and the same year , Member State consulates issued 3.5 million visas to Russian citizens .
That is more than a quarter of all Schengen visas issued worldwide .
All EU and Russian citizens benefit from the general facilitation provided by this facilitation agreement , such as a reduced fee of EUR 35 .
Certain categories are also exempted under specific facilitation ; there is a visa-free waiver and also a multi-entry visa .
The Commission has evaluated this facilitation and has found that it works quite well .
However , there are some shortcomings , as were referred to .
To address these , we adopted a month ago a recommendation for directives for the renegotiation of the visa facilitation with Russia .
This relates entirely to further facilitation with regard to documentary evidence and the length of the visa application procedure , the extension of the provisions for the issuing of multiple-entry visas and a visa-free waiver for a number of well-defined categories of applicants .
As regards the specific issue of the implementation of Article 10 of the visa facilitation agreement , which provides for the simplification of the registration procedure , we noted in our evaluation that Russia had adopted some simplification ; it is now possible to register by post , for example .
The registration fee will be abolished by next year , but some of the other measures , such as the translation of the registrations into English and the possibility to register online , have not yet materialised .
We are raising this issue with our Russian counterparts and in different fora , and we hope that this will take place very soon .
Concerning the other Eastern Partnership countries , there have been other steps as well .
This was also in your question .
We have visa facilitation with Moldova and Ukraine as from 1 January 2008 , but we are also renegotiating these agreements .
Regarding Belarus , draft negotiating directives for visa facilitation were adopted by the Commission a month ago , and we will recommend multiple-entry visas with a long period of validity for bona fide travellers and set deadlines for processing visa applications , as well as possible exemptions for visa obligations for holders of diplomatic passports .
We will also adopt draft negotiating directives for a visa facilitation agreement with Azerbaijan and Armenia next year .
On the correct application of the visa liberalisation scheme that Mr Weber referred to , namely , that applicable to Serbia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , the Council decided , as was also said , to grant visa-free travel to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia in 2009 .
The decision came following intensive dialogue and substantial progress by these countries on the main matters covered by the visa liberalisation dialogues .
The dialogues have proved effective in implementing a lot of important reforms but , as was also pointed out , the visa-free regime comes with responsibilities and the countries concerned should take the appropriate measures to make sure that there is no abuse of the visa waiver .
Some Member States have experienced an increased number of asylum applications from these countries - notably Serbia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
These have to be assessed on an individual basis according to our legislation .
We have taken a number of steps to address this situation : we have had high-level meetings with the Ministers of the Interior on the two questions , and there was a high-level visit to the two capitals by the Belgian Presidency and the Commission .
The authorities of these two countries have taken some steps .
There have been new information campaigns organised to inform the citizens .
There are instructions to the border police to deliver and to perform increased controls on people exiting the country and to inform travellers about the risk of unfounded applications for asylum .
When , earlier this autumn , we proposed lifting the visa requirement for the citizens of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina , both countries committed themselves to setting up information campaigns for their citizens on the rights and obligations arising from the visa waiver , and this has been done .
These are very ambitious campaigns .
In addition , after approval by the European Parliament and the Council , the Commission made a commitment to intensify post-visa liberalisation monitoring for all the Western Balkan countries .
There will be two parts to this .
On the one hand , we will continue to assess the sustainable implementation of reforms by the countries concerned through the stabilisation and association process - in particular , in the area of justice , freedom and security .
On the other hand , we will also act as a prevention mechanism against new situations of high in-flow of persons from the region .
The collection of the necessary operational information that could help to prevent these situations was done early this year , and we will have active participation from Frontex , Europol , immigration liaison officers , Western Balkan police liaison officers and the secretariat of the Police Corporation Convention for South-East Europe , supported by the incoming presidencies - Hungary and Poland .
All the information exchanged and collected will be shared by EU Member States and , of course , when appropriate , with the countries of the Western Balkans .
Such information will also feed into the Commission assessment to be carried out in the first semester of next year on post-visa liberalisation monitoring .
I consider that these measures should contribute to avoiding the misuse of the visa-free travel regime , and I am confident that close cooperation between the countries of origin and EU destination countries , supported by the Commission , offers an effective response .
We will , of course , continue to report regularly to the European Parliament and to the Council on the results of this monitoring mechanism , for the first time in June 2011 .
Mr President , as the permanent rapporteur of the European Parliament for the European Union 's cooperation with Georgia , as well as the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on Mrs Griesbeck 's reports , I would like to say a few words about these two agreements - the agreement on readmission and the agreement on visa facilitation between the European Union and Georgia .
I feel duty-bound to say that these agreements were adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs by an overwhelming majority of votes .
I would like to add that at the previous parliamentary session , here in Strasbourg , we listened to a speech given by President Saakashvili ; a speech which even in the eyes of those who would not consider themselves to be his fans was described as being matter-of-fact , balanced and rational .
President Saakashvili , during his speech , not only declared his renunciation of the use of force and willingness to hold talks with Russia on difficult matters , but also declared that the main goal of Georgia 's foreign policy would , of course , be European integration and NATO membership .
In my opinion , we have to remember that Georgia and the Georgians are today the most pro-European country and nation out of those countries that are included in the Eastern Partnership programme , although we must not , of course , talk about any deadlines , because talking about deadlines today would be a sure sign of madness .
The European Union should give a positive and matter-of-fact response to Georgians ' ambitions .
We should be open to cooperation with Georgia .
These agreements that we are talking about today obviously do not constitute a revolution , but we all regard them as a step in the right direction .
The key thing is to bring them into effect as soon as possible , because in my opinion , it would be wrong if people living in Abkhazia or South Ossetia , regions which have broken away from Georgia and whose residents hold Russian passports , had it easier today in terms of visas than people living in Georgia .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the EPP Group is in favour of the two proposals for EU-Georgia agreements : the readmission agreement and the visa facilitation agreement .
I would like to refer to the last one , the visa facilitation agreement .
It simplifies the visa application for Georgians .
Member States will apply uniform and simplified procedures .
A visa will cost EUR 35 , less than at present , and will allow a stay of up to 90 days every six months .
Visa applications will be processed in 10 days , or in three days for some categories , or less in cases of emergencies .
No visas will be required on diplomatic passports .
Free movement is one road to learning democracy and seeing it at work .
The people-to-people direct contact means sharing values and realities .
It creates trust .
This is why I hope that more EU citizens will travel to Georgia and more Georgians will travel to the European Union .
Mr President , we would like to thank Commissioner Malmström for the information she has provided .
Visa policy is a very important tool in our hands in that it can help us facilitate contacts between people , and bring the countries concerned closer to the European Union .
From this point of view , this agreement between the European Union and Georgia is a very important one .
I would like to say a few words about visa liberalisation in the countries of the Western Balkans , mainly about the problems that have arisen in connection with Serbia and Macedonia .
We supported this agreement with an overwhelming majority in Parliament , and we consider it very important for the aforementioned reasons .
These countries undertook serious efforts to meet expectations , even though we often see that their political lives are divided .
We have seen cooperation in these countries in this area .
It is satisfying to see that the number of people travelling to the European Union has increased .
We have the impression that the problems in Serbia and Macedonia are largely due to human trafficking , and that this definitely affects a smaller number of people , even if it causes serious problems .
I believe that we have a shared responsibility .
We have a shared responsibility to ensure that these countries , too , do everything in their power , both in respect of informing their citizens and taking decisive action .
Serbia , by the way , has done so very quickly and efficiently .
I believe , however , that our own responsibility in this is also quite considerable .
It is the responsibility of the Commission both to assist these countries in combating human trafficking and to provide information , monitor the events that take place in the area and truly increase the effectiveness of this otherwise very important tool , which we intend to continue to use in the future , both in connection with the countries of the Western Balkans and other countries .
Furthermore , please allow me to state in a few words that we are very pleased that , although somewhat later and with a one-year delay , Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina will also be joining the group of visa-exempt countries this year .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I agree with Mr Weber of the EPP that EU visa policy is extremely valuable and that technical standards and conditions of visa facilitation and visa waiver must be met .
However , I do not believe that , in the case of the Balkan visa waiver , political considerations have overridden these technical standards .
The Commission worked very hard to get document integrity , law enforcement and border controls up to scratch .
We would devalue our own stance if we thought that the technical standards had not been met , because we voted to support that visa waiver .
Of course , it is of concern if concessions are abused , but there must be measured and proportionate responses .
The countries concerned - as Commissioner Malmström said - have responsibilities and they must be reminded of them .
The Commissioner has explained to us that there has been quite intense work , with high-level meetings with interior ministers , visits to capitals , encouragement to run information campaigns - and there is a specific commitment by Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania to inform their citizens .
Of course , if there are problems with one visa waiver agreement , this undermines the others , so there is a certain onus for responsibility and solidarity and for all citizens to be aware that they could harm other people 's chances of free travel .
I personally am reassured - and I think my group will be - that the Commission will intensify its monitoring of respect for the agreement conditions and have a mechanism for flagging up problems through close cooperation with our partners .
I hope that all groups will find that reassuring and adequate .
As my neighbour , Mrs Macovei of the EPP , has said , people-to-people direct contacts create trust .
That is the bottom line .
That is the reason we support visa facilitation and visa waiver .
There has been broad based cross-party support in Parliament for this proposal because it is based on our EU experience and values .
So do not let us overreact .
There have been problems , but the Commission is on the case .
Let us make sure that we do not undermine either the right to asylum or the visa waiver agreements .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , our political group supports the visa facilitation agreement between the EU and Georgia .
However , we have some reservations on the agreement on readmission .
We voted against it in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and submitted a written minority opinion , because the agreement contains numerous ambiguities which might be clarified in the Joint Readmission Committee .
It does not include strict safeguards concerning the violation of fundamental rights and guaranteeing high standards of reception , which are poor in Georgia .
It aims at returning people to a country where sexual and gender-based violence is rife and police ill-treatment tolerated .
It applies also to those former residents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia who do not have any de facto links to Georgia .
And now some words on the visa agreement with Russia .
Three years ago , a report was adopted on visa facilitation with Russia , which passed my own amendment saying that the requirement of the mandatory registration procedure is a serious obstacle to travel within Russia and the EU .
Unfortunately , nothing has changed since that time and this is crucially important for my electorate who travel to Russia for private visits .
Mr President , Georgia today is a country that , despite facing many problems , is undergoing very dynamic social and economic changes .
We should unambiguously and gladly welcome any way of showing Georgian society that the strength of these changes is being reflected in our reactions as European Union institutions .
When it comes to Russia , too , we should consider in what context we see the visa regime with Russia .
My feeling is that it should not be treated as a point of prestige for the authorities - that if we abolish the visa requirement , then the Russian authorities will negotiate well with the European Union .
We should take a different view of it , in the context of ensuring modernisation and in the context of our relations with ordinary Russians .
For this reason , it should be stated explicitly that the process of abolishing visas , of opening up on the basis of established conditions , is a very positive one , which makes a positive contribution to our relations with societies in the East .
The myth that visas are some kind of crucial element for our security should be debunked , and it should be said , perhaps particularly clearly in the European Parliament , and repeated at every opportunity : visas build walls , unnecessary walls .
Within the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee that I chair , we have examined a special report with non-governmental organisations in which we researched this issue .
The report shows clearly that visas are , in fact , not an important security instrument ; visas are a way of separating European Union societies from those in the East , whereas we should always be open .
This is our duty as parliamentarians .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I can say that we support the facilitation of the issuance of visas , but at the same time , everything must be done to ensure compliance with the technical requirements prescribed in regulations .
On behalf of my electors in Latvia , I also support those facilitations connected with travel from Russia to the European Union , for this is very important in circumstances such as a family 's ability to come together , as in Latvia there are many mixed families and relatives where some live in one country and some in the other .
This is also essential for tourism , which is developing strongly recently .
Moreover , there has already been positive feedback on what has already been achieved by way of visa facilitation .
This is also essential for business .
If we look at Latvia 's business relationships with Russia , these are seven times greater when it comes to imports , and eight times greater for exports .
This is all very positive .
I wish the Commission success in implementing it all .
Mr President , as we all know , the visa exemption has applied to biometric passport holders from FYROM , Serbia and Montenegro since 19 December 2009 .
Nonetheless , concerns are being voiced by Member States of the European Union - and were voiced today by Commissioner Malmström - about the increase in the number of asylum applications by Serbian and FYROM citizens and the possibility of a situation arising which will jeopardise the issuing of visas and the point of the measure .
My country , Greece , backed the prospect of abolishing visa requirements for citizens from all Western Balkan countries , as real proof of their European prospects .
This was first formulated on the agenda in Thessaloniki in June 2003 and in the spirit of the Greek initiative for Agenda 2014 .
This notwithstanding , I must express my concern as to whether the criteria of the road map are being applied by these countries and as to whether immigration flows from these countries to Member States of the European Union are being controlled , especially now that the European family is being shaken by the financial crisis and cannot bear the weight of more immigrants .
We have to understand that more visa facilitation agreements are designed to facilitate travel within the European Union , not immigration or other illegal activities , such as human trafficking .
( NL ) Mr President , last month , the European Commission rightly sent the governments of Serbia and Macedonia a letter of warning concerning the alarming increase in asylum applications from these two countries .
Mr President , it leaves a particularly sour taste in the mouth that in the very same month , this House decided to grant a visa waiver for Albania and Bosnia .
Obviously , these two countries also immediately began behaving in a way similar to the conduct which led to that first letter of warning .
Mr President , that should never have been allowed to happen , but it is not yet too late .
The waiving of the visa requirement also comes with a certain responsibility and , if this responsibility is not taken , then we have to act .
The Commission must haul the Serbian and Macedonian ambassadors over the carpet and demand that they take action .
If it were up to me , we would revoke that visa waiver today , but the Commission will probably not be in favour of that , so what I do want the Commission to say is that it will have the courage to penalise any continued misconduct on the part of these Balkan countries .
Serbia and Macedonia are the forerunners of Bosnia and Albania .
It is time that we sent out a clear signal to these two Balkan countries and doing so would be a good thing .
( ES ) Mr President , the increase in asylum applications on behalf of citizens of Serbia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia requires measures protecting the amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 .

Visas are an instrument included in the framework of immigration policies ; their purpose is to legalise the entry and temporary stay in a country where the applicant is neither a non-national nor a resident .
Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 provides for an evaluation mechanism for visa extension , in which certain requirements in relation to illegal immigration , public order and security , the Union 's external relations , territorial cohesion and the principle of reciprocity must be fulfilled .
This mechanism could also function in the opposite direction .
Asylum , on the other hand , is an instrument of protection that cannot be used incorrectly .
It should be pointed out that the purpose of the European Union 's common policy in this area is to preserve the integrity of asylum as an instrument of protection for the persecuted , prioritising the principles of the Geneva Convention and the New York Protocol , applying common criteria for the identification of people who genuinely require international protection and a guaranteed common minimum level of benefits in all Member States for the welfare of those people .
Asylum is therefore an instrument of humanitarianism and solidarity and , hence , exclusive in its purpose and nature .
This is why it is important that the European Union reacts and helps the Serbian and Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonian authorities to adopt sufficient measures regarding the requirements that must be fulfilled to benefit from refugee status or subsidiary protection status , thereby avoiding improper or fraudulent use of them .
( RO ) Mr President , thank you , Commissioner , for the information which you have provided us with regarding the visa facilitation regulations , especially for Georgia , the Republic of Moldova and the countries of the former Yugoslavia .
Indeed , the timing of our debate coincides with the introduction of the visa waiver for citizens from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , including the option to suspend the agreement quickly if problems arise , such as a deluge of asylum applications .
I believe that any attempt to turn the clock back on the European Union 's policy towards the Western Balkans would be a mistake .
Lifting the barriers preventing free movement can make an important contribution to closing the wounds of the past .
At the same time , I think that closer cooperation is required between the European Union and these states in order to discourage the flood of asylum applications , tighten border controls , provide correct information to local citizens and combat the organised crime networks involved in human trafficking and in exporting crime and prostitution .
All these measures can help reduce the incidence of these activities .
( NL ) Mr President , we have a situation where a number of misguided Serbs and Macedonians have applied for asylum in Belgium , Sweden and Germany since the introduction of visa-free travel .
I support the call of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for us to ensure that the inhabitants of the Balkans are better informed , but there is something else important to bear in mind here .
First of all , there are other people , too , who do not understand what visa-free travel actually entails .
I have heard Dutch members of this Parliament saying , in all seriousness , that we are now going to have hordes of asylum seekers coming to take our jobs , just like the Poles did , and I am not even talking about the delegation of the Dutch Freedom Party ( PVV ) .
That suggestion is not only absolutely ridiculous , but could also do a great deal of harm .
They are playing on the fear and ignorance of our citizens .
Secondly , those asylum seekers were almost exclusively members of ethnic minorities .
If there is anything on which we need to call Serbia and Macedonia to account , it is that they have to do much more to improve the position of these ethnic minorities .
So yes , let us ensure that the inhabitants of the Balkans are better informed , but let us also ensure that members of this House and citizens and ministers of the EU are better informed of what visa-free travel actually entails .
( SK ) Mr President , we are considering whether the current agreement concluded between Russia and the European Union fulfils our expectations and whether the two-way movement of people matches their interest in travelling .
Commissioner , I can tell you without the slightest hesitation that the current visa regime is deficient and is particularly damaging to the EU .
Russia has changed enormously since the time of the former Soviet Union .
The middle class is solvent and is interested in learning about the world , travelling , relaxing and shopping .
When my country acceded to the Schengen area , we had to impose restrictions on Russian citizens travelling to Slovakia , in accordance with EU rules .
The financial impact was serious , with tour operators and shops losing many good customers .
The European visa regime discourages respectable Russians from travelling to Slovakia , while not restricting the less respectable from migrating in the slightest .
I therefore firmly believe that if we care at all about respectable Russians , we will try to open our economic space and make use of the potential that exists in Russia in order to expand and enhance cooperation between our countries .
Mr President , I am so glad that in two days , the people of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina can finally celebrate the granting of visa-free travel to the EU Schengen area - just before Christmas .
Their happiness is my happiness .
I have been fully committed to supporting and accelerating the visa liberalisation process for all countries of the Western Balkans and , finally , almost all of them will be able to enjoy the opportunity to visit and study in our countries for three months .
Our oral question to the Commission has to be seen in a positive spirit .
It is to make sure that this new freedom is not put at risk .
The visa-free regime is not about asylum for political or economic reasons .
It is not about permanent residence .
It is not about a work permit .
I would like to welcome the steps that Commissioner Malmström has already taken - in particular , with the authorities of Serbia and FYROM - showing the determination of the Commission to keep the process on track and to ensure correct application of the regime .
Thank you for your response .
Now we have to continue working together to prevent and address any misinterpretation , misunderstanding or misuse .
The responsibility continues to lie with the authorities of the region .
We welcome the fact that Albania and FYROM have already successfully launched an information campaign , and we encourage all the countries in the region of the Western Balkans to do the same and to step up measures to prevent abuse .
We ask the Commission to continue monitoring , as it does already , and to report to us .
Developing people-to-people contact , as you have already said , is essential for democracy and stability in the region .
Let us not put that at stake in a European perspective .
My commitment continues to be whole-hearted .
( RO ) Mr President , one essential condition for a complete waiver of visas between the Russian Federation and the European Union is fulfilment of the commitments made through the 2007 agreement .
The Russian authorities have repeatedly requested that the short-stay visa requirement be lifted .
The EU , on the other hand , has preferred a gradual approach , reflected by a list of joint measures .
I feel it is important for all the technical conditions to be met before implementing a decision on visa liberalisation , for example , improvements in border management standards , document security or the fight against corruption .
Russia must also confirm by deeds its intention to achieve tangible results in settling unresolved conflicts in the region .
It has a firm responsibility in this regard .
Resolving the conflict in Transnistria is a political priority for my country .
We support the continuation of formal discussions as part of the 5 + 2 negotiations , with the aim of identifying a lasting solution .
It must fully respect international law and the Republic of Moldova 's sovereignty .
I would also like to mention the situation of the Eastern Partnership countries , which include Georgia and the Republic of Moldova .
They have been waiting a long time for visa liberalisation and have implemented numerous reforms with this in mind .
I wish to point out that the Republic of Moldova is a great advocate of this measure within the Eastern Partnership .
I want to stress that if Russia achieves a relaxation of the visa scheme before the EU 's close neighbours , the latter would find this demoralising .
This would prove that the status of Partnership countries does not count for very much when strategic concessions from the Union are at stake .

( PL ) Mr President , we are supposed to speak about visas ; we are supposed to speak about visas in terms of statistics and what the European Union has done .
In this Chamber , there is widespread satisfaction .
I would like all of you who have spoken with such satisfaction today to try and imagine having to stand for 10 or more hours in a queue , bear humiliation and discomfort and stand in the rain in terrible conditions in order to get a visa .
People have to stand and they have to pay one third of their salary to get a visa .
They also have to hear that diplomats in their country do not need visas , and finally , after trying to get a visa several times , because they need one , they get a single-entry visa , despite wanting a Schengen visa , but they did at least get a visa for the country in question .
The visa procedure should weigh heavily on our conscience .
It is nothing short of a humiliation for millions of people - the people who stand in those queues .
Let us remember this when expressing the satisfaction that is so widespread in this Chamber today .
I understand that we use the visa procedure as a carrot and stick , but this should apply to governments , and we should sympathise with the people who stand in the queues .
Madam Commissioner , you are from Sweden .
As you know , in the 1970s , your country , with Austria , was one of only two countries where there was a no-visa regime for the communist countries .
As a citizen of Poland , I visited your country in 1976 .
Why ?
Because travelling to Sweden was visa-free .
Of course I love your King , Swedish freedom and the economy , but please remember that , as long as we have visas , we should not feel comfortable .
Mr President , speaking on behalf of the EPP Group , we look at visa facilitation and visa liberalisation policy very positively , because we think that this is a very positive instrument with which to deal with third countries , especially those countries that lie in our near neighbourhood .
So our initial outlook is clearly positive .
Visa facilitation is the first step , and this week we are giving it to Georgia .
It is a first step , but it is an important step in what my colleague , Anna Maria Corazza Bildt , has called people-to-people contact .
Visa facilitation normally goes together with readmission agreements .
Madam Commissioner , we also attach a great deal of importance to readmission agreements because we want to make sure that people who are illegally staying in EU territory are asked to leave .
This is the only way in which we can win public trust for visa facilitation and eventual visa liberalisation .
The two go together , so we ask you to work harder to increase the network of readmission agreements that we have with third countries .
As for visa liberalisation , we did this last year for Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro .
It is good to see that our friends from Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina are now going to benefit from it , too .
We wholeheartedly accept this and feel that this is a very good step towards further European integration and certainly to bring the citizens of these countries closer to us .
When we decide on these dossiers , we are always very careful to take a decision which is not political but is primarily taken on technical grounds - i.e. countries must first fulfil technical criteria before they get our positive decision .
A decision would also , of course , be political , but it must rely primarily on technical assessments .
I emphasise this because it is mostly up to the Commission to come to us and say that a particular country has passed the technical criteria .
Therefore , when we have cases of abuse with people coming from a visa liberalisation country , such as Serbia or Macedonia , and asking for asylum in EU countries , we have to ask whether the technical assessment has been carried out fully and correctly , because it is clearly not compatible with visa liberalisation to have someone coming to the European Union and asking for asylum .
This tells us that something , somewhere , has gone wrong .
It is legitimate for us to ask what went wrong and to get a reply .
Finally , we must take this opportunity to send a clear message to the countries involved - especially those such as Serbia and Macedonia involved in cases of abuse - that they should clearly tell their citizens what visa liberalisation is all about .
It is not about going to EU countries to settle there or to find work , but it is a simple visa waiver for a limited period of time - simply for a visit .
This applies to the European Commission too .
It is important for the Commission to work hand-in-hand with these countries to make sure that this message gets through .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I support my fellow Members ' request for the Commission to undertake an assessment concerning the implementation of the EU-Russia visa facilitation agreement .
This shows the common intention of the parties to strive for the complete abolition of visa requirements in the long term , in view of the impact that appropriate implementation of the objectives of facilitating and simplifying visa issuance procedures could have both on individuals and on the development of economic and trade relationships .
I believe , therefore , that it is important to monitor the implementation of this agreement ; this would allow for considerable development of concrete personal , cultural , scientific and economic links between the European Union and its main Western European negotiating partner .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner Malmström 's response was reassuring in respect of Serbia and Macedonia in that we do not intend to throw the baby out with the bath water .
It would be a serious mistake to reintroduce visa obligations for Serbia and Macedonia just because there have been problems in connection with these two countries .
Mrs Malmström has indicated this , and I am convinced that the Hungarian Presidency will be a partner in this matter in the following term , since Hungary , as a neighbour of Serbia , has an important stake in the resolution of these problems for the sake of good neighbourly relations , as well as the community of 300 000 Hungarians living in Serbia .
It is evident that the majority of tasks will have to be undertaken by the governments of Serbia and Macedonia and , as Mrs Malmström mentioned , it is they who must provide information to their citizens .
However , I would still like to point out that the old Member States that are facing these asylum issues must also review whether their asylum policies are appropriate , as they are also granting asylum to applicants to whom it should not be granted .
Madam President , visa facilitation and visa liberalisation are undoubtedly intended to be favourable terms .
They are always defended on the grounds that they have nothing to do with immigration and everything to do with education and tourism - two more favourable terms .
You can call me a cynic , but students do not always come to study and tourists do not always visit for a limited period .
They sometimes come to the EU in order to work and to live .
The idea that people are always truthful about their intentions is not borne out from experience .
In the present crisis , jobs are scarce - especially unskilled jobs - and the demand for housing accommodation always exceeds supply .
The jobs that illegal migrants fill are often jobs that could be filled by citizens of Member States and the conditions and pay are frequently below the minimum .
We must not even pretend that turning a blind eye to illegal migration is an act of generosity .
It leads to poverty wage rates , unsafe conditions , exploitation and abuse .
( EL ) Madam President , I , too , have taken the floor in order to endorse what has been said by my fellow Members as regards our acceptance in principle and the positive approach to visa exemptions .
It goes without saying that we have seen abuse and bad examples , poorly worded texts which we have identified and hastened to rectify , ever since this exemption started .
It is vital that the Commission and the Commissioner in person cooperate with the authorities in the countries from which problems have emanated ; I refer , of course , both to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and to Serbia .
It is precisely because we are moving towards exemptions for other countries - and that , I repeat , is a move in the right direction - that our guide should perhaps be this : closer cooperation with the authorities in these countries , possibly also specific action which can guide us in future , alongside the application of these control agreements .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the relations between Russia and the EU have always represented a special relationship , considering the respective positions of both parties as a major power .
It is without doubt that , due to this status , there will be disagreements on certain issues , and several issues will be seen differently .
However , we must not forget , and I actually need to emphasise this , that Russia does not only belong to Europe in a geopolitical sense , but also in respect of its culture and history .
These ties make visa facilitation measures between the two parties indispensable , and the Jobbik Movement for a Better Hungary supports these .
Similar to certain Member States of the EU , Russia can determine its administrative obligations relating to visas independently , and these need to be based on reciprocity .
The situation of Serbia is far from being so unambiguous , as unfortunately , the Hungarian minorities and other minority groups still suffer several disadvantages to this day .
The European Parliament and the European Union must investigate this matter in any case .
( PL ) Madam President , at the same time as liberalising the visa regime , we should also send out clear signals regarding our values .
This is not just about opening doors , because we should open them as wide as possible ; it is also about promoting democracy in the countries neighbouring the European Union .
We should , therefore , support those countries that are truly striving for democracy and the rule of law and which respect European values .
However , it seems to me that , first and foremost , we should liberalise the visa regime for the post-Soviet countries , and only then for Russia .
Here , I agree with those who have said that if we liberalise the visa regime for Russia before doing so for the residents of Ukraine and other post-Soviet countries , it will send out a very bad signal .
In Georgia , it may be the case that in areas occupied at present by Russia , many people will want to obtain Russian citizenship and have it approved , as this will mean a free pass for Russia .
Let us treat the visa regime also as a tool to promote democracy .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for this debate .
I fully agree with you that visa facilitation and visa liberalisation is a very strong tool for increasing people-to-people contact .
Not only ordinary citizens , students , tourists ; it also increases business possibilities and that is a very good thing .
We have decided in the European Union to move towards visa liberalisation with the Western Balkans .
That in itself is a political decision .
It shows political will , and that is very important , but the achievement of this goal can only be very technical and very strict .
We cannot abolish visas unless we have very strict criteria .
These criteria are open .
They are transparent .
They are the same for everybody and they are bringing about important reforms in the countries that want to achieve visa facilitation and visa liberalisation .
And yes , Mr Busuttil , the Commission does monitor this very closely and the expert missions are composed also of experts from Member States .
All these reports and all this work is done in a very transparent way .
Having said that , there have been a few cases of abuse , notably in Serbia and in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Now , this should not overshadow that overwhelmingly ; it works well , but there are abuses .
The Commission has addressed that .
We have been there .
We have talked to our interlocutors .
The Belgian Presidency has been very active .
We are trying to assess this problem .
It is mainly a small group of criminal networks that encourage people in remote areas to travel to the European Union under false premises in the hope that they will receive asylum .
We will , of course , examine all these applications on an individual basis , but very many of them are unfounded and this is why we need to address these networks .
This is being done and we are in dialogue with the authorities from these countries .
I was personally in Tirana and in Sarajevo only a month ago , together with the Belgian Minister , in order to reinforce this message , that this is very important but beware of abuses .
We said it to all the Ministers , to members of the parliament , members of civil society , the universities and , I think , all the TV channels that we could find in these countries , in order to make it very clear that this is a fantastic opportunity but please do not abuse it .
We have an evaluation and monitoring mechanism in place and I will be happy to report to you later this spring on how it is working .
On Russia , this has indeed led to a lot of good things , to increased mobility between our countries .
According to all evaluations , confirmed by Member States , there are no signals that the visa facilitation has led to any increased security threats or to increased irregular immigration .
We are now identifying a list of common steps for Russia and the European Union to take in order to open possibilities for further talks on moving towards visa liberalisation .
On Georgia , I just want to reiterate to my Green friends what the rapporteur has also said , that they have acceded to the Council of Europe and the European Convention of Human Rights on the readmission agreement .
EU laws also require Member States to individually assess an asylum application and , should there be a need for international protection , they must , under EU law , respect that and also the principle of non-refoulement , that is , not to return a person to a country if there is a possibility that this person will be subjected to persecution or serious harm .
Overall , I think that this was a very good debate .
I am looking forward to reporting to you on the evaluation of the readmission agreement .
They are indeed very hard to negotiate , Mr Busuttil , but we are working on it .
As I said earlier in this debate , there will be an evaluation at the beginning of next year and I will be happy to come to Parliament and to discuss its conclusions and how we can move further in facilitating these kinds of agreements with third countries .
Madam President , I , too , am pleased , just like our Commissioner , at the quality of our debate , which has demonstrated the genuine responsibility of our institutions in general .
This responsibility has also been expressed through the replies made by the Commissioner , the commitments made and reiterated through the various evaluation meetings arranged for February and June 2011 .
Of course , I did not want one immediately as regards Pakistan .
I was , in point of fact , reminding you of our fundamental positions .
I also wanted to thank her for the willingness that she expressed in terms of reciprocal security , of replies to questions , of openness and cooperation , of adjustments and the fight against abuses and in terms of respect for these different legal circumstances .
Although these agreements rightly provide a legal framework for organising the facilitation of visas and readmission procedures , under exact and strict conditions , this must not be confused with the absolute necessity we also have of defining the terms and the parameters of a European right to asylum .
In conclusion , I believe that this policy is a little like the two-headed god , Janus Bifrons .
We have spoken about policy and about procedure .
As far as I am concerned , Janus represents two profiles , procedure and policy , of a single face .
It has a technical face , that of procedures , that of conditions of law and of respect , but it also has a political face characterised , as certain fellow Members have said , by consolidation , by cooperation , by an opening of the Union towards third countries , a sign of our values , but it is also a case of registering a form of response to Europeans ' willingness to make this opening .
I should like to conclude by saying that we must balance these elements and do everything to make them clear to our citizens .
We need to make it clear to them what a three-month visa really is and hence avoid ambiguities and other misunderstandings that could arise .
I am counting on you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 14 December .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Maintaining the exemption from visa obligations is not only a technical issue , but clearly a political matter as well .
However , exemptions from visa obligations are always based on mutual trust and mutual commitments .
Today 's debate conveys the message to the countries concerned that the long list of tasks that lies before them as a result of their commitment does not end after being granted visa exemption , and that they still need to provide their citizens with information about what visa-free travel entails in order to prevent abuses of this opportunity .
The visa exemption granted to Serbia and Montenegro will provide an opportunity to acquire a European perspective primarily to the young people on whom the Europe of the future will be built .
The exemption granted two years ago carried an important political message for these countries , and withdrawing it would have severe consequences .
Of similar importance is the maintenance of visa exemption for the Hungarians living in Vojvodina , for those citizens who live on either side of the border , speak the same language , and cultivate close family and cultural ties .
For countries rushing towards EU membership , the creation of the conditions of coexistence , regardless of borders , is of special importance .
Every liberalisation of visa requirements goes towards meeting the expectations of the people living in the countries affected by the liberalisation .
I would like to stress that the agreement facilitating the issuing of visas between the EU and Georgia cannot be viewed separately from the agreement on the readmission of illegal immigrants .
We have been talking about this for a long time in Europe , because visa policy is particularly important for the EU .
Visa liberalisation means that EU countries are opening up to the citizens of Balkan countries , thereby creating possibilities for participating in EU dialogue and learning about democracy .
However , along with liberalisation , we have to take into account the fact that making it easier to cross borders may make life easier for illegal immigrants and criminal groups .
The Member States should apply uniform procedures for issuing visas , because Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina are waiting their turn .
The European Commission must abide by the conditions for visa liberalisation and monitor the situation so that good solutions do not give rise to difficulties within EU Member States .
Additionally , it is important for countries to cooperate and to make use of experience gained to date with regard to the visa issuing procedure .
I believe that Serbia has made great efforts so far to meet the EU 's expectations and continue on its path towards integration .
The following measures were achieved in 2009 and 2010 : visa liberalisation , launch of the ratification process for the stabilisation and association agreement and the European Commission 's approval to draft the opinion on Serbia 's application to join the EU .
However , it is regrettable that the Serbian authorities have not publicised in the media and adequately explained what the establishment of the visa-free travel regime introduced in 2009 entails so that their citizens do not abuse this scheme .
I hope that this alarming rise in the number of applications for asylum in the EU submitted by Serbian citizens will not harm Serbia 's integration process .
I firmly believe that the Serbian authorities will respond promptly .
I also should recall that the path to accession depends on the individual efforts made by Serbia to comply with the Copenhagen criteria and the stabilisation and association agreement .
In connection with the general topic of this debate ( visas ) , I would like to talk about two issues which are specific , but , in my opinion , of the highest importance .
Both issues are very sensitive from the perspective of successfully implementing the European good neighbourhood policy .
First , there is the matter of implementing the agreement on visa facilitation between the EU and Russia .
In my opinion , it is not enough just to criticise - from the standpoint of an overall assessment of how the agreement is functioning - certain measures which Russia has unfortunately also had to apply against citizens travelling from EU countries .
This is necessary because of the general security situation in the country , and the measures , such as , for example , the obligation to register , do not essentially complicate visa facilitation .
The second issue is the apparent concern regarding the proper implementation of the system for relaxing the EU visa regime in Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro .
This concern has reportedly stemmed from an increase in the number of asylum applications from citizens of these countries , and measures against the relevant domestic bodies have been put forward as a solution .
This is misleading and beside the point .
The EU and NATO have long had a major influence on the overall political situation in the Balkans .
These organisations should , first and foremost , pursue the sort of measures and the sort of policies in the Balkans that will not force people to leave this sorely tested region .
We must not count our chickens before they are hatched .
We will only believe in the agreement with Moscow to remove trade barriers once it has been ratified and implemented .
In this context , we simply need to think of the Russian decision to withdraw from the signing of the Energy Charter .
It will also become clear whether the Kremlin really intends to comply with EU calls for visa facilitation .
Visa liberalisation for the Western Balkans , which is an area only a fraction the size of Russia , has resulted in a wave of asylum seekers , so what can we expect to happen when the visa restrictions for the seventh largest country in the world in terms of population are lifted ?
If a large number of Islamists from the Caucasus have Russian citizenship , will we be allowing potential terrorists into the country without visa requirements ?
Whether we are talking about Serbia , Georgia or Macedonia , we must take a close look at the situation and , if necessary , continue to work on appropriate readmission agreements .
We must evaluate the experiences of lifting visa regulations for the Balkan countries , bring the Schengen Information System II ( SIS II ) up to date and monitor the implementation of the visa requirements in Moscow .
We must also keep an eye on the increase in the number of refugees leaving the Caucasus and the central Asian countries for Russia , together with the growth in the number of asylum seekers from those countries which want visa restrictions to be removed .
According to data held by Russia 's statistics agency , in 2008 , more than 1.5 million Russian visas were issued to EU citizens , and 3.5 million EU visas were issued to Russian citizens .
That is more than a quarter of all Schengen visas issued worldwide .
EU-Russia visa policy is an important instrument for deepening interpersonal relations and enabling Russia to move closer to the EU .
I would like to draw attention to the difficulties faced by the inhabitants of the Russian Federation 's Kaliningrad Region .
The majority of the inhabitants of this Russian island surrounded by EU Member States receive single entry short-stay Schengen visas .
Most Kaliningrad inhabitants travelling through neighbouring EU Member States have to pay a visa fee every time and stand in queues at the consulates of EU Member States .
Recently , representatives from social organisations in Kaliningrad , picketing at the building of the European Commission in Brussels , called for the introduction of special conditions of travel to EU Member States for the enclave 's inhabitants , without tying this issue to EU-Russia talks on a visa-free regime .
The past few years have seen the start of favourable processes in Western Balkans states , which seem to efface the memory that fifteen years ago , the region was still a war zone within Europe .
Undoubtedly , the EU 's exemplary assistance in the process of democratic development in the Western Balkans and the fact that it kept open the prospect of accession for the countries of this region contributed to these developments .
The decision on visa liberalisation taken one year ago introduced the European practice of the freedom of movement to Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia , a clear sign of care on the part of Europe .
Without doubt , the matter of immigration is once again becoming a serious domestic policy issue in some of the Member States , and is exacerbated by the economic crisis .
However , I believe that European solidarity must be exercised in spite of the crisis , if we wish to avoid a resurgence of nationalism and protectionism .
Although the Western Balkans are not yet part of the EU , stability in South-East Europe can only be achieved through EU enlargement in the Balkans .
The EU must strictly monitor compliance with the technical requirements related to border protection but , at the same time , it must offer assistance to ensure that the citizens of Western Balkan states see a realistic chance for their lives to improve , and that they consider EU accession an attainable goal .
We must assist the region in its journey towards social and economic development through efficient information , even greater solidarity , and additional financial means , so that these citizens can find prosperity in their own home countries .
Creation of an immigration liaison officers ' network ( debate )
The next item is the report by Agustín Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 377 / 2004 on the creation of an immigration liaison officers ' network - C7-0055 / 2009 - .

Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking my fellow Members , Mrs Guillaume , Mr Ilchev , Mrs Keller , Mrs Wikström and Mr Tavares .
The support they have given me has improved this report .
I would specifically like to draw the Council 's and the Commission 's attention to the terminology .
From my point of view , it would be more appropriate if we used the term ' irregular immigration ' .
Up to now , clandestine immigration has been referred to as ' illegal immigration ' in all the legislative instruments the EU has enacted .
Although it is true that in some Member States , an irregular entry or stay constitutes a crime and in others , the term ' irregular ' has no legal or semantic significance , in many other Member States , an irregular entry or stay does not constitute an unlawful act , which is why we should not generally criminalise these activities .
For this reason , in the explanatory statement of the report , it is asked that the institutions revise the terminology that is used , insisting on the need to find a more precise and appropriate definition for the phenomenon of clandestine immigration .
Moving on to the substance of this issue , the immigration liaison officers ' network was created by Council Regulation ( EC ) No 377 / 2004 .
This instrument states that the liaison officers will be representatives of a Member State posted abroad by the immigration service or other appropriate authority with the aim of establishing and maintaining contact with the authorities of the host country , aiming to contribute to the prevention and combat of clandestine immigration , the repatriation of irregular immigrants and the management of legal immigration .
Since the enactment of the regulation , the Frontex Agency has been established , whose mission is to coordinate operational cooperation between Member States in the area of external border management ; assist the Member States in the training of national border guards ; carry out risk analyses ; monitor the development of external border control and surveillance research ; assist Member States in circumstances that require increased technical and operational assistance at external borders and provide them with the necessary support in the organising of joint return operations .
It is evident that the important mission entrusted to Frontex could be achieved in a more efficient way if they could draw upon the knowledge and experience of the immigration liaison officers ' network , especially if we take into account the fact that the European Agency does not have offices or representatives outside EU territory .
The proposed amendment to Regulation ( EC ) No 337 / 2004 aims to harness the knowledge and experience of the immigration officials for Frontex and vice versa , which was not included in the original regulation .
Furthermore , the proposed amendment suggests accessing the information obtained by the liaison officers ' network through ICONet , which is a secure information and coordination network for the immigration management services of Member States , accessing the External Borders Fund to promote the creation of liaison officers ' networks and , finally , facilitating a mechanism for the presentation of reports on the activity of the network and the designation of named regions of interest in the area of immigration .
The relevant legal bases of the proposal are Article 63 ( 3 ) ( b ) and Article 66 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
I will stop there , Madam President , and will make further observations in the second round .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would very much like to thank the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs in general and , specifically , the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , and the shadow rapporteurs for the work done on this very important dossier and I welcome the agreement reached with the Council .
The suggested amendment will enable closer cooperation between Frontex and the immigration liaison officers ' network and that will improve the information exchange via a web-based secure IT platform and ensure that the Council and Parliament are properly informed about the activities of these networks .
Moreover , I am also pleased that , through the amendments put forward by Parliament , a human-rights based approach will be applied when reporting on the situation in matters related to irregular immigration in the selected third countries .
Let me say that I fully agree with the rapporteur that we should use the word ' irregular ' migration .
Unfortunately , the Treaty in Article 79 refers to ' illegal ' so that is why it is in there , but I myself also always use the term ' irregular ' migration , so I fully agree with you .
Thanks to the amendments to the regulatory framework that you have introduced , and in accordance with the Stockholm Programme , the liaison officers ' networks will be adapted in a way that will improve their contribution to a better understanding of the root causes of migration movements with a view to addressing these phenomena properly .
So I hope that when you vote tomorrow on the amended regulation , it will be adopted without any delay and thus enable us to exploit more efficiently this very important cooperation tool for migration management .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we always support proposals in Parliament that aim to respond to the need for the adequate management of legal as well as illegal or clandestine flows of migrants .
This proposal is also part of this dynamic and aims to introduce amendments - already outlined with great authority by Mr Díaz de Mera - to Council Regulation ( EC ) No 377 / 2004 on the creation of an immigration liaison officers ' network , in order to create the necessary synergies between this important instrument for cooperation and the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) , which was only created at a later stage .
As representatives of the Member States abroad , it falls to the liaison officers - currently posted in more than 130 third countries - to maintain the necessary contacts with the authorities of the host country , so as to contribute to preventing and combating illegal immigration for returning illegal immigrants and managing legal immigration .
As Frontex does not have permanent representatives outside Union territory , there is no longer any doubt about how important such cooperation has become .
Frontex must , on the basis of information gathered by the liaison officers , go ahead with the risk analyses and with strengthening operational cooperation between Member States and third countries .
The information obtained by these networks will then be transmitted using ICONet - a secure information network to coordinate the services responsible for the management of flows of migrants in Member States - and , at the same time , will enable these networks to benefit from the funds available from the European External Borders Fund .
As Mr Díaz de Mera must already be wondering why I have not yet mentioned it , I should like to stress that he has done an excellent job , not just in terms of the quality and effort he has put in , as he always does with these reports , but also because of the efforts he has made towards reaching agreement on this important issue at first reading .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , in taking this opportunity to speak on behalf of the S & D shadow , Ms Guillaume , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , for having actively consulted all the shadows in his usual way and successfully pushed forward the negotiations with the Council .
Whereas the Commission proposal consists of mostly technical modifications , this report has , in my view , allowed for a better understanding and consideration of the complexity and scope of the liaison officers ' activities .
Immigration Liaison Officers ( ILOs ) are indeed engaged in quite complex and opaque activities .
It is therefore absolutely necessary - for reasons of transparency - to further a better exchange of information with the European Parliament , on the one hand , and organisations such as the UNHCR and the Asylum Support Office , on the other .
It is also fundamental to include and promote the human rights orientated approach to the mission of ILOs , which the Commissioner has just mentioned .
It is surely needless to recall that , in the context of addressing mixed migratory movements , the posting of ILOs in third countries may raise several concerns from a fundamental rights perspective , in particular , regarding the right of individuals to leave a country , including their own , and the right of asylum seekers to flee and find protection from persecution .
Finally , on the heated debate concerning terminology , we have in the explanatory memorandum a satisfactory compromise for what seems to be an endless debate .
I will finish by thanking Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra and saying that our group will fully support his report .

Madam President , I would also like to join those who have expressed their appreciation of the efforts of the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera , as he created an atmosphere which allowed us to successfully discuss his proposed changes , to edit the most complex ones and to reach compromises which mean that we can now be pleased with our efforts .
As a representative of the ALDE Group , I would first of all like to point out that the results achieved are largely due to the fact that on this occasion , the issue of human rights was integrated into the larger topic of immigration and the management of immigration processes .
In this way , whilst observing human rights , we can guarantee an ongoing humane and fitting approach both by immigration officials and by Frontex staff .
Secondly , a great merit of our work is that cooperation will improve , both among communications officials and between them and Frontex .
And finally , Frontex will use our combined efforts to establish a new know-how which will be larger in scope and more varied in its functions .
This know-how will be in the hands of the institutions and persons responsible to allow them to control immigration processes more effectively .
And what makes more effective management of immigration processes necessary ?
The fact that immigration processes will remain active and are likely to intensify in the near future .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I also would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , for his great work .
The immigration liaison officers should not only be seen as ' facilitators of deportations ' - which I would actually not like them to be seen as - they should closely monitor the human rights situation in the host countries and especially the protection offered to asylum seekers and returnees .
I am very happy that our rapporteur managed to include a reference to human rights and reporting on human rights several times in the report - an aspect that was missing completely from the original proposal .
I also welcome the greater role that is given to the European Parliament , being the only directly elected body at EU level and which has an even greater role now after the Lisbon Treaty - although not everybody seems to have realised that yet .

Madam President , I should first of all like , as has already been said several times , to congratulate Mr Díaz de Mera on his excellent work , and on his cooperation and dialogue with us throughout this process : in particular , on the thorny issue of knowing whether the references that we have in this text , and in others , are to ' irregular immigrants ' or ' illegal immigrants ' .
On this issue , the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera , had a very constructive and dynamic attitude .
It is also true that the treaties and the position of the Council itself did not allow him to go further on this issue and establish a definition that was more wide-ranging , as well as more technically correct , for cases of irregular and undocumented immigrants .
I believe that what is at stake here , and what has been at stake in many discussions that we have had on immigration in the European Parliament , is that we have a repressive policy on immigration that has been almost entirely completed , with nothing missing : the primary function of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) , that of the Schengen Agreement , and even that of the liaison officers - which is currently being amended , as it has been before - is to control borders , which is a repressive function .
Moreover , we all know here in Parliament , on the left and increasingly on the right , that an immigration policy which only includes repressive measures is not an immigration policy whatsoever , because an immigration policy worthy of this name also requires a legal section for legal immigration channels .
I believe that if we were just voting on Mr Díaz de Mera 's report , as such , with the ideas that he has been putting forward , I would be fully in favour .
However , we are instead voting on the compromise with the Council , at first reading , so I believe that we have not gone as far as we could have gone with this .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , one of the totems of a sovereign state is that it controls who can and who cannot come into its own country .
Unfortunately , several governments in the UK have given away this power to unelected , faceless bureaucrats in Brussels .
What a disaster it has proven to be .
We have a situation now where we have uncontrolled EU immigration into our country , which has resulted in wages being driven down and people - indigenous people - being put out of work .
I do not believe that this EU immigration liaison officers ' network has any power to stop this happening at all .
We also have a two-tier immigration system in our country whereby if you are from Australia or New Zealand or anywhere else , you have a cap .
However , if you are from Latvia or Poland or any of the EU countries , you can come to our country willy-nilly .
This is fundamentally wrong .
It is argued that this network will help control illegal immigration , but what happens if a country like Romania , for example , basically gives citizenship to hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants ?
What it does is it makes a mockery of the whole system .
I support elected politicians in the UK having control over our own borders .
What I do not support are unaccountable , unelected appointees .
I believe that the strengthening of this network would not be necessary if each individual Member State had the power to control who does and who does not come onto its lands .
I therefore implore everybody to reject this report .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( HU ) Madam President , my fellow Member from the UK spoke of the difficulties British employees are facing as a result of immigration in their country .
I come from Hungary , a country where a large number of people are unfortunately forced to move to England to find work , for example , as nurses or doctors or other qualified healthcare workers , as salaries in Hungary are extremely low .
These people were trained in Hungary , at a very high standard , and Hungary is seeing the collapse of ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , if doctors and dentists and people like that want to come to the UK to work - and we need their skills - then by all means they should come , but what we have at the moment is a situation where our market is saturated : we cannot control who comes from the EU and who does not .
This is fundamentally wrong .
It is bad and it is putting people out of work .
I shall give you an example .
The taxi driver who drove me to the airport this morning was a bricklayer who has been laid off as a result of Polish people coming onto the site , undercutting British workers , and now he is driving a taxi .
That cannot be right .
( NL ) Madam President , it goes without saying that every agency working in the fight against illegal immigration can count on my support .
If immigration liaison officers can make the work of , for example , Frontex more efficient , then that is a positive thing .
I would like to stress that we should not spend so much time staring at institutional and bureaucratic processes that we can no longer see the wood for the trees .
The problem of illegal immigration is a political problem and one that requires political will if we are to come up with solutions to it .
Well , we have found out today that there are still Member States , such as Belgium , which reward illegal immigration , for political and ideological reasons .
They are rewarding illegal immigrants by regularising their status or granting them residence permits .
That way , illegal immigration is not combated , but actively encouraged .
We can have as many immigration liaison officers and Frontex staff as we want but , in the meantime , the problem will just keep on getting worse .
What annoys me most about the present report is the recommendation that we should no longer speak of ' illegal immigration ' , but of ' irregular immigration ' , as it is now called .
Well , I just cannot get my head around that : we seem to want to solve the problem by giving it another name or by pretending that the problem no longer exists .
This is positively Orwellian .
Let us just call a spade a spade ; let us be clear and refer to illegal immigration and illegal immigrants .

( EL ) Madam President , the mere fact that almost everyone today has congratulated our rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , and all the shadow rapporteurs who worked on this endeavour , illustrates the very serious effort made and the excellent results achieved and , of course , I too congratulate them all .
Today 's debate is extremely important because it illustrates the effort we are making , at European level now , to manage legal , non-legal and illegal immigration flows , the effort we are making to coordinate and really demonstrate our solidarity between Member States and to make better use of all the instruments at our disposal .
We have created the immigration liaison officers ' network .
As we have already heard , this network involves approximately 130 countries and allows us to obtain sound information .
We created Frontex , we recently created the European asylum support office , we signed the readmission agreement , we are making use of all the European funds at our disposal and are strengthening them as much as we can year on year .
The very fact that we have now arrived at a point where we make use of and combine these tools - in other words , we see what Frontex 's requirements are , link up with the network of liaison officers and combine all the means and instruments at our disposal even more closely - illustrates that we are moving forward more efficiently .
Of course , no one can say that we have reached our target level .
When you see that , in Greece , we have 90 % of illegal entries of immigrants into Europe , that alone shows that we have a great deal to do .
However , this cooperation and the facilities that we have prove that we can move forward even more efficiently .
They allow us to be optimistic , insofar as we can , that Europe has the facilities and that , with solidarity and close cooperation by one and all , we shall be able to achieve even better results in future .
Rest assured , Commissioner , that we shall support all such efforts on the part of the Commission .
Have no doubt that we shall support all such initiatives on your part .
( DE ) Madam President , as we are aware , the officers of the Frontex border guard agency carry out important work as part of the operational cooperation between the Member States and third countries to combat illegal immigration .
In my opinion , this needs to be effectively combated in the transit countries in particular .
A dense network of immigration liaison officers and their close cooperation is therefore a sensible measure to enable us effectively to combat mass immigration into Europe with all its negative consequences for the peoples of Europe .
It must be ensured , however , that the information and assessments provided by liaison officers are made available to Frontex and the national authorities as quickly as possible and without any red tape .
In general , we definitely need greater cooperation on immigration issues between all the actors .
In my opinion , the powers of Frontex should be enhanced as quickly as possible - with the consent of the Member States - in order to be able to ensure that its work is uniform and effective , particularly at the external borders .
( MT ) Madam President , as the rapporteur for the Frontex Regulation , I am happy to welcome the latest development that has been made to the law that we have before us , as it will help us throughout the process of strengthening the Frontex agency .
My report on the agency and on the changes that need to be made to its remit was actually presented last month and the deadline by which the amendments need to be made expires this very week .
Therefore , I augur that in the coming months - January and February - the LIBE Committee will adopt the amendments on the Frontex report , and that we will be able to conclude it within the Committee .
I then hope that we would be able to initiate the process towards closing this dossier as swiftly as possible .
Nonetheless , the fact that we are going to have these immigration liaison officers that will facilitate the communication of information to Frontex is an extremely positive development .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report could have received a favourable vote , but unfortunately it has been modified by what we consider to be avoidable and unnecessary amendments , which have replaced the words ' illegal ' and ' clandestine ' with the word ' irregular ' , almost as if there were a fear of saying things as they really are .
On a positive note , however , the report provides for the creation of a network of immigration liaison officers posted to consular authorities and to international organisations , with responsibility for preventing illegal immigration and facilitating the repatriation of illegal immigrants .
Furthermore , the direct exchange of information on illegal migration flows between States , embassies and international organisations may prove useful in combating the activities of criminal networks .
Too many lives have been destroyed .
Preventing trafficking in human beings is one of the challenges that the EU must overcome .
( DE ) Madam President , the Member States send immigration liaison officers to third countries in order to combat illegal immigration in contact with the authorities in those countries .
I therefore consider cooperation between these officers and Frontex to be urgently necessary .
We need a meaningful exchange of information and best practice , and we also need to avoid having duplicate structures .
I hope that such synergies will result in more efficient border controls - particularly since Frontex has no external officers of its own in third countries .
A key element of this cooperation must be the consistent processing of readmission agreements , whether in Eastern Europe or on the continent of Africa , because chaos reigns in the EU where the repatriation of illegal immigrants is concerned .
Some Member States proceed with great vigour , while others are very sluggish .
Naturally , this then has negative implications for all the Member States .
There is therefore an urgent need to act .
Frontex needs to be bolstered , and the EU also needs to force authorities in the Member States to fulfil their responsibilities .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report and the proposal behind it clearly serve , and are intended to prepare , the promotion and facilitation of immigration , which we consider unacceptable .
The creation of a network of immigration liaison officers is one more step towards a centralised measure controlled by the European Union that serves the spreading of immigrants and refugees .
Furthermore , it is unacceptable that they intend to replace the term ' illegal immigration ' with ' irregular immigration , ' thereby attempting to further legitimise this otherwise illegal act .
The peoples of Europe have had enough of the flood of immigrants , and we would welcome it if the elected Members sitting in this House also acknowledged this .
Unfortunately , I can say no more about this report than that it is a caricature of itself .
What is embodied in this report is a caricature of the European Parliament .
Madam President , the amendment to the regulation facilitates the exchange of information ' to manage legal and illegal immigration ' .
I do not want to manage it : I want to stop it .
Migration is based on the false assumption that we are the products of our culture and that exposure to European culture will transform non-Europeans into Europeans in the second generation , if not the first .
Distinct peoples are not the product of distinct cultures : distinct cultures are the product of distinct peoples .
Bring the populations of the Third World into Europe and you will be bringing the Third World into Europe - not temporarily , but for all time .
That is what we have been doing for the last six decades .
( HU ) Madam President , now would be the time for us to finally try to find and remedy the root causes of the issue of immigration .
For human reasons , I propose the introduction of everyone 's right to reside in their native land , in their home country , and appropriate economic and other conditions should be created in the world , including in countries considered second-rate EU Member States , to ensure that people can live in the country that is their homeland .
To continue my previous train of thought , the healthcare system in Hungary has collapsed , or is on the brink of collapse , as Hungarian doctors , nurses and employees with healthcare qualifications are forced to migrate en masse within the EU , to England , for example , as well as to other countries , essentially becoming economic refugees .
It would be time to investigate this phenomenon and take action to combat it , for example , by requiring Member States , where necessary , to ensure an appropriate livelihood for qualified doctors and nurses .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , even if the debate did not show it , I understand , Mr Díaz de Mera , that you have very strong support for your proposal .
I would like to congratulate you on that because it shows that you have done very important work .
I also want to reiterate my joy that you have reinforced the human rights aspects in this through the amendments made by the committee .
It will ensure that all relevant aspects , especially human rights , are taken into consideration when we look at a country or a region and when we report matters in relation to irregular migration in the given country or region .
We know that there is a very clear correlation between the human rights situation and the number of migrants or asylum seekers .
This is a major push factor .
This is also a task for the Asylum Support Office .
It will collect such information on countries of origin and transit of asylum seekers .
The core function of ILOs - the liaison officers - is to establish and maintain contact with the host countries ' authorities with a view to preventing and combating irregular migration .
Providing a full assessment of the human rights situation in the host country , however , is not within their competence , although it is high on the agenda .
I think that we have improved the text with your proposal and I very much look forward to your vote tomorrow .
I would like to thank you and the shadow rapporteurs again for your important work .
Madam President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your words , and also for your commitment .
I would once again like to express my admiration for the way that you are managing the portfolio with which you have been entrusted .
There have been 18 speeches this afternoon , and the majority groups have supported this report .
I would therefore like to reiterate my deep and heartfelt gratitude , because they have participated actively , enriching and amending substantive issues that should be included and are now included .
I am essentially referring to the human rights chapter , the European Asylum Support Office and the role of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees .
Obviously , in such a broad and diverse Chamber , we are not obliged to agree with one another , which is why the efforts that we have all made to reach a very broad consensus are particularly significant .
Ladies and gentlemen , from a centre-right and Christian Democrat position , I am indeed saying that I am unequivocally in favour of the expression ' irregular ' , and that I reject the expression ' illegal ' , as legally , semantically and ethically inappropriate .
Thank you very much to all my fellow Members for their support , and also for their speeches , including the dissenting ones .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 14 December .
Single application procedure for residence and work ( debate )
The next item is the report by Véronique Mathieu , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State and on a common set of rights for third-country workers legally residing in a Member State - C6-0470 / 2007 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the European Union has , for ten years now , been trying to arm itself with legislative instruments in the area of economic immigration .
Instead of an initially global approach , the Commission has preferred a sectoral approach .
This draft directive brings to light the need for a common policy on legal immigration , particularly of the economic variety .
Until now , we have legislated on illegal immigration , border controls , visa policy .
It is time to move forward together on the subject of economic migration , because the European Union must face up to the challenges common to all its Member States ; challenges that require common solutions at the European level .
These challenges are demographic decline and the ageing of Europe 's population .
In fact , due to these two problems that affect Europe in its entirety , global employment forecasts are showing up perceptible workforce shortages in the years to come .
We must therefore find solutions at the European level to meet the needs of the labour market , and economic migration is one of the solutions that we must explore .
Let us take care , however , and not deceive ourselves .
Defining a European approach to the management of legal immigration means organising it with obvious attention to the needs and hosting capacities of each Member State .
As is stated in Articles 1 and 8 of this draft directive , states will retain control over the number of migrants that they wish to admit onto their national territory .
Our governments have worked in various ways to regulate economic immigration : by means of bilateral agreements , quotas , regulatory measures .
Not one of these measures , however , has shown itself to be truly effective in managing legal migration flows while , at the same time , combating illegal immigration .
Now , the link between the two is obvious .
It is by organising legal immigration in the best way possible that we shall be able to put an end to illegal immigration .
That is the whole issue behind the adoption of this package of measures already introduced by the Commission no less than five years ago .
What will this ' Single Permit ' Directive bring to the existing legal landscape in the area of economic migration ?
By contrast with the ' Blue Card ' Directive , this directive does not concern the admission criteria for third-country workers .
It is aimed at eliminating the variations between differing national legislation concerning the application procedures for work permits and residence permits , and the rights of foreigners working legally in the European Union .
There is still no European instrument covering the totality of rights available to third-country nationals working and residing legally in the Union .
This directive will therefore put an end to these differences in protection for these workers by ensuring equality of treatment with national workers in a significant number of areas : working conditions , education and professional training , social protection , access to goods and services , tax reliefs .
In this way , this common base will offer these people protection against exploitation by guaranteeing them the benefit of a secure and protective legal status .
It is also a way of combating unfair competition that works to the detriment of European workers .
In fact , this difference in protection will eventually tend to encourage the recruitment of a poorly qualified and weakly protected labour force at the expense of European workers .
Moreover , this directive will simplify admission procedures for employment purposes .
All Member States will have a harmonised procedure that is simpler , quicker and less onerous .
The adoption of this directive will thus result in major advantages for migrants , for employers and national administrations , and will finally enable better management of legal migration flows .
Parliament is now a colegislator , which means that it must also demonstrate responsibility - an idealistic and bygone opinion - and we must show that we have risen to the level of the new duties that the Treaty of Lisbon has given us .
Let us come forward as credible spokespeople ready to rise to the sizeable challenge represented by the management of migratory pressure at the frontiers of Europe .
We know that well-managed migratory flows will be of benefit to everyone .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mrs Mathieu and Mr Cercas , the two committees , as well as the Belgian Presidency , for the hard work that has been done on this proposal .
As you are aware , and as the rapporteur said , the Commission already presented this report in 2007 .
Our aim was , and is still , to simplify procedures by introducing one permit for residence and work , while guaranteeing employment-related rights to legally residing third-country workers who are not covered by specific EU legislation or Commission proposals .
With this proposal , we do not address the conditions for granting or withdrawing a permit .
Such conditions are the competence of the Member States , as is the decision on volumes to admit - if any .
This proposal is one of the building blocks of the European Union 's labour and migration policy .
If it is adopted by Parliament and the Council , this directive will confirm that the European Union values the important contribution third-country workers make to our economies and our societies .
It would also demonstrate that we are ready and able to agree on legislation concerning labour and migration .
It is a very complex proposal and it addresses both the immigration side and the social employment side .
The majority of the amendments voted in the respective committees of this House can be supported by the Commission to the extent that they reinforce procedural guarantees for both the migrants and the employers .
This is in relation to amendments geared towards further simplifying the application procedures and strengthening the equal treatment provisions - for example , the principle of proportionality of fees as regards procedures and the equal treatment provisions on tax benefits .
On the other side , the amendment that makes the export of acquired pensions conditional upon the existence of a bilateral agreement is much more restrictive compared to the approach proposed by the Commission .
I am pleased to see that both the Presidency and Parliament have made important efforts to bring their positions closer .
The Belgian Presidency has tried to have Member States come closer to the EP position , and I know that Parliament has taken into account a number of the concerns and requests by the Council .
The compromise we are all trying to achieve will respect certain criteria , such as the aim to protect migrant workers and to provide them with a series of work-related socio-economic rights on the basis , as much as possible , of equal treatment with EU workers as from day one of employment .
It will also take account of the importance of creating a level playing field throughout the EU for these workers and , thirdly , the importance of showing our partner countries that we are ready to provide for the fair treatment of third country nationals legally residing and working in our Member States .
We cannot disregard Member States ' concerns relating to certain equal treatment provisions , especially when it comes to budgetary concentration .
What I believe important is that those criteria I have just highlighted are respected , even though the end result may not be as ideal as we wanted and as ambitious as we had hoped for .
As Mrs Mathieu said , this is a compromise .
It is a good compromise and it marks an important step forward in the area of legal migration and will be of high importance to the workers of the European Union .
Let me therefore express my hope that we can reach an agreement on this proposal as soon as possible .
I again thank the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs for the work that has been done .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Mathieu , ladies and gentlemen , immigration in Europe is undoubtedly a highly important and hugely significant political , economic and social issue .
It is a massive opportunity , but it requires intelligent , fair management , as otherwise it would become a problem , not only for those arriving , as they would not be treated fairly , but also for the workers who are here whose jobs would be threatened .
The alternative is that the labour market would be split and divided , and there would be ' low cost ' workers threatening the social victories won over a century of building the European social model .
Consequently , Commissioner , Mrs Mathieu , the principle of equal treatment is the cornerstone of an economic immigration policy that is both intelligent and fair .
The Council said so in Tampere 11 years ago , the Commission said so five years ago in its Green Paper , and tomorrow , Parliament must vote on a proposal for a legislative initiative .
This subject of equal treatment is the focus of Chapter III of the directive .
It is not just a bureaucratic directive .
It lays out rights and obligations , which should apply to all legal immigrants , and it should encompass all rights to equal treatment and non-discrimination .
Unfortunately , however , Commissioner , the directive is not the one that we were promised .
It is not I or the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs who are saying that , but all of the humanitarian non-governmental organisations , all the churches in Europe and all the trade unions , without exception .
This directive is inadequate and even dangerous , because it excludes the very groups that most need protection ; it excludes temporary workers , displaced people , those transferred by their companies , and workers from less developed countries who will be coming here under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Mode 4 .
Hundreds of thousands of workers are therefore going to arrive from third countries in accordance with the country of origin principle , because they are not going to be treated equally by this directive .
This is also because you are giving the Member States the option to opt out of equal treatment with regard to payment of pensions when they return to their countries , to family benefits and to welfare benefits for the unemployed , except for unemployment benefit itself .
This will even apply to workers who are subject to the principle of equal treatment and who are covered by what Mrs Mathieu said .
They are also excluded from grants and any type of assistance for higher education , including professional training .
For all these reasons , the Commission states in the explanatory memorandum and the impact assessment that it intends to eliminate and put an end to the ' rights gap ' , but in practice , it does not do so .
This is not enough , Commissioner .
Moreover , unfortunately we have amendments tomorrow tabled by the right and centre-right groups in this House that go further , as you said , and which even adopt the Council 's most extreme positions in order to destroy the consensus that we had built in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I therefore believe , Commissioner , Mrs Mathieu , ladies and gentlemen , that we need to have a much broader debate on this issue , along with the other directives , that is open to European civil society , the NGOs , the churches and the unions .
We must not deal with this issue so quickly and , in my view , so irresponsibly as we would if we adopted the Council 's text tomorrow .
I believe that the majority of my fellow Members across party divides would agree to conducting a broad debate in order to reach a wide consensus in Parliament that respects the principles of our Charter of Fundamental Rights and that follows the recommendations of the United Nations , the International Labour Organisation and the Council of Europe .
We are talking about people 's dignity , but also about the future of Europe , and I believe that in Europe , we need all workers , without exception , whatever their origins , to have all rights to the exclusion of none if they are living legally in Europe .
This is the way to combat xenophobia and racism and fight for a decent Europe .
Madam President , may I , first of all , congratulate Mrs Mathieu on having been able to take the lead on a dossier which had been knocking around for years .
If I have understood you correctly , Mrs Malmström , a proposal for a directive on the conditions governing stays by third-country nationals in the European Union for work purposes was made as early as 2001 .
That proposal was withdrawn in 2006 , whereupon this proposal was tabled in 2007 , with this unique procedure for citizens of third countries entering the EU in order to work here .
As a result , residence and work permits are being combined into one .
Madam President , the proposal now on the table - and I do not entirely agree with Mr Cercas - indicates that third-country nationals who are in possession of a single permit have social rights which are , in fact , the same for everyone .
The debate in the Committee on Social Affairs and the Environment - and I thank my fellow member Mr Cercas , because I am happy to discuss this with him - became quite heated on two points .
Primarily because of the scope , whereby - and this is something with which I agree - posted workers cannot , or may not , qualify for a single permit .
That is described in Article 3 ( 2 ) ( b ) of Directive 96 / 71 / EC , also known as the Posting of Workers Directive .
In my view , the social status of posted third-country nationals is , and was , adequately described in that directive .
What I thought then and still think is important is that we create a level-playing field , where employees on loan will not be allowed to work for a lower wage than the usual staff .
However , I wonder if , in failing to mention the Posting of Workers Directive , we might be causing ourselves problems in the future .
My second point , with which I have struggled a great deal and which has now been modified as a result of my amendment , is the principle of breaching equality of treatment .
I was and still am of the opinion that this principle , as laid down in Regulation ( EC ) No 883 , must also be our starting point when it comes to this single permit .
I find that the compromise which the Council has reached is a good one , because it guarantees both equal rights and equal treatment .
Madam President , the directive on a single permit for residence and work really is very important .
There were many discussions , many opinions and many assessments , but a joint decision that would be acceptable for all third-country workers legally residing and working in EU Member States has not been reached .
This directive should be a general framework directive on rights for third-country workers and should serve as a framework for specific directives , because only then can it contribute to the European Union goal of a common migration policy .
However , the main problem is the fact that the framework of the directive we were promised was already removed from the Commission 's proposal , as certain categories of workers , such as temporary workers , intra-company transfers and refugees were deleted from its contents .
In other words , this directive does not strengthen the principle of legal equivalence for third-country workers .
For this directive to be a point of reference and a framework , it is necessary to include all workers within the scope of the directive , in particular , temporary workers , because otherwise , migrants legally residing and working in the European Union would not enjoy working conditions based on the principles of justice , uniformity and equality .
It should be noted that migrant workers make a contribution to the EU economy through their work and the taxes and social security contributions they pay .
Therefore , they must be guaranteed the same minimum rights and be treated in the same way in the labour market .
If we vote on this directive tomorrow , we must be united , because only then can we win this struggle for all groups of workers to be included in this directive and for them to have equal rights .
I would like to stress that it is impossible to create a two-tier labour market , either within or outside the European Union .
We must not allow the creation of an underclass of workers that faces discrimination and does not enjoy any rights or guarantees .
If we do , we will be trampling over all the social standards we gained previously .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to start with a little point of order : I note that for such an important debate , our partner in the negotiations , the Council , is absent .
I find that unacceptable .
It is not the first time and I request the Presidency of this House to write to the Council and complain about this .
( Applause )
Then I would like to go on and , like the others , congratulate Mrs Mathieu for doing a very good job on a very difficult , complex and sensitive dossier .
My group , the ALDE Group , will accept its responsibility and we , too , want to arrive at an agreement because we realise that it is very important .
However , we do not do so with great joy because , as I think has been expressed in different ways by all the groups in this House and by the Commission , this proposal does not go nearly as far as is necessary .
My group will stick to its position on the additional documents because , if we allow Member States to require additional documents , then that defeats the whole purpose of the single permit ; either you have a single permit or you do not but , if you have a single permit , there are no additional documents .
On the correlation tables , for the sake of arriving at an agreement , my group will not vote for the insertion of correlation tables .
But I have to say - this is a personal remark - that I find this a shameful red line by the Member States because , if the Member States have the intention of transposing the directive and being transparent about it , they should - of their own free will - insert correlation tables .
Finally , in 1999 in Tampere , the Member States came out with this grand statement that they wanted a common asylum and immigration policy .
Well , how much progress have we made to date ?
Hardly any .
It is very clear that the Member States do not want a common immigration policy .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , we , too , have a concern about the variable labour market that we already have across 27 Member States and within those 27 Member States , but our concern is how we move away from this towards something which is more comprehensive and stronger .
We want to be sure that we have an agreed basis of rights for the majority of third-country nationals , as originally set out by the Commission and generally improved in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We do not want to see these rights increasingly restrained and constrained , so we will support the widest possible and strongest range of rights in tomorrow 's vote .
We want to remind the Council that we are concerned here with individuals who should be able to develop their skills and education , benefit from the social security contributions they make and look forward to claiming their pension entitlements , given , as is recognised in the proposal , that their work supports our economies and indeed our societies .
For our group , the commitment to circular migration is also important in Article 11 ( a ) .
The scope is a vexed issue because we have other existing instruments under discussion which , at times , come into tension .
We are also fooling ourselves if we think that what is on the table here is actually going to meet the needs of each and every migrant worker within the European Union .
We need a more nuanced approach to ensure that migration works for them , so we are not going to be voting , for example , to include beneficiaries of humanitarian protection .

Madam President , Commissioner , as Mr Cercas put it so well , there is a difference of opinion between the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Parliament must therefore vote against what is called the ' Single Permit ' Directive .
Fundamentally , this text has but one aim , which is easy to spot , and that is to make workers in the European Union compete against workers from countries outside Europe , and even make immigrant workers compete against each other , depending on their status .
If this directive remains as it is , there will be several kinds of status : that of a resident , that of a seasonal worker , that of an intra-corporate transferee .
It would make the existence of several categories of workers in the European Union official .
Accepting this would violate the principles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Contrary to what you said , Mrs Mathieu , such differences in status would result in permanent downward pressure on the living , working and employment conditions of all wage earners in the European Union .
Equality cannot be summed up by merely invoking working conditions .
As Mr Cercas said , equality must involve wages , working hours , security of employment , health , holidays , social protection , access to public services and training .
Without this common minimum , we shall have a jungle of competition , stigmatisation , exclusion and exploitation without limit .
Equality must involve all workers , whatever their origin .
Let us not accept the addition of new types of competition between workers , on top of those introduced by the appalling Bolkestein Directive .
Equality among workers must be the objective of a single positive directive , affirming this principle .
In its absence , it is in the name of the Europe of workers , of social Europe , of a humanist Europe , that all of us together in this Parliament , whatever our opinions , reject this directive .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report in question certainly contains some positive elements , and the general aim is to simplify processes and reduce the bureaucratic steps for third-country workers who hold a valid residence permit in a Member State .
However , as a discussion point , I would like to mention the fact that , today in Europe , tens of millions of citizens - very many of whom are young - are without work as a result of structural deficiencies in the European productive system and as a result of a crisis which does not seem to have an end in sight .
Europe 's primary responsibility , even before assisting third-country nationals residing in our countries , is to implement economic , political and social measures which will help our citizens , in the first instance , to gain , or regain , work .
If Europe can provide work for its own citizens , it will create firm social foundations so that external migration flows can be accommodated properly .
The key point must be to ensure , above all , that Europe grows independently and stands on its own two feet .
Our countries will then have the strength to offer work to others as well .
( NL ) Madam President , my party has always made it clear that we oppose a European asylum and immigration policy .
In the Netherlands , we now have a fantastic cabinet which has been better able to implement the will of the people in the areas of asylum and immigration than before , but we have now simply been presented with a fait accompli .
Nevertheless , my party , the delegation of the Dutch Freedom Party ( PVV ) , will always strive to ensure that these powers are transferred back to Member States .
The important thing to do in the meantime , of course , is to limit the damage , but that is not what this report is trying to achieve : the new application procedure actually makes it easier , not tougher , for people to enter the European Union .
Madam President , only an elitist political class which is completely out of touch with its citizens could manage to leave those citizens , who witness the disastrous effects of mass immigration of non-Western migrants on a daily basis , out in the cold .
I will vote against this report because I have been elected by the Dutch and not by fortune-seekers who want to taste Western pleasures without embracing Judeo-Christian values .
( MT ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating Véronique Mathieu for all the effort she put into achieving this result .
She carried out very important work on an extremely complex subject , as Commissioner Malmström said .
As the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , we endorse cooperation in the area of legal immigration as long as we make it clear that we are simultaneously sharpening our attack against illegal immigration .
I believe the one cannot exist without the other .
Nevertheless , at the same time , we also recognise that one of the tools that can be used to combat illegal immigration is to provide good and clear opportunities for regularised immigration , just as we are doing in this case .
However , I would also like to recall , as Véronique Mathieu said , that the new powers granted to us in this area by the Treaty of Lisbon brought with them new obligations .
Therefore , since we are required to shoulder these new responsibilities , this Parliament must do just that , by proving that it is capable of compromising with the Council of Ministers .
This requires accepting some Council positions , such as the safeguards that it would like to keep in the issuing of these permits according to this directive .
This , I believe , raises the issue of equal treatment .
We have to acknowledge that in order to reach an agreement with the Council , then we must inevitably accept that the conditions will not necessarily always be the same .
At the same time , however , and I conclude here , those who claim that we are rushing ahead or who are ready to vote against should appreciate that without such a directive , we will end up in an illegal situation that will definitely not dignify any of the workers who find themselves in it .


Madam President , I think my colleagues from the S & D Group , Mr Cercas and Mrs Blinkevičiūtė , both referred to the central problem for our group in this package : it is not just about equal treatment or the country-of-origin principle - as Mrs Oomen-Ruijten said , that has been debated very extensively .
There is also the question of the illogicality of where we are today .
We have a single permit proposal which comes after the skilled workers proposal , the blue card , and comes after sanctions on employers .
That means we have a package which has many of the correct intentions , such as having a horizontal approach .
However , we are not having a horizontal approach because we are in a situation where Mrs Mathieu is doing a good job with what she has but , as she said in her speech , we wanted a global approach but we now have a sectoral approach , and that sectoral approach is exactly what Mrs Lambert was concerned about .
So where are we today ?
Our group has deep concerns in the employment sphere on the country-of-origin principle and , as my colleague Mrs Blinkevičiūtsaid , we have a real problem with the categories of workers who are included in this proposal .
So we have a situation where posted workers , intra-corporate transferees , seasonal workers and - yes - beneficiaries of international protection are all excluded .
We will present these amendments again tomorrow on behalf of our group .
If you have a single permit which does not do what it says on the tin - i.e. it does not have a reasonably broad-based approach to entry for third-country nationals to the European Union - you will face problems of equal treatment , of a two-tier work force and other problems that we want to solve with common policies .
On the other hand , we in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs in particular appreciate that the sectoral approach is the approach we have to work with , so there will be directives on seasonal workers and intra-corporate transferees , but you cannot blame our group , which has equal treatment on the country-of-origin principle at the heart of its activities in trying to resolve these matters .
We are telling the truth , which is that we are doing things in the wrong way and we are doing it because of the people who are not present today to listen to our arguments : the representatives of the Council .
The Council did not want to deal with this in a horizontal way and we are left with this kind of piecemeal approach .
So on the single permit , we understand the good intentions and the global approach and the work of the rapporteur in trying to make this work , but we will present our amendments tomorrow in good faith in the hope that we can obtain a single permit which says what it is : a single permit covering the broad range of people who seek to work in this European Union .
We want to make it a realistic single permit that will really work for all Member States and will stand the test of time .
( DE ) Madam President , I have now been in Parliament for a year and I have dealt with various dossiers , but none of them have been as difficult as what we have on the table here .
At this point , I would like to offer my sincere thanks once again to Mrs Mathieu and Mr Cercas , the two rapporteurs from the relevant committees .
This really is a very difficult matter , and the reason for this is that naturally we have very high ideals in Europe .
We want to treat everyone who lives and works here fairly and equally .
That , in principle , is something we can all agree on as a starting point .
However , the question remains as to how much we can really implement this in detail .
We have already been reminded that with the Treaty of Lisbon , we now wish to draw up a common policy on asylum and migration .
Asylum policy is something close to our hearts , and not just because of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We also need a migration policy for economic reasons , because demographic changes are taking place and we have a very urgent need not just for highly qualified workers , but also for less skilled workers .
Basically , the great difficulty here is what to do .
As has already been said - Mrs in ' t Veld mentioned it - the Member States stated back in 1990 in Tampere that they wanted to develop a common structure .
Nothing has yet been placed on the table .
In other words , what we have today is a compromise - we are not completely happy with it , but in my view , it is a way for us to move forward .
Speaking personally , I can well understand why some are saying that we need more time for discussion .
I am not completely happy with it either .
It is particularly important to me , for example , that everyone should have access to training and further education , because this is absolutely crucial - not just for the persons concerned , so that they can work in the labour market , but also for us with our real need for workers .
In the case of social security , for example , where we already have so many different systems anyway that have not even been harmonised within the EU , it raises the question of how we can really create a common set of rights for third country nationals in all cases even if we want to .
It is difficult , and that is why I see the compromise that is currently on the table as a good thing .
We really should vote in favour ; then at least we will have something .
( FR ) Madam President , it has to be said that it is extremely odd to begin a directive which is intended to guarantee a legal framework for proper access to rights for all workers with a long list of the categories of workers excluded from that directive .
That makes it seem like a project for legal migration but also for a multi-layered European labour market , where each category of workers would be assigned , according to their worth , a sort of portfolio of rights .
We are therefore a long way from a horizontal and universal approach to workers ' rights .
I think that those responsible in Europe have still not understood that more rights for workers means greater economic efficiency and greater social cohesion , with greater individual and collective benefits , of course , for migrants , for the host societies and for the societies of origin .
Indeed , this has been shown in a study by the London School of Economics which says that regularising 600 000 irregular workers in Great Britain , who will not have access to this single application procedure , would bring GBP 3 billion into Great Britain 's coffers .
We are not , I think , at all equal to the challenges .
( HU ) Madam President , we all know that economic immigration is a real phenomenon in the Member States of the European Union .
However , the presence of third-country workers must be evaluated with at least two considerations in mind .
The issue primarily manifests as an economic necessity , as demographic and labour market trends indicate that European societies need immigrant labour .
Thus , it is in our interest to ensure that immigration takes place legally , under regulated circumstances , and that Member States have the possibility to monitor the process , while immigrants experience legal certainty , meaning that there should be no advantages to be gained from circumventing legal procedures .
I believe that the part of the directive that concerns common rights , that is to say , the equal rights of immigrants and employees who are nationals of the Member State concerned , is very important .
At this point , I would also like to draw attention to the other , cultural aspect of the issue .
The presence of immigrants with different cultural customs and traditions is a source of tension in many Member States .
I am convinced that the provision of equal rights cannot stop at the prohibition of discrimination on the labour market .
I believe that the issue calls for a more subtle approach .
This is because legal immigrant workers do not only bring an additional source of labour into Europe , they do not only wish to work here , but also want to study , start families , raise children and lead full lives .
Should Europe decide therefore that economic immigration is the solution to the imbalances caused by the demographic situation , it must not disregard the cultural dimension of the issue .
The success of multiculturalism presupposes tolerance , mutual respect and solidarity .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the solution that we are discussing is an erroneous solution , that it is highly unfair to many vulnerable people and that , in some ways , it is also self-destructive , because it will not have escaped anyone 's attention - and this point has already been made - that there is a contradiction between discussing a single permit and beginning with waivers and exceptions .
Excluding posted workers , seasonal workers and refugees from the solution in question actually undermines the uniformity of rights , both employment rights and citizens ' rights .
And there is an even more negative development : not only are we looking at a solution which could pave the way for forms of dumping , because the costs will differ in each case , but it will also make a distinction between one citizen and another .
This Parliament will need to discuss later on the issue of working conditions for seasonal workers .
Commissioner , seasonal workers are not just foreign citizens ; they are European citizens too , and if material conditions and citizenship rights distinguish one from the other , it is inevitable that businesses will seek second-rate solutions when employing them .
As far as posted workers are concerned , can you imagine the kind of situation that will be created in our global market if large multinational companies are allowed to hire people to come to work in our countries , but on the terms and conditions applicable in their countries of origin ?
A new , but extremely negative situation will be created .
Dumping will not be the only everyday occurrence ; distinctions will be made between citizens , too , and this is something that Europe has never experienced , not even in its most recent history .
Unity is fundamental and , for this reason , the provision should be radically overhauled .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let us be clear : is this the agreement that we wanted ?

The answer is ' no ' .
Many of us in Parliament would like to have gone further , but I believe that this is a step in the right direction , for two reasons in particular : firstly , because we are currently creating a new instrument aimed at benefiting the nationals of third countries who wish to immigrate to the territory of Member States by conferring upon them a set of rights ; secondly , as Mrs Mathieu has already said , because of the political message that we are sending overseas , which counteracts the idea of a Fortress Europe that is only able to adopt repressive measures and strengthen security , while , at the same time , we are responding to the concerns expressed in the Stockholm Programme regarding the creation of flexible immigration policies in order to promote the Union 's economic development .
I therefore agree with Mrs Mathieu that an agreement urgently needs to be reached with the Council and , while I share Mrs in ' t Veld 's view that many Member States do not want to discuss any sort of common immigration policy , this makes it important to take the first step .
Let us be clear : the abolition of internal borders between Member States has made it essential to harmonise national legislations on the conditions of admission and residence for third-country nationals , to guarantee them equality of treatment , and to ensure that they are guaranteed rights and obligations comparable to those of EU citizens .
Furthermore , I believe that the creation of a single application procedure for a residency and work permit will be of benefit in efficiency terms , for both migrants and employers , and that it will also make it easier to monitor the legality of their residence and employment .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to date , access to employment has been regulated only for a few specific categories of third-country nationals .
Indeed , not everyone benefits from the general principle of equality of treatment in access to employment .
As a result , the European Union must take steps to guarantee equal treatment both for third-country nationals legally residing in a Member State and for those who qualify for refugee status or who require international protection , pursuant to Council Directive 2004 / 83 of 29 April 2004 .
We need to prevent a growth in demand , for example , for seasonal workers , just because they can be paid less and because they have different - lower - costs with respect to European citizens employed to do the same job .
We must also avoid , for example , the risk of many multinational companies transferring their headquarters to countries such as Morocco or Turkey and sending their employees to work in European branches because it is cheaper .
For reasons of social justice , we must ensure that European citizens are treated equally in terms of remuneration , working conditions and social security .
For this reason , I believe that it is right to include seasonal workers , posted workers , refugees and self-employed workers in this directive .
It would be extremely dangerous to make distinctions .
( FI ) Mr President , over the centuries , people have left Europe for reasons of work and to escape war and political and religious persecution , and now Europe , with its stability , attracts people from outside Europe , and that is a good thing .
It is excellent that the rules on lawful immigration are being harmonised within the EU so that residence and work permits are combined into just one permit .
That is a good thing .
In my opinion , however , the Commission 's approach is rather less judicious , because it has chosen one that is sector specific .
It guarantees different rights for different groups .
It has become such a jungle that even the experts find it hard to discover what European policy on immigration actually is .
We have employees who have been sent here , employees with blue cards , researchers , seasonal workers , company employees who have been transferred internally , and so on .
Why can the Commission not apply the same rules to all employees ?
It has become evident on many an occasion that a lot of migrant groups are not treated equally , and that is very difficult to accept .
The guiding principle here must surely be equal treatment for all .
It is not right that only certain people receive equal treatment and that others do not .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has tabled amendments with this in mind , and I hope that they will win Parliament 's approval in tomorrow 's vote .
This is very important , and while we bid the migrants welcome , we want the rules to be made more equal and more consistent .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the idea of a one-stop shop is to be welcomed , but it is a paradigm shift for some European countries - including my own , Austria , where residence permits are issued by the authorities dealing with third-party rights and work permits by the authorities responsible for the labour market , the Austrian Employment Service , with the involvement of the social partners .
Regulation of access to the labour market directly affects the social partners and they should therefore be involved in its substance .
The discussion that has taken place to date has involved the trade unions far too little , and NGOs and churches have been similarly excluded .
Many of the previous speakers have said that migration policy must be viewed as a whole .
I am therefore against the Commission 's piecemeal approach that splits up the package and thereby introduces through the back door the country of origin principle , and possibly even social dumping , as has also been mentioned already .
Allow me to make a comment on the legal nature of the supplementary document .
A credit card format will not be able to accommodate all the official orders and data , so the supplementary document also needs to be normative in nature .
Only then will efficient controls be possible .
This serves to protect workers and prevents competition being distorted in a way which benefits those enterprises that wish to grow rich on the backs of illegal workers .
( NL ) Mr President , I have waved my blue card two or three times already so that I could ask a number of questions .
Anyone listening to this debate would get the impression that I had not spent several months making my contribution to the social dimension of this dossier that we are now dealing with .
What this is about - and I say that again to all the members here - is an amendment by me which is intended to ensure equal treatment for everyone who enters a Member State with a single permit for residence and work .
That is guaranteed .
How can you suggest that it is not guaranteed ?
I have read the press reports , too , and I am getting the feeling that we are just rabble-rousing .
Nor can you make the same claim about seasonal workers , and I believe you were going to come up with a proposal in that respect .
As far as posting is concerned , it is not the case that you can set up a company in a third country and then relocate workers there to work in poor conditions .
Mr President , that is simply not true !
( RO ) Mr President , the single permit will facilitate administrative procedures , improve the control and management of economic migration and the exchange of data on labour market demand .
However , this legislative proposal only offers a half-way solution because it deals with the rights of persons who have already been allowed entry to the European Union and the labour market of a Member State .
It does not cover another two aspects : the criteria for granting the right to work and the exclusion of seasonal workers and intra-corporate transferees .
I would also like us to remember that we are regulating the rights of third-country workers , but we still have not fully achieved a free labour market for all EU citizens .
( SV ) Mr President , there has been a lot of talk about equal rights in this debate .
It is also a matter of balance or conflict , because that is the choice that we will have , and it is also a question of a long-term or a short-term approach .
The exclusions will , in the worst case scenario , open the way for a new form of slavery .
We know what amending the Posting of Workers Directive from a minimum directive to a maximum directive has meant in terms of shattering the order and balance on the labour market .
These exclusions will not improve the situation .
Instead , they will make it worse .
This will lead to social disasters .
Whole industries will choose to recruit seasonal workers in a way that will affect the whole labour market , suppress wages and create conflict .
I appeal to my fellow Members from other political groups , such as the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , to support the amendment tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
That is the only way to ensure that the exclusions do not create these serious social conflicts .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 18 December 1990 , the UN adopted the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families .
This Convention is one of the UN 's nine main instruments on human rights .
Unfortunately , 20 years later , none of the Member States of the European Union have signed or ratified that Convention .
I believe that recognising the rights of third-country nationals who live and work legally in the European Union must be a priority for a Europe which faces new challenges in relation to integration , non-discrimination and protection of human rights .
For this reason , I ask all Members to support Amendment 16 and to sign Written Declaration 96 - to which I am a signatory , together with Cornelia Ernst , Sylvie Guillaume and Franziska Keller - in order to petition Member States to ratify the UN Convention on migrant workers .
( PT ) Mr President , it is true that this proposal for a directive discusses a wide variety of situations , including , for example , immigrant workers from third countries , seasonal workers and posted workers , but the truth is that what this represents in practice is the legalisation of social dumping , the reinforcing of job insecurity and the worsening of discrimination , under the pretext of a single regulation .
That is why we say that this proposal for a directive cannot be adopted .
What is needed is to improve the rights of those working in the European Union , whether as posted workers , seasonal workers , full-time workers or even immigrant workers .
We must recognise their rights , including the United Nations International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families .
It would be positive if the Commission committed to adopting and ratifying this Convention for all Member States .
( SK ) Mr President , economic migration is a fact that is more or less familiar to all the more affluent countries of the European Union .
Along with the migrants who come to EU countries legally , however , in accordance with their laws and regulations , there are many illegal migrants , who are often exposed to discrimination or even persecution , as employers frequently take advantage of their lack of a legitimate residency status .
The attempt made in this directive concerning better organisation and the introduction of specific common rules to resolve this problem may help to preserve the dignity of people coming to EU countries to find work , if they are willing to accept EU rules on migration .
I am under no illusions that the directive will resolve all the problems of employment migration .
It may improve the current employment system for migrants , however , and eliminate some of the undesirable developments we have seen in this area .
We therefore have reason to regard this draft directive as a step in the right direction .
That is how it should be seen .
( GA ) Mr President , there is a proverb in Irish that says : so many people , so many minds .
If that is true about anything , it is true about this controversial , complex subject .
Therefore , the rapporteur has done a very good job , and she deserves praise .
As the European Union is founded on principles of peace and prosperity , it is only right that it should try and convey that idea throughout the whole European Union , and indeed the world .
As the world 's biggest donor to third countries , it is right that we should be trying to ensure that those who are legally within our borders will be treated with the same dignity and respect that we would like to be shown to our citizens if they were in third countries .
While this is not perfect , it is a step in the right direction .
I welcome it and therefore endorse it .
Mr President , I do not wish to re-open a debate with my fellow Member , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , but rather just to dot the ' i 's and cross the ' t 's .
The debate has not been in any way personal , and no one has called her work into question .
If they had called it into question , I would say straightaway that she has done an excellent job on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
However , if Mrs Oomen-Ruijten says that she has tabled amendments for tomorrow 's sitting that improve the text and provide equality , I have to say that this is not the case .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has put her name to the amendments to the texts - which I have here - that the Council did not succeed in introducing during the dialogue we had with the Council .
These are not amendments by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ; they are the Council 's text word-for-word .
With regard to the posting of workers , the Council has a much more unequal position than the Commission .
We would be prepared to accept the Commission 's original text , but the text from the Council states that all posted workers , including those who are covered by the 1996 directive , are also excluded from this directive .
This amendment does not , therefore , provide greater equality but rather greater inequality .
I would like to reiterate my personal regard for Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
She is undoubtedly an excellent MEP whose work is very good , but ultimately , she has aligned herself with the Council 's view .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this has indeed been a very good debate .
Regarding the scope of the directive , it is no secret that the Commission would have liked a global approach .
My predecessors proposed this many years ago .
It was impossible .
It still is , so we therefore have this sectoral approach .
I do not like it , but it is the only way to move forward .
The directive is necessary because we have third-country workers .
They are in our countries and make an important contribution to our economies .
We need to protect them .
Having said that , contrary to some of the views that have been expressed here today , let me emphasise that the present directive establishes the principle of equal treatment for migrant workers in all employment-related areas , including employment conditions and wages .
It does not create discrimination .
Once adopted , the directive will be a very important tool in the fight for the protection of migrant workers and against social dumping .
Nobody wants social dumping .
We want to protect these people .
Other categories of workers , such as seasonal workers and ICTs ( intra-corporate transferees ) , are not included in the present proposal .
I share your view that we need to protect them .
That is why , before the summer , the Commission proposed two separate instruments covering ICTs and seasonal workers , specifically targeted to protect them .
I am sure that , once the rapporteurs , the shadow rapporteurs and the committees really start working on those proposals , they will do their utmost to make sure that those categories are also protected and that we can progress in those fields as well .
I am also aware that some people or groups here would like to have included posted workers - who are now excluded .
The directive which we are discussing today is supposed to avoid discrimination , not create new discrimination , so let us treat the issue of posted workers separately and not in this context .
The Commission is about to launch an impact assessment study on the issue .
It has announced a revision of the Posted Workers Directive for the end of next year .
The question of the personal scope of the Posted Workers Directive could be addressed as part of the announced revision of the Posted Workers Directive .
As regards the issue of correlation tables , which Ms in ' t Veld raised , the Commission fully shares her view , not only as regards this directive .
It would have been , and hopefully it will be , an important tool for addressing the issue of better regulation and greater transparency on the part of Member States when they implement the various directives .
It will be good for you ; it will be good for us , the national parliaments and citizens .
We keep repeating this to the Council .
If it facilitates things , the Commission is prepared to make a declaration on this . However , we do not want to jeopardise the directive if it is possible to reach a decision tomorrow , when you vote on this issue .
However , we will keep on fighting for this and we will come back to it for many other pieces of legislation .
Thank you for this debate .
Thank you for the very hard work that many people have been doing , particularly Ms Mathieu and Mr Cercas .
I hope that we can reach an agreement and have a positive vote tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , I must agree wholeheartedly with you , as you have given very full answers to the 23 fellow Members who have spoken on our text , to Mr Cercas and to me .

I must thank all the rapporteurs on this text from all the political groups , with whom we have had much discussion and very good cooperation throughout this year , as we have been working together on this for a year now .
We started at the beginning of the year and we are finishing with the Belgian Presidency .
Thank you , Mrs Malmström , as you have paid very close attention to this text , as have your services .
I also thank the Council , because the Council has listened to us very attentively and I also thank those fellow Members who have spoken this evening .
I would like to say that tomorrow , we are actually voting at first reading .
This is a compromise .
A compromise is never 100 % satisfactory and if fellow Members still need to be reassured , I hope that in any event , the speech you have made will reassure them .
With regard to Mrs Flautre , who said just now that we were beginning the text of a report with exclusions , remember that all those workers concerned in the exclusion were , in any case , covered by directives relating very specifically to them .
It was not therefore a matter of excluding a certain number of workers from third countries .
I hope that the text of this report , which we have drawn up with all the rapporteurs and which we shall be presenting tomorrow to our other fellow Members , will be a great step forward for workers from third countries .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 14 December 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I voted against this dangerously worded draft directive from the Commission and Council that sought to create a low pay job market for migrant workers in the EU .
Migration must be fair .
Everyone working in the EU should be treated equally , regardless of his or her country of origin .
This proposal for a single work permit for nationals of non-EU countries was a missed opportunity to support decent working conditions where migrants are welcomed on the basis of equal treatment .
Instead , the proposal would have resulted in discriminatory treatment between EU workers and non-EU employees posted to work in the EU .
For example , companies could find it more profitable to officially relocate their headquarters to countries outside the EU and then to post their workers to their European branches to avoid having to provide the same rights and conditions for their workers that are legally applicable to EU citizens working in the EU .
The European Parliament rejected this proposal .
This ensures that the Commission and Member State Ministers must go back to the drawing board and bring forward a visa proposal that does not promote a race to the bottom .
Extension of the scope of Directive 2003 / 109 / EC to beneficiaries of international protection ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Claude Moraes , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the extension of the scope of Directive 2003 / 109 / EC to beneficiaries of international protection - C6-0196 / 2007 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I fear that as I get into the first paragraph of my speech , there will be only me , the PPE coordinator , and the Commissioner left in the Chamber .
I admire you for your stamina , Commissioner .
I should never take up my speaking time by doing this , but I could not help it .
Thanks to the PPE Group for being here too at this time of night .
Commissioner , you and the Council did a great job in rescuing this proposal , which now benefits those who should never have been excluded from the original Long-Term Residence Directive .
There was another opportunity to include them in 2008 , and again unfortunately , through the failure to reach unanimity in the Council , this could not happen .
So it is a very happy day today that a proposal taken on by my predecessor as coordinator in my group , Martine Roure , is now the subject of an agreement .
I am very grateful to the Council , too .
I pointed out in the previous debate that it was not present but , if it were present here today , I would thank the Council too , because during the Belgian Presidency , we were able to make good progress .
I am very grateful for that .
The proposal will bring direct benefit to all beneficiaries of international protection who have been in the EU for more than five years but currently cannot become long-term residents .
It will finally bring to an end their differential treatment compared to other third-country nationals and will give them greater certainty about their situation in the EU .
The main issue for the negotiations boiled down to the calculation of the time period of legal residence to reach the five years .
We supported the Commission that the full duration of the procedure should be taken into account .
However , this was strongly opposed by the Council .
We were particularly concerned about this , because asylum procedures can take many years in some Member States .
The compromise we have reached in the negotiations is that at least half of the asylum procedure will be taken into account and , if a procedure takes more than 18 months , the whole procedure will then be taken into account .
I hesitate to go on to the issue of correlation tables but I am duty bound to say something about them - I would rather not .
I would nevertheless like to implore the institutions to reach a horizontal agreement on this issue .
I would particularly urge the Council to recognise the importance of correlation tables for overseeing the implementation of legislation .
We had a very difficult situation in which many of the dossiers considered of great importance by groups across this House could have been delayed because of this issue .
I am very happy also that the scope of the proposal includes both refugees and beneficiaries of subsidiary protection .
It is vital to continue the trend towards aligning the standards of protection and the rights granted to both groups , as in the recasting of the Qualification Directive .
The agreement also contains many safeguards against refoulement .
Given that beneficiaries will now be allowed to move between Member States , it is important that the protection background of beneficiaries is never forgotten .
Therefore , Member States will have to include a comment in the long-term residence permit and will be obliged to consult the Member State that granted protection in cases of possible expulsion .
The proposal also takes into account the transfer of protection to another Member State under national arrangements .
The long-term residence permit needs to be modified accordingly in order to safeguard against refoulement .
We have also ensured that the principle of family unity is upheld in the event of expulsion to another Member State , but it is also clear that it should not be automatic in cases where it may not be in the best interest of family members to go with the expelled person .
The agreement we have reached on this is a signal of the new cooperation which can exist between the three institutions in the area of asylum and legal migration aided by the new framework in the Lisbon Treaty .
It shows that we can reach an agreement with Member States on a progressive piece of asylum-related legislation .
I again want to thank my shadow rapporteurs from across the groups , Ms Nedelcheva , Ms Wikström and other colleagues who helped make this what I would call a pleasurable trialogue - if that is not a contradiction in terms !
I should like to thank all concerned for making this a reality .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the European Parliament rapporteur , Claude Moraes .
He has done a fantastic job together with his team of shadow rapporteurs .
Parliament , the Commission and the Council have really achieved an agreement .
The minister was also very helpful .
The compromise that we have reached is a well-balanced one and is in line with the 2007 proposal .
The extension of long-term residence status to beneficiaries of international protection will ensure a higher level of protection and legal certainty for refugees in Europe and will allow for better integration in our societies .
This is also the first building block of our asylum package - the first of six pieces of legislation - and is a first step towards our joint aim of achieving a common European asylum system by 2012 . It will give a strong political signal that we can agree , that we are willing to go down this difficult but necessary road and make progress , and that we can act reasonably and constructively on this .
I would really like to thank you for that .
Concerning the much talked about issue of correlation tables , the Commission made a declaration to the Council .
I would like to read it out , with your permission : ' The Commission recalls its commitment towards ensuring that Member States establish correlation tables linking the transposition measures they adopt with the EU directive and communicate them to the Commission in the framework of transposing EU legislation , in the interest of citizens , better law making and increasing legal transparency and to assist the examination of the conformity of national rules with EU provisions .
' The Commission regrets the lack of support for the provision included in the 2007 COM proposal amending the Long-Term Residence Directive which aimed at rendering the establishment of correlation tables obligatory .
' The Commission , in a spirit of compromise and in order to ensure the immediate adoption of the Long-Term Residence proposal , can accept the substitution of the obligatory provision on correlation tables included in the text with a relevant recital encouraging Member States to follow this practice .
' However , the position followed by the Commission in this file shall not be considered as a precedent .
The Commission will continue its efforts with a view to finding , together with the European Parliament and the Council , an appropriate solution to this horizontal institutional issue ' .
I think we can agree on this .
It is important that this declaration is in the protocol and has been heard .
As I said in the earlier debate , the Commission is repeating this argument .
Nevertheless , on this particular report , it is very important that we have reached agreement .
Thank you all , again , for your contribution .


Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Moraes , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , first of all , to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Moraes , on the excellent work he has done and on the exemplary cooperation he has shown with the shadow rapporteurs , the Commission and the Council .
With this report , we have made a great step forward towards a harmonised European asylum system .
The agreement reached with the Council was necessary and I am very pleased that we have succeeded in making progress on this issue .
The asylum package is very much greater and , indeed , there is still much to be done .
Therefore , we must not drop our guard and I hope that the Council will take the same cooperative attitude in negotiations on future issues .
That is what I wanted to say by way of introduction .
Regarding the substance of the dossier , without repeating the rapporteur 's words , I would like to go back to two points .
First of all , I would like to stress the importance of integrating third-country nationals into our societies .
Migrants who come to our countries are a considerable asset to our economies .
We cannot , however , welcome everybody under any conditions .
Several governments have realised in recent months that their integration model has failed .
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Moraes , who has drawn up the report on which we are to give our views to his usual high standard and with a sincere desire to uphold humanitarian principles and the principle of respect for our fellow human beings .
Beneficiaries of international protection in a Member State often stay there for a very long time , perhaps the rest of their lives , as their vulnerability and persecution in the country from which they have fled tends to remain for a very long time .
Many beneficiaries of international protection therefore find themselves in the same situation as those who are classed as refugees .
It is also reasonable for people to be classed as resident in a country after they have lived there for five years , and this was the approach taken by both the Commission and Parliament .
The Council wanted to take a different approach , which I find regrettable .
I would also like to emphasise that members of the family of the person who is a beneficiary of international protection must have the chance to shape their own lives .
For example , in the case of expulsion , the family must be allowed to choose whether to follow or to remain where they are .
I am pleased that Parliament will now adopt this report .
It is regrettable that the Council has not approved the correlation tables , but I welcome the fact that we are pressing on with the reports that are to be included in the common European asylum system .
It is to be hoped that the Council will now take more of a listening approach .
We all have the same deadline to meet and that is 2012 .
We now need to relinquish our old , ingrained opinions and look to the pan-European approach and what is best for everyone when it comes to asylum and migration .
Otherwise , the word ' solidarity ' will soon become meaningless .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Moraes , once again for his fine work and for his very good , if not excellent , cooperation on this report .
Mr President , last week , we visited Athens with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and while I was there , I talked to Mamuth .
Mamuth is 26 years old and comes from Eritrea .
He entered the European Union via Greece and travelled on to the Netherlands , where he would have preferred to stay , because he had some contacts there , but he was sent back to Greece .
Mamuth said that , when he eventually got his refugee status in Greece , he would not be able to travel freely and that it would take an eternity before he was granted Greek nationality .
It is for the sake of young men like Mamuth , who are entitled to a new life and do not deserve to be shunted back and forth across borders again , that I am pleased that this House is now going to change that situation and that rapporteur Claude Moraes has managed to take this first step in our asylum packages .
It is also important that Mamuth , who would actually prefer to live his new life in the Netherlands , is given a decent basis for comparison , because this young man has the right to see how various matters are dealt with in Greece and the Netherlands , or wherever it is that he wants to build his life .

Thank you , Mr Moraes , thank you for your cooperation and let us see how long the process takes for Mamuth .
( MT ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking and congratulating Claude Moraes on his report .
I agree with the report and welcome it with satisfaction because it will grant new rights to those who apply for international protection , including refugees .
It will furnish them with rights which , after all , are already given to third-country citizens that have been legally residing in a European Union country for five years .
There are , however , a few difficulties in this report .
I come from a country which has experienced these difficulties , namely that five years is far too long a time to wait in order to acquire the right that is granted by this law .
This applies especially to those countries who are hosting a huge amount of people who are stuck there ; blocked in the country they first arrive at .
Aside from my country , there are others that have recently undergone similar experiences , Greece being one of them .
They are hosting vast numbers of persons who are required to wait five years to benefit from these rights , as laid down by this law .
Naturally , they ultimately benefit from long-term residence , yet they can also move to other European Union countries , which could be of great help to those like Greece , Malta , Cyprus and others .
Therefore , I believe that this law , although good , could have been improved upon by decreasing the stipulated five-year waiting period .
Here , I would like to conclude by thanking the rapporteur Claude Moraes for having recognised this and for having done what he could to insert a reference , albeit a symbolic one to him , in an explanatory note at the end .
( RO ) Mr President , I , too , must begin by congratulating my colleague , Claude Moraes , for this report .
I also want to thank him for the exceptional efforts he makes as coordinator within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I think that it is excellent that this new directive finally fills a legal vacuum with regard to the right of residence which beneficiaries of international protection find themselves in throughout the European Union .
These persons who have settled in one of the Member States are currently in a precarious state of legal certainty due to the fact that they are not eligible , under current circumstances , for long-term residence permits , something other third-country nationals are eligible for .
They must be granted the right of long-term residence in a non-discriminatory manner , with the only condition being prior legal residence , as is also the case for the other third-country nationals .
I believe that it would have been better to take into account in this calculation the whole duration of legal residence within the European Union , from the time the application for international protection was lodged .
At the same time , consideration must be given to the fact that these people are permanently vulnerable outside the European Union , so that any move to withdraw international protection or the right to residence must be carried out with complete respect for their fundamental rights and the principle of non-refoulement .
This directive provides the necessary additional provisions with regard to the procedures that can be applied if it comes to expulsion or ending international protection .
I think that we must vote in support of Claude Moraes 's report as it is part of the general package governing the European Union 's asylum and migration system .
( DE ) Mr President , I am not looking at this report through rose-tinted spectacles .
I am deliberately looking at it through the eyes of the citizens in our home countries who are concerned because after residing for five years in a Member State , refugees are then to be granted long-term resident status .
This will then apply throughout the territory of the EU .
So once a refugee has settled in a country with relatively soft asylum law , after five years he will be able to move his place of residence to any other Member State he chooses - and naturally he will initially seek out a country where the regulations have loopholes or are softer , and will subsequently settle long-term wherever the social standards are obviously high .
The consequence will be secondary migration and abuse .
Even the accumulation of a duration of five years in the asylum system is problematic , since often the administrative procedures are subject to wilful delays and investigations .
Extending the directive would place an even greater burden on those Member States with a high social standard , which already have huge problems in any case , making it harder still for refugees to be integrated .
I shall be extremely critical of this report .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I do not have much to add .
There is a big consensus of support here for the work done by Mr Moraes on this very important directive .
I would just once again make a pledge to Mr Moraes and the others that this is an important building block .
I believe it will get strong support tomorrow in the vote .
This is the first step in our common journey towards 2012 and the asylum package .
I just hope that this spirit of constructive cooperation will remain because I need - and I am counting on - your support for the remaining directives .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to formally thank the Commissioner again for her work on this .
One of the reasons why we hope that the first step on asylum can be completed in tomorrow 's vote - and I hope it is a resounding vote - is because , although asylum remains one of the deeply sensitive issues for this House , as Mr Busuttil explained for smaller countries in particular , every piece of legislation on asylum can have a disproportionate effect , not just on small countries , but also on flashpoint countries such as Greece .
We should all proceed carefully , as we did in this report , and there are some items in the explanatory memorandum which ensure that Members ' concerns are taken very seriously , particularly when they come from serious Members .
For example , I think we were able to incorporate Ms Nedelcheva 's concerns regarding integration and those of Ms Wikström when she talked about family members and expulsion , as well as the issues of domestic violence and other issues .
It is when we have that kind of cooperation that negotiations go very well at the higher level of the Commission and the Council thanks to the work we do in Parliament with colleagues .
Finally , Ms Sargentini , I really wanted to find an inventive way of saying that correlation tables were extremely important .
To say that asylum seekers are now waiting for the correlation tables to be implemented is probably the most inventive and imaginative lobbying for the correlation table resolution to happen , so I hope Council was listening .
Thank you again to all my colleagues for their support on this report after such a long time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 14 December 2010 .
Territorial , social and economic cohesion - Good governance and EU regional policy ( debate )
Mr President , we have intended with this report to answer the question raised in the title , which is whether establishing economic , social and territorial cohesion is an absolute prerequisite for global competitiveness in the European Union , with a particular focus on the role played by the cohesion policy in this respect .
It is alarming that there are such great disparities between the European Union 's 271 regions .
While the most developed region has a per capita GDP which is 334 % of the EU-27 average , this figure is only 26 % in the poorest region , in other words , 13 times smaller .
Another adverse factor is the rate of economic growth in the European Union , which is slower compared to that of our international competitors .
Therefore , as is also mentioned in the EU 2020 strategy , we need to develop strategic areas and look outside the European Union to become more powerful .
Europe is faced with a tough task as it will need to tackle , apart from the impact of the current crisis , other major challenges as well , such as adapting to globalisation , demographic changes , climate change and energy security problems .
The cohesion policy 's role in the EU 2020 strategy is unarguable .
I think that this policy 's priorities must be aligned with the objectives of the future strategy , but it is worth mentioning that it still needs to remain an independent policy .
The strategy 's objectives can be achieved more easily through increasing the synergy between the research , development and innovation programmes , on the one hand , and the cohesion programmes , on the other .
We must support large projects with a major impact at EU level , which will generate economic growth , create jobs and ensure sustainable development for the regions .
Particular importance must also be attached to investments in any kind of infrastructure , be it transport , ICT , social , educational , research and development or environmental , which will help achieve a suitable level of accessibility for all European citizens , offering them equal opportunities to development potential .
The guidelines at local and regional level will be dictated by the specific features of the area , with the opportunity available to generate immediate added value .
The application of the principle of decentralisation must be encouraged up to local authority level so as to improve the absorption of European funds .
While promoting economic competitiveness and creating jobs , the particularly important role played by SMEs must not be overlooked .
They must enjoy increased access to EU funding , financial engineering instruments and other credit sources .
Maximising the cohesion policy 's impact is an absolute must for boosting economic competitiveness .
At this point , I would like to stress the need to continue simplifying the procedures for using EU funds , the guarantee of their flexible use , the continuing use of GDP as the main criterion for determining regions ' eligibility under the cohesion policy and the need for a specific proposal from the Commission on the use of public-private partnerships .
In terms of increasing the European Union 's global competitiveness , I think that part of the funds allocated to the cohesion policy should be used to establish and maintain Europe 's role as global leader in the sectors where it already enjoys a competitive edge and in the sectors where there is potential for it to become global leader .
Therefore , fellow Members , achieving economic , social and territorial cohesion , along with strategic investments , is the absolute prerequisite for guaranteeing the European Union 's economic competitiveness globally .
Mr President , the current global crisis has highlighted once again how important good governance is at every level , as well as the need to have local and regional authorities constantly involved , as equal partners , in devising and implementing EU policies and strategies , especially as they enforce almost 70 % of EU legislation .
The cohesion policy plays a vital role in the application of multi-level governance .
Given the considerable impact this has in achieving territorial cohesion in Europe , the principle of multi-level governance should become compulsory for all Member States .
Indeed , active involvement by local and regional authorities in the decision-making process even at the prelegislative phase , along with a relevant analysis of the effectiveness of share management mechanisms , with the various responsibilities that the Commission and Member States have , will actually guarantee that better results are achieved with regard to the absorption of European funds in the future programming period .
The practical reality has shown us that an integrated approach to regional policy is much more effective in terms of the results achieved .
This is precisely why this approach should also become compulsory .
We need a common definition of the concept of partnership .
On this point , I have asked the European Commission to come up with a definition of this as a condition for establishing proper partnerships with local and regional authorities .
Therefore , adopting the local development methodology based on local partnerships is the solution available to Member States for enhancing the role of local and regional authorities in the management and implementation of European programmes , especially those relating to urban , rural and cross-border development .
The simplification of regulations at EU and national level , not only as a consequence of the economic crisis but also as a general principle of the future cohesion policy , is a prerequisite for better governance in applying the cohesion policy , as it is the only way we will be able to encourage prospective beneficiaries .
In addition , I think that we need for the future programming period a common set of regulations for using European funds , which are applicable to all Member States , thereby eliminating the opportunity for the latter to introduce additional conditions which actually restrict access to funding .
If our long-term aspiration is to have a policy which is clearer , results-orientated and much easier to apply , the Commission must improve both the assistance capacity given to local and regional authorities and the systems for monitoring the activity carried out at national level .
I believe that training and guiding these authorities through the process of implementing the programmes will help reduce the high error rate , especially with regard to ineligible expenditure and public procurement .
In order to avoid duplication of audits and the excessive level of control currently faced by beneficiaries , we have asked the Commission to produce a single audit manual which will facilitate the uniform application of a single audit model at all levels .
Last but not least , we must take measures to encourage the private sector 's involvement in European projects .
A first step in this direction is to simplify the regulations for operating the financial engineering instruments aimed at small and medium-sized enterprises .
Finally , I want to mention the good cooperation I have enjoyed with the Commission 's representatives during the consultations , as well as the receptiveness and support they have shown in giving effective backing to the measures featuring in this report , which is a further guarantee that these measures will eventually be adopted by the Commission .

Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , in particular , Mrs Mănescu and Mr Luhan , I would specifically like to thank both of you for your two reports , which are once again constructive and very positive towards regional policy and have come at absolutely the right time in view of the ongoing debate on the future structure of regional policy , particularly looking ahead to the Cohesion Forum at the end of January / beginning of February .
It is important that we constantly view regional policy in particular as an investment policy - as a policy of investing in regions , in people , in Europeans .
In the area of innovation and regional policy , a total of EUR 86 billion has already been earmarked for this financial period , and this is intended to help small and medium-sized enterprises in particular , to improve the quality of their workforce , their production methods and the services that they are able to offer .
However , what we need to do - and here you are both absolutely right - is to improve our strategy further in the future , so that in addition to the controls that will continue to be necessary in the future - in other words , alongside correct financial conduct - we focus much more on a results-orientated assessment of our work .
I always say - and it is at the core of the cohesion report and its conclusions - that there is no contradiction between focusing on a few priorities as laid down in the EU 2020 strategy and flexibility in implementing these in the very varied regions of Europe .
Territorial cohesion is enormously important .
For me , it is a key issue and provides us with information as to how we can improve living standards in the regions further , which is our task , in order to ensure that people have prospects in the regions in which they were born .
That will also contribute to further internal cohesion in Europe .
In this context , it is important - and this should be accentuated in the coming programming period - to bring back the focus more to the role of towns and cities , in view of the fact that around 70 % of Europeans live in an urban environment , but at the same time , it is essential that we do not forget the importance of town and country relations .
Here it is a matter of using other funding to continue to improve the interfaces and to prevent unnecessary overlaps .
It is also important - as we debated very comprehensively and , in my opinion , very well in this House some time ago - to pay attention to areas with specific geographical circumstances and , naturally , to consider the matter of demographic change in Europe , which is something that we will encounter very often and need to deal with .
On the one hand , we are seeing very serious tendencies towards depopulation in rural areas and , on the other , a great increase in the attraction of urban areas - with the result that we have not only more and more people living in a small space , but also a corresponding depopulation .
To a certain extent , this can be countered by investments in old and new infrastructure .
This will make a very important contribution to ensuring growth .
The matter of partnership - of cooperation - is very important , as was mentioned in particular in Mrs Mănescu 's report .
Yes , it is important to develop multi-level governance .
However , I would specifically like to point out to this House the importance of the regions also involving the local level .
When I am in the regions discussing things , I sometimes get the impression that the local representatives are not being involved by the regional representatives , and that the regional representatives are not being involved by the national representatives .
We need to develop instruments here .
I am with you but , vice versa , I must also state quite clearly that naturally , we must respect the constitutional framework of each Member State and give it its due .
However , I support you on the matter of involving as many levels as possible - but also as many stakeholders as possible , including NGOs - in the development of our partnership and investment programmes .
I will perhaps go into the matter of financial controls in more detail in my closing remarks , since I have already exceeded my speaking time .
I would also like to warmly welcome the new president who has taken the chair .
Mr President , the cohesion policy is one of the EU 's most important and successful policies .
The Treaty of Lisbon allows territorial authorities to be more deeply involved in the decision-making process , which is an important step towards genuine multi-level governance .
This must play a key role not only in the forthcoming programming period , but also in every phase of devising and implementing the Europe 2020 strategy .
The Mănescu report , which was voted for unanimously in the Committee on Regional Development , wishes to focus on the competences and role of regional and local authorities in the process of implementing the cohesion policy .
The report stresses that the multi-level approach must be applied horizontally in all EU policies .
Multi-level governance is a prerequisite for achieving territorial cohesion and boosting its potential .
It should be based on a bottom-up approach , taking into account the diversity of the administrative systems currently operating in Member States .
Greater focus must be placed on the integrated approach during the current programming period and in the future , which also applies not only to improving administrative capacity but also to the use of the financial engineering instruments .
The role of local and regional authorities must expand by adopting a local development methodology based on regional partnerships , especially for projects relating to urban , rural and cross-border aspects .
The role of these partnerships is to help achieve balanced development and they extend beyond national frameworks , thereby contributing to the increase in the Union 's territorial cohesion .
In addition , they will highlight not only the common development potential , but also the specific local aspects .
Multi-level governance based on clear , transparent procedures will lead , by extension , to decentralisation , which is still necessary in some Member States .
Expanding the role of regional and local authorities involves giving them responsibility for making projects more efficient , which will mean adopting a more results-based approach .
I congratulate Mrs Mănescu and Mr Luhan for the excellent reports they have presented , which will provide significant added value to the future of the cohesion policy .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , let me commend my colleagues , Mr Luhan and Ms Mănescu , for their excellent work .
We all agree that the cohesion policy has a significant role to play for the competitiveness of the European regions .
With regard to the continuation of the policy and its achievements , we want to see adequate resources , or at least no less money made available for the cohesion policy than we have at the present time .
Neither do we want an additional burden for the beneficiaries .
The future design of the cohesion policy depends on the decision we will take together .
However , the Commission has an important role to play with the proposal it makes and here we rely on you , Commissioner Hahn , because in my opinion , some of these proposals - like the suggested preconditions for the Member States for receiving European Union financial assistance - need additional qualification .
The cohesion policies for all regions need support , and we should not permit a situation to arise in which they will suffer because of the inefficiency of some national governments .
Here again , I agree , Commissioner , that it is important to develop these levels .
It is therefore crucial not to replace complexity by conditionality and not to make life difficult again for the final beneficiaries .
To ensure the cohesion policy leads to positive results , let us allow the regions to participate actively ; let us allow them to feel ownership of the process , give them appropriate resources and make sure they use them in the most efficient way .
Mr President , Commissioner , first I wish to thank the rapporteurs for their excellent work .
These two reports really do create a firm basis for the future of cohesion policy .
A viable cohesion policy that applies to Europe as a whole is an absolute precondition for our global competitiveness , no doubt about it .
As the Commissioner said , regional policy is nothing less than investment policy .
This is something that we also need to strive for in the future .
It is through cohesion policy that we can also respond vigorously to the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy .
If we want better research , development and innovations , we also have to see cohesion policy as an integral component of these goals , and we must acquire a broader perspective on them .
Cohesion policy is not actually just a matter of solidarity . Of course , it is partly , but it is through cohesion policy that we now have very robustly financed research , development and innovation .
That is why it is only right that we should also put at least the same amount of money into cohesion policy during the next funding period as we have hitherto .
The Fifth Report on Economic , Social and Territorial Cohesion takes excellent account of these factors , and it is also very important that we invest more time and money in success .
Mrs Mǎnescu 's report also gets to grips with a very important key question in cohesion policy , namely , how to establish such a policy which is good and which takes every level into consideration .
We have had some disappointing results as regards implementation figures , for example .
As regional policy actors , we should take seriously these problems in cohesion policy and , furthermore , try to find solutions to them .
In my opinion , Mrs Mǎnescu 's report also does an excellent job of addressing these issues .
Mr President , I should like to focus my speech on Mr Luhan 's report .
Regional cohesion policies have a key role to play in Europe for economic development that is balanced , socially harmonious and ecologically effective , that is , at the end of the day , globally competitive .
I thank Mr Luhan for including some of our amendments aimed at establishing a sustainable low carbon economy which safeguards biodiversity .
Nonetheless , we cannot vote for his resolution because it promotes a vision of cohesion policy as an instrument for global competitiveness that still appears to us to be too narrow , too restricted and inadequate .
We must point out two sticking points .
Firstly , the rapporteur relies almost exclusively on quantitative measures in terms of infrastructure as the driving force for growth , increase being his main criterion .
We do not feel that is appropriate for the current situation .
For example , he mentions 246 operational programmes in research and development and is proud of these , but without questioning what they are about .
Research is a good thing but we also need to know what it is that we are researching .
The second sticking point is that the rapporteur does not put forward sufficiently clear plans .
We would have liked a robust choice in order to meet the challenges set out in his report , the choice of a green economy , of a green new deal which is the only choice capable of moving Europe and its regions upwards .
Mr President , these reports are along the same anti-grassroots lines as the strategic plans of the monopoly groups in the European Union and of the bourgeois governments that serve them .
There never has been , nor can there ever be , cohesion in the European Union , despite the efforts made to use political cohesion for the purpose of manipulating the public .
The policy of the European Union is coloured by two basic elements : the first is the deep-rooted inequality which is an inherent characteristic of the capitalist development method and the second basic element is that Community funds are not allocated to grassroots needs ; they are allocated to works and infrastructures to boost the return on capital and hot money for the monopoly groups through public-private partnerships .
Today , as the capitalist crisis continues , even this misleadingly named principle of Community solidarity is being abandoned and replaced by the competitiveness of capital .
The reports and plans of the political representatives of capital for future cohesion policy serve the contemporary needs of business groups , faster capitalist restructurings through the anti-grassroots EU 2020 strategy and the savage attack on the labour , insurance and social rights of the working classes .
The European Union and the capitalist development method are not able to satisfy urgent needs , such as earthquake protection , education , health and welfare .
That is why leaving the European Union is more necessary today than ever before , as is the fight for a planned socialist economy .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I am speaking tonight because my colleague , Mr Bufton , who would have addressed you , is unwell .
On his behalf , I present this to you .
As we know , along with the CAP , regional funds represent the biggest part of the EU budget .
For decades , the British people have been forced to foot the bill for various projects around the EU , most of which are of no benefit at all to the UK taxpayer .
Recently , the Bureau of Investigative Journalism in the UK unveiled the fact that EU regional funds are being used to prop up arms dealing companies in Eastern Europe , with some projects receiving funding amounting to millions of euro , although these are some of the richest companies .
Do they really need EU subsidies ?
Given the fraud and waste endemic in this budget line , and the way it is not even being used for the purposes its supporters allege , I call on the coalition in the UK to withdraw funding , as we need this money at home - yet another reason to leave the EU .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Hungary is certainly in a special position when it comes to the creation and support of regions constituting transboundary economic units .
It is an historical fact that these regions were a unit within the Carpathian Basin at one time .
The Members of Jobbik therefore support cooperation between the regions and consider it a necessity in the present situation as well , which could further mitigate the temporary barriers erected between the Hungarian people .
However , instead of resources disbursed and controlled directly through Brussels , we can only envision funding in the form of projects launched and approved in joint collaboration , based on a partnership between the countries concerned .
At local and regional levels , identification as well as management of problems can be more effective , taking into consideration the transboundary nature of the economically connected regions mentioned as an example .
This should be supported even if we only take into account economic considerations .
Similarly , the simplification of rules , the involvement of SMEs in European projects and the process of helping economically less developed regions to catch up should all be supported if these popular measures did not entail an extension of the competence and supervisory role of Brussels and the Commission to the detriment of national control .
Prioritising the regions and granting them direct economic support could even trigger the beginning of a new era for the Hungarians of the Carpathian Basin .
( PL ) Mr President , there are few European political strategies that give rise to so much emotion and controversy .
Cohesion policy , which , by some , is considered to be a socialist policy par excellence , is thought of as a capitalist policy by others .
By some , it is regarded as a just policy , and by others as unjust .
Some see it as a way of ironing out disproportions , while others see it as strengthening competitiveness .
In fact , there are no contradictions within the policy , which is essentially intended to foster greater cohesion between areas of the European Union , not only in terms of social justice , but also in terms of equal opportunities with regard to competitiveness .
In other words , it is cohesion for competitiveness .
Both reports speak about this , and point to certain aspects that are important not only for the situation today , but also in the debate about the future of cohesion policy .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that both reports focus particularly on the principle of partnership .
I call on the Commissioner to give serious consideration to whether a requirement for Member States should be placed in the proposed development contract .
Such a requirement would state that , before signing a contract , a Member State shall agree all directions for development , priorities and principles with local and regional partners .
This should be compulsory so that the European Commission can unambiguously assign to each Member State responsibility for implementing its part of cohesion policy .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by congratulating and thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Mănescu , for her excellent collaboration and for the fact that she was prepared throughout to discuss and take account of proposals made by fellow Members in connection with the contents of the report .
As regards the contents of this report that we are debating , there can be no doubt that good governance is fundamental to the success of any policy , especially cohesion policy , which is based on joint administration , most of the responsibility for which has shifted to national and regional authorities .
There is only one answer to the challenges of this complex administration system : multi-level governance .
What I should like to stress is that , if we take account of the future direction of cohesion policy , at least as it would appear up to a degree in the fifth cohesion report , multi-level governance in both its horizontal and vertical dimension will be instrumental to the viability of any development initiative and to the success of the policy .
I also welcome the call for simpler rules and greater technical assistance for local authorities on the part of the European Commission as factors that will guarantee greater participation by potential beneficiaries in programmes and in taking up funds in a viable manner .
The assessments which are now carried out by the European Commission give us information as to which bodies consistently have problems in terms of their managerial capabilities in implementing political cohesion programmes .
As the report notes , additional technical assistance for these bodies , in conjunction with reinforcement of the ' Train the trainers ' initiative , will boost the managerial capabilities of even the smallest body at local level .
Finally , I believe that more unified and harmonised rules for the Structural Funds will provide a solid basis for efforts towards simplification and sound financial management .
( BG ) Mr President , just days ago , the Commission voted for the Danube strategy action plan , so I will look at Mr Luhan 's report through the prism of this event , especially since he says in his explanatory statement that his aim is to stimulate debate on the dependency and complementary nature of the measures at European and national level .
To this I would like to add the regional level .
The report outlines the framework in which the cohesion policy can play a role in improving the Union 's competitiveness .
It does not explicitly set out the role of macro-regions in this process , but an analysis shows that the Danube strategy is precisely such a framework on a smaller scale , as was the Baltic strategy before it .
I find that the conditions in the report coincide with the realities in the Danube Action Plan .
Furthermore , the tenets of increasing competitiveness contained in the report are fundamental to the strategy .
For example , the report places great value on building links with other territories .
It underlines that the Member States have to support a locally oriented approach to formulating and implementing the cohesion policy .
And all of these are operating techniques enshrined in the new policy for the Danubian macro-region .
I also admire the thesis in the report about the importance of providing continued support , in particular , to disadvantaged regions .
This makes the Danube strategy a special case in Mr Luhan 's report which conforms fully with its conclusions .
The aim of my comparison is to show the true path of the cohesion policy .
I believe that these principles and operating methods should form the basis of the cohesion policy during the next programme period , and include a results-oriented local policy through the macro-regions .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur on good governance ; in particular , I want to express my thanks for her positive cooperation and to congratulate her on this excellent report .
This report shows the Commission what needs to happen in the time ahead , particularly in the area of the partnership principle .
It states how it must be ensured that local and regional levels are also involved , and how economic and social partners as well as representatives of civil society need to be involved in all phases - in the implementation and in the evaluation of the Structural Fund .
That represents a commitment by the Member States to real partnership .
It means that the partners will be empowered to talk to the administrations as equals , through training initiatives and financial support ; it means that the partners will have a real influence on the form the programmes take .
So far , however , we have seen little commitment on the part of the Commission . That applies just as much to the current period as to the proposals that it has made on the matter .
I welcome the fact that Mr Olbrycht said that if this development and investment partnership contract comes about , it will only be possible if there is a partnership and if the partners are involved in developing these plans on an equal footing .
Otherwise , there is a risk that we will move from being a Europe of regions to being a Europe of Member States , and that is not our aim .
Our aim is regional development and the involvement of the local and regional levels , of the economic and social partners , and of civil society .

( PT ) Mr President , this debate is taking place at an opportune time in that the economic , social and territorial disparities within the European Union are being exacerbated in a way that is worrying : the inequality that exists between countries and regions and those within each country are getting worse .
We have clearly failed to achieve territorial cohesion .
Cohesion policy does not exist in isolation from other areas of policy : it influences and is profoundly influenced by the prevailing political guidelines and macro-economic framework .
Attacks on workers ' salaries and rights , the dismantling and degrading of public services , the attack on the state 's social functions and cuts in public investment are integral parts of the economic and monetary policies that the European Union has been imposing on Member States .
These are policies that lead to increased poverty and inequality , and that prevent us further every day from achieving cohesion .
The truth is that cohesion policy has not counteracted the impact or imbalances caused by the integration of economies with very diverse levels of development into the Single Market or the Economic and Monetary Union .
The insufficiency of the funds dedicated to cohesion and the incoherence of macro-economic policies that are obsessively focused on nominal convergence but make real convergence unviable are significant causes , which must be corrected by increasing the budgetary allocation to cohesion and by profoundly changing macro-economic policy .
Supporting production and developing the productive capacities of each country and region , taking full advantage of the local potential that each has through the sustainable use of its resources , preserving the environment and creating jobs with rights , as well as strengthening social security schemes and public services , are strategically essential to effective economic , social and territorial cohesion .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome Mrs Mănescu 's report .
Multi-level governance has a key role to play in cohesion policy and , in this respect , the multi-level approach , which provides for cooperation and shared responsibilities across various levels of government , is being put into practice in the management of regional funds .
The Commission is promoting initiatives in favour of regional and local authorities .
There must be a greater incentive to support such proposals in order to ensure the real coordination and effective implementation of European programmes .
The partnership must be guaranteed by a culture based on dialogue between the various parties involved .
Cooperation at regional level must be transparent and must ensure fair representation of all concerned .
For this reason , it is important to provide appropriate training for subnational representatives through initiatives such as Erasmus for regional and local officials , the financial cost of which must be borne by the Commission .
This is likewise useful for exchanging good practices and for improving the quality and effectiveness of cohesion fund management .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I find it regrettable that an important debate on cohesion policy has once again been pushed almost into last place on the agenda .
It does not do justice to this policy and its importance in any way .
I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteurs for their reports , which have emphatically shown us the policy area in which the European Union has been really successful - namely cohesion policy - and the fact that it is essential to continue this policy and to do so in a political system with multiple levels - in other words , multi-level governance .
Cohesion policy projects make European action directly visible to our citizens : in infrastructure projects , in social projects , in support for research , innovation , in the maintenance of competitiveness and employment in the regions .
In the current debate on the future of the European Union , alongside the debates on currency and finances , we should be debating with the same intensity on what the European Union needs to ensure its internal cohesion , so that countries and regions do not drift apart economically , socially or politically .
After all , when faced with global challenges and the emergence of new competitors on the world market , we need greater union and greater commonality .
Cohesion policy can make a significant contribution to this .
For this , however , we need cohesion policy to be focused more on those projects and project areas that advance Europe as a whole , that enable those who are strong to remain strong , and that give those that are weaker the opportunity to close the gap to the strong .
In my view , to achieve this , it is necessary to maintain and expand the objectives of cohesion policy that have applied to date .
However , I also feel it is necessary to make the funding more conditional and more focused on central European initiatives , whether in the transport sector , in the energy sector , in regional and urban development , or in research and innovation .
The path described by the Commission in its Fifth Cohesion Report seems to me to be a necessary part of this - namely , to integrate the funds into a common strategic framework which results in a development and innovation partnership between the Commission , the Member States and the representatives of the regions .
It also includes , however , involving the local and regional administrations in this process as early as possible .
In so doing , the new forms of regional cooperation could genuinely support the process of developing real multi-level governance .
Mr President , I hope you will allow me to make a further comment regarding what was said by Mr Colman , who has unfortunately left the Chamber .
I would like to remind him that the European Union is a voluntary union of states .
If countries want to leave , they have the right to do so .
However , I do not believe that is what the citizens of Scotland , Wales , Northern Ireland and England really want .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , we are laying the foundations for the Europe of 2020 , imagining it to be inclusive , intelligent and innovative and , in doing so , we must clearly situate the challenges we face in a global context .
We can only enter and win the race to become competitive if we succeed in creating uniform levels within the European Union .
The three aspects of cohesion policy - social , economic and territorial - together with the Structural Funds , are the instruments on which we must focus our attention .
Indeed , we must not think of applying the cuts required to overcome the financial crisis to cohesion policy .
On the contrary , we must assume the responsibility for implementing it , improving it where it has failed .
On the basis of the data gathered and of the analysis of the results obtained , the Committee on Regional Development underlines , in Mr Luhan 's report , the close relationship between competition and cohesion , and proposes corrective actions for the next programming period .
There is no doubt that Europe can only become competitive if it successfully overcomes the territorial disparities that exist between the various regions .
In this regard , I thank Mr Luhan for having accepted my amendment aimed at reiterating the possibility of introducing advantageous tax provisions for transitional periods of no more than five years - a possibility already contained in the resolution which was voted on by this Parliament in February 2006 .
This is a useful way of avoiding some of the difficulties encountered in applying cohesion policy , such as complex procedures , inadequate checks and the need for more effective monitoring .
A series of amendments have been tabled on these points to optimise the impact of cohesion policy and thus increase the Union 's economic competitiveness .
As Mr Luhan 's report points out , emphasis must be placed both on horizontal and vertical partnerships between local authorities and on cofinancing , elements which must be regarded as fundamental principles .
It is also important to accelerate the simplification of procedures and access to financing , just as it is important to take an integrated approach to the distribution of funds and to maintain transitional regimes , particularly in this difficult period .
The bottom-up decision-making process , with the involvement of the regions concerned , ensures support for development by harnessing specific regional aspects .
Finally , the report highlights two main objectives in this regard : innovation and infrastructure .
I believe that this report is important because it provides all of us with a clear strategy for responding exhaustively to the problem contained in the title of the report .
I would like to tell you that , as the person in the Bureau responsible for interpreting and translation , I am going to ask the House to put the light that I have here indicating that the interpreters cannot follow you in every seat , because it is not very helpful for them to inform only me .
I can , of course , inform you myself , but I think it will be more effective if we have this light at every desk .

( PT ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Luhan and Mrs Mănescu on the remarkable work that they have carried out on their respective reports .
They have both made a significant contribution to the discussion on new cohesion policy for 2014-2020 that is under way .
Now , more than ever , it is essential to achieve economic , social and territorial cohesion to assert the European Union 's competitiveness on a global scale .
This goal will be achieved so long as we are aware that it is only by strengthening and developing the regional dimension that we can have a Europe that is internally cohesive and externally competitive .

In particular , I should like to stress three points that I consider crucial : firstly , decentralisation , ensuring that local and regional authorities , especially those with legislative powers , participate more and contribute to better implementing cohesion policy ; secondly , the urging of Member States to invite regional and local authorities to participate on an equal footing with the national authorities and representatives in negotiations on the future of the Structural Funds ; and lastly , the strengthening of the role of regional authorities in preparing , managing and implementing the programmes .
It is only through the greater involvement of these authorities in the whole process that it will be possible to comply with the principle of subsidiarity .
Another aspect that I consider crucial is seeking a more simple architecture for the funds after 2013 , not as a result of the economic crisis but rather as a general principle for future cohesion policy , so as to facilitate the absorption of the funds .
The great concern underlying the Treaty of Lisbon was to bring Europe closer to its citizens .
Instead of just doing this , let us also make their lives easier by preventing unnecessary administrative burdens that will dissuade them from participating .
Only in this way will we achieve the goal of true territorial cohesion .
Only in this way will we see a reduction in the starkly contrasting disparities that exist today within the European Union , and where there is currently a huge gap between rich and poor regions .
Increased participation also means increased responsibility and it is this responsibility that should be taken up and shared by all , as a means of doing more and better to create a stronger , more competitive Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to add my congratulations and thanks to the two rapporteurs for their successful work .
The comments made by Mr Luhan on the subject of the ' Future architecture of cohesion policy post-2013 ' are particularly to be welcomed .
Although the conclusions on the Fifth Cohesion Report already indicate the Commission 's initial ideas on the subject , Mr Luhan 's report is an important contribution to determining Parliament 's position in respect of the Commission .
Like the rapporteur , I therefore consider it eminently sensible for cohesion policy to be in harmony with the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy in the future .
However , the individual regions must still be able to decide their own priority areas .
Not all regions are the same ; even within an individual Member State , the regions differ .
A maximum of two or three priorities - one of which may have already been made mandatory - leaves the regions little scope for manoeuvre .
The regions need to be given room to invest in their infrastructure and people according to their own priorities .
With this scenario , specific issues such as demographic changes may not be able to be taken sufficiently into account .
That would not be much of a regional policy adapted to the needs of the regions , such as the Commission is always talking about .
For this reason , I believe that we as Parliament have to make it quite clear from the start that the regions must not be allowed to be weakened relative to the Member States .
The partnership principle needs to be strengthened further .
The significance of the regions of the EU varies greatly depending on the structure of the state .
For this reason , particular significance must be attached to the principle of subsidiarity .
This needs to be taken into account in the Commission 's idea of establishing innovation and development partnerships between the Commission and Member States in the future .
Without going into too much detail , perhaps I might be permitted to discuss briefly the importance of Objective 3 .
I expressly agree with the rapporteur when he talks of difficulties in the border territories of the EU - both internal and external borders .
This objective needs to be brought into play more in the future .
In my opinion , too little weight is being given to Objective 3 in the current debate on the future of cohesion policy .
In particular , cooperation between the regions situated at the former external borders of the EU - and I am referring here to my home region of Saxony - needs to be developed far more .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the data provided by the Court of Auditors in the 2006 and 2008 annual reports on the control systems in operation for cohesion policy are certainly alarming .
These systems were not as effective as they should have been ; they had an error rate of 12 % for the amounts reimbursed in 2006 and of 11 % in 2008 .
If this error rate is to be reduced , the European Commission must strengthen its supervisory role in relation to local and regional policies .
The development of a guide for public and private operators and the creation of a training and mobility scheme on how to apply multi-level governance policies in practice could represent effective measures for improving regional policy .
Furthermore , Member States must strengthen the role of regional and local authorities , in particular , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is likewise necessary to facilitate cross-border regional cooperation ; indeed , in many areas of the European Union , there is enormous potential for cooperation between regions and local communities of bordering Member States , particularly in sectors such as tourism , agriculture , industry and the environment .
I shall take advantage of the fact that I have concluded my speech within the allocated time to thank the interpreters , who are always very good to us .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , at the outset , I would like to stress that I consider the report to be particularly important , and to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Luhan , on an excellent job .
I think that cohesion policy should be the European Union 's flagship policy , and that its significance should grow in future years .
As a horizontal policy , it should set out the directions to be taken by sectoral policies , and contribute to an increase in the competitiveness of European regions and a strengthening of the European Union 's position on global markets .
The system for implementing cohesion policy must be modern and flexible , based on a multi-level management model , as has been mentioned many times .
It should also foster the coordination of the Structural Funds with other European instruments and with national funds .
I managed a region with 2 200 000 inhabitants for two terms of office , and I was responsible for implementing cohesion policy instruments on the basis of both a centralised model , between 2004 and 2006 , and a decentralised model - the regional operational programme - between 2007 and 2013 .
These experiences allow me to state with full responsibility that the decentralised model allows for better use of local potential for the implementation of strategic solutions and the achievement of positive changes , which is why I am convinced that goals should be agreed at a European level , but the ways of achieving them should be defined in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity at the most appropriate level , which , in the case of cohesion policy , means the regional and local level .
At the same time , it is essential to link expenditure of funds to the achievement of measurable goals and results : economic growth and a higher level of employment and social inclusion .

( RO ) Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Luhan , for all his efforts in compiling this report , which is especially important for Romania too .
I believe that the Europe 2020 strategy must promote a sustainable development plan .
In this respect , what is required are both stronger representation externally and more efficient coordination internally .
This report is important because it mentions the cohesion policy 's achievements .
Indeed , a major role is given to boosting the regions ' competitiveness globally .
Allocating funds for investment and development projects will definitely be a major benefit for our country .
It should be pointed out that Romania may be eligible for substantial funds both now and in the period after 2013 .
In this regard , at national level , there were ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is true that cohesion policy is important as a contributor to growth and prosperity , as well as to promoting development that is balanced between regions .
It is true that development that is balanced between regions is essential to the functioning of the internal market and of the Union itself , and that cohesion policy is essential to achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
It is also true that cohesion policy is useful to the environment , to job creation , and to shaping and creating a modern transport network .
Given all these things , Mr President , Commissioner , it is unacceptable that the Commission is now taking advantage of these regions ' successes and now also wishes to use them as a threat against Member States that do not meet macro-economic criteria .
This is particularly true given that , in these situations , the regions were not even involved and do not have direct responsibilities , and given that they will be the ones most affected by the constraints on the use of the Structural Funds .
This is not right , Commissioner , and I should like to hear your reply .
( LV ) Mr President , I should like to draw the attention of this House to social cohesion .
I find it difficult when talking to voters to explain that we take decisions here in a profound and deliberate way when their standard of living has deteriorated since joining the European Union .
I am talking about Latvia .
Thirty-four per cent of the population of Latvia currently survives on subsistence income and on the margins of poverty .
The minimum pension is LVL 64 , received by 12 % of the population .
What I see and hear in this Chamber , what is contained in the reports , is something that I cannot , for my part , support , because I cannot perceive that social questions are given any great attention here .
Once again , what we have here is talk of further market liberalisation , competitiveness ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to make four comments on these reports .
The first is that the European Union only makes sense to people if it tries to alleviate economic , social and territorial disparities .
The second is that European cohesion policy is the crucial financial policy instrument for achieving this objective .
My third comment is that those who criticise this should really come up with an alternative .
If they have no alternative to offer , then they should keep quiet .
My fourth point is that my home region - I come from eastern Germany - is an area where this policy has advanced economic development .
We are on the right path , but we still have some way to go . We will therefore continue to need further support after 2013 if we are to keep making progress .
Mr President , Tip O 'Neill , the great Irish-American politician , once said : ' all politics is local ' .
The same could be applied to the European Union in terms of development .
All development has been regional .
In particular , the success of my own country under the cohesion policy since we joined the European Union is a perfect example .
We had a little over half the average GDP when we joined in 1973 , but now we have one and half times the average GDP , notwithstanding the financial difficulties of the country at the present time .
Secondly , as we move forward , one of the key aspects for us is going to be to simplify the procedure , put an emphasis on results and added value and try and cut down on red tape and regulation .
You could fill in forms from here to the end of Parliament but , if there is no added value , it is of no benefit .
If we do that , we can continue to make progress and I certainly look forward to seeing the regional policy ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Mr President , the effective application of cohesion policy , which is , at present , very decentralised , requires the responsibilities of regional and local level bodies to be further strengthened , because these bodies best understand the needs of a given area and its inhabitants .
I firmly believe that the creation of a real partnership with regional and local bodies requires a clearer definition of the so-called principle of partnership , as well as the active involvement of local and regional bodies in consultations on the regional policy of the European Union .
I would like to emphasise that the provision of better coordination between individual levels of control , greater flexibility , and transparent and clear procedures , not only represent features of good administration of public affairs but , above all , should facilitate the drawing down of funds and increase the participation of potential partners in projects .
Mr President , I would like to express my thanks for the very lively debate and I would also like to take this opportunity to say a few more words about financial controls .
As I am constantly emphasising at various opportunities , we really must get to grips with this and simplify matters , particularly in view of the fact that we need to make greater efforts to ensure that small and medium-sized enterprises also take advantage of the opportunities that we want to provide by means of European funding and also , for example , the revolving funding that we want to offer more in the future ; and we really need to look at how we can keep the red tape to a minimum .
On the other hand , I am also constantly having to point out that a large part of the bureaucracy is added at national level .
In other words , not all the bureaucracy that arises in European projects originates from Brussels ; rather , it is the combined effect of processes at national and European level .
We need to work on this together .
Mrs Mănescu , I agree with you that we must make the effort to develop standards in this area - although naturally I cannot dismiss national legislation and circumstances entirely .
In principle , however , I am absolutely with you .
The subject of conditionality is also something that requires detailed consideration which we do not have sufficient time to go into here .
It is undoubtedly a matter of identifying for each individual country and for each individual region , where necessary , the reasons for delays in implementing projects ; generally , we know what they are already .
In most cases , it is nothing to do with money - or at least not primarily so - but rather is due to other shortcomings .
The thinking behind conditionality is to get rid of these in advance so as to ensure faster processing subsequently , which is in the interests of all concerned .
I am also grateful to the speakers who referred to the development and partnership contract and to the fact that this represents an opportunity , as Mr Olbrycht said , to push for the further involvement of the regional and local authorities .
Some rethinking will be necessary for this as regards how we can actually implement it in a somewhat institutionalised way , and - let us not forget - in a way that is acceptable to the Member States .
Here , I am relying on and building on the support and backing of the European Parliament , since the European Parliament , the Commission and the Committee of the Regions are of one mind on this .
There is one further player , however , and that is the Member States ; we need to convince the Member States that they , too , will benefit from an added value if they involve more people in programme planning and these people thereby come to identify with it far more .
I am also grateful for the comments - which I think came from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - concerning growth .
I am advocating qualitative and quantitative growth .
We need both .
Take research , for example : this is actually something that falls into the category of qualitative growth .
If it is one of our main objectives to increase the share of renewable energy , for example , but fundamentally we also want to be more energy efficient , then a very important topic for research might be ' How can I store electricity , keep it ready and then make it available when I need it ? ' , so that we can make our power generation even more efficient .
All in all , one thing has become clear : we will only be able to achieve our objectives if we in fact have a regional policy that reaches all the regions of Europe .
As has also been said today , if we want to implement the EU 2020 strategy , we will only be able to do so if we can transport and implement this policy in all the regions , but taking into consideration the needs and requirements that exist locally .
Once again , many thanks - particularly to the two rapporteurs - for this very valuable work .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking all my fellow Members who made a significant contribution to this report and , ultimately , to the cohesion policy and its future .
I also want to thank the shadow rapporteurs who tabled amendments and made contributions which were just as important , and also because we reached agreement together very easily .
I do not wish to go into too much detail on what was said .
I also wish to thank you for the kind remarks you made to me .
However , I would like to highlight what was said by the Commissioner in particular , comments that are very much worthy of approval .
He said that the cohesion policy is a policy of investment in regions and people , which is a prerequisite for improving living standards in the European Union 's regions .
I fully concur with this view .
I similarly agree that we have your backing - for which we are grateful to you - for increased investment in every kind of infrastructure , as an absolute prerequisite for eradicating the disparities in the European Union .
With regard to the opinion expressed by Mr Besset , I simply want to say that if he had read the report closely , he would have realised that it also mentions economic growth based on a green economy .
There is also the fact that I made a direct reference to the EU 2020 strategy where the green economy has been introduced as well .
This is why I want to tell you that the report enjoys majority support at the moment .
Thank you once again to all of you and we hope that the future cohesion policy will progress along the right path .
Mr President , I would like to thank my fellow Members for their significant contributions to this report , particularly in its final version , as well as the shadow rapporteurs and the rest of my fellow Members who tabled amendments , not to mention those who spoke at such a late hour during the plenary debate .
Given that the vote taken within the Committee on Regional Development recorded a broad consensus among the political groups on the need to implement the principles and measures proposed in this report , I cannot help but be pleased that today 's debate has also been in the same vein .
The working document was drafted following consultations with the European Commission , the Committee of the Regions and representatives of the beneficiaries , whom I would also like to thank once again for their contributions .
As I already mentioned in my previous speech as well , I firmly believe that the European Commission will have the receptiveness and determination required to ensure that the solutions identified and proposed by us in the Committee on Regional Development will not simply remain at the proposal stage .
We have come up with specific proposals , Commissioner .
All you need to do is give them serious consideration .
I mention this , especially as in the coming months , the European Union will have to define and adapt its future cohesion policy and 2020 strategy , as well as the conditions for their successful implementation .
Our desire is a new approach to multi-level governance , which will properly serve the EU 's vital objectives , as well as a Europe of citizens characterised by economic growth , social progress and sustainable development .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
In order to achieve true social and economic cohesion among the Member States , first we need to address their differences , not just in terms of economic growth and development , but in terms of their physical location .
At this stage , I see no point in talking of common measures .
The measures for each Member State must differ , because their needs differ .
As regards the role of the Commission in the procedures for providing assistance and monitoring good governance in regional policy , it is my view that it must first clearly outline and state its engagements .
From my own experience in raising issues with the Commission , I either get an answer that is evasive , or am simply told that the question is not within its competence .
I am from a country where , for many years , passing the buck has been standard procedure , and what I wish is for the competences of the Commission to be clearly delineated , so that we can get clear answers and precise actions in particular circumstances .
At present , there is a very marked threshold effect between regions that are eligible for funding under the convergence objective and those that are not .
This is extremely detrimental to some regions which may not be poor but are certainly not rich .
It would be very helpful if this threshold effect could be attenuated by creating an intermediate category of regions between the ' convergence ' objective and the ' regional competitiveness and employment ' objective .
I am glad that this is one of the proposals put forward in the conclusions of the fifth report on cohesion .
This intermediate category could be aimed at regions with per capita GDP of between 75 % and 90 % of the EU average .
I would also like to see this system replacing the transition mechanism and covering regions other than those coming out of the convergence objective .
In the context of negotiations on the next multiannual financial framework , the budget for this reshaped cohesion policy should remain the same .
However , it is worth mentioning that just over 20 regions should be taken out of the convergence objective , which will entail savings of EUR 10 billion per year .
This money could certainly be reallocated to a new intermediate category of regions .
I congratulate Mr Luhan on his work on the report .
In connection with the report , I would like to draw attention to two points .
As regards the connection between the implementation of the EU 2020 strategy and improved competitiveness , it is important to point out that cohesion and increased competitiveness are processes that presuppose and even strengthen each other .
We cannot focus on supporting the most highly developed regions with a view to maximising the competitiveness of the EU , as this would present the risk of underdeveloped regions falling behind even further , which , in turn , would lead to significant social tensions and the instability of the entire European Union .
Moreover , it is important to establish that although the cohesion policy contributes significantly to the realisation of the EU 2020 strategy , it alone cannot be responsible for the achievement of the objectives of the strategy .
We must therefore establish consistency between the realisation of the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy and those of the cohesion policy , and the other policy areas must also contribute to an appropriate degree to the achievement of the objectives of the strategy .
As my second observation , I would like to stress that I fully agree with the rapporteur in that GDP should remain the measure of determining Member State eligibility , as GDP has been the most reliable indicator of the level of development known to date .
At Member State level , national authorities may use other indicators when distributing the resources , but at EU level , GDP must be retained as the benchmark of eligibility for aid .
The report on the proper administration of regional policy will strengthen the powers of regional and local bodies in implementing EU policies .
Parliament has long supported the greater involvement of public bodies other than those at the national level in planning Community policies .
The principle of partnership as set out in the Committee of the Regions ' White Paper on Multi-level Governance must be strengthened right from the early phase of negotiations within the framework of EU discussions .
The report supports a further simplification of both legislative and non-legislative regulations .
However , it should be emphasised here that some Member States and their public bodies in particular often contribute to an administrative burden which is not required by Community regulations .
Further correction is essential here .
The rules of the subsidy programmes should be simplified to make individual processes more comprehensible , and so as to avoid dissuading potential beneficiaries from participating in projects .
A high percentage of errors ( 12 % ) is reported over expenditure paid out in the implementation and financing of programmes .
The highest error percentage is always reported in the area of public procurement and so-called ineligible costs .
There is insufficient supervision by the European Commission , and it is clear that the Commission cannot set up a control system at all national levels .
It is essential for the monitoring role of the Commission to be retained and supported at the start of programmes , but more could be transferred to Member States and their regional and local bodies during the programmes .
in writing . - ( LV ) In order to extend the influence of cohesion policy , certain decisive reforms are essential .
The support provided by cohesion policy must be concentrated in three main directions .
What is essential is first , geographical concentration ; second , concentration in the scope of support ; and , third , administrative concentration .
This means that the extent of financial support must be directed to those EU Member States , those regions , where there is the greatest need .
That is to say that an improvement in the socio-economic situation is impossible without the definite support of EU cohesion policy .
This means that every region must assess the sectors that most urgently need to receive support , instead of nominating all possible sectors without deeper analysis .
Every region should choose three to five of the 10 sectors offered by the Commission in which to concentrate 100 % of the available support .
This means that we must continue to ease the administrative burden .
We must increase the degree of trust by the institutions involved , so that the number of functions carried out by those institutions may be optimised .
I want to emphasise that the existing distribution criterion for EU cohesion policy support - GDP by purchasing power parity per capita ( up to 75 % of the EU average ) - is an appropriate , tested and safe criterion for defining the arc of regions qualifying for support within the convergence framework , because it reflects the genuine disparities between EU Member States and regions .
I share the rapporteur 's opinion that the Union 's cohesion policy is one of the most important policies helping to increase the competitiveness of the region and to ensure sustainable development .
As the international financial crisis had a negative influence on all regions of Europe to a greater or lesser extent , the cohesion policy , which provides added value , certainly has a very important role to play in ensuring that the regions can emerge from the lull stronger .
The sad thing is that the governments of many EU Member States do not understand the role and importance of the regions - the local authorities - well enough , as they are afraid of losing their power to the regions .
For example , the government of my home country , the Republic of Estonia , often adopts important laws pertaining to local authorities without taking the authority 's decision-making processes into account .
In order that the various regions are not discriminated against , more attention should now be paid to the regulatory action taken by the Member States ' governments to make sure that their actions are not contrary to the Member States ' own laws and European values .
It is true that there are now many regions of Europe which have obtained major political support through the European Committee of the Regions , the European Court of Justice and the Commission in cases where the Member States ' governments have ignored the rights of local authorities .
I believe that an effective European cohesion policy and the fulfilment of the objectives set out in the directive will help to ensure the viability of the regions , but viable regions will increase the viability of the European Union as a whole and , at the same time , this will help prevent the marginalisation of border regions .
The Luhan and Mănescu reports set out quite rightly the principles on which our cohesion policy should be based .
However , I would like to emphasise three areas in which we need to be more ambitious .
The first is territorial cohesion .
The concept is often quoted but rarely put into action in concrete terms .
For example , we should pay special attention to border regions .
The handicaps and problems that these regions experience reflect the limitations of European integration .
These areas that mark a break should be turned into areas that help make connections .
The next area is the unequal treatment of regions that oscillate between Objective 1 and Objective 2 .
There can be up to a tenfold difference in the aid given to some regions with the same GDP .
It is time we established a transitional mechanism that gives equal treatment to all regions with GDP between 75 % and 90 % of the EU average .
Lastly , we need to work on new performance indicators .
The development challenges that regions face are linked to their own local constraints .
We need to refine our criteria at all levels of governance so that we can accurately gauge the needs and aims of regional development .
Particular attention needs to be paid to the EU 's cohesion policy in the interests of greater sustainable growth and increased competitiveness .
In a Europe of the regions , GDP should continue to be the main criterion in determining regional eligibility for funding .
However , European regional policy must cover all the regions , while being sufficiently flexible to take into account regional and territorial differences .
If we are to exploit fully the potential for growth of the regions and achieve economic , social and territorial cohesion in the European Union , it is essential that particular attention is paid to competitiveness .
In so doing , we must also take into consideration small-scale problems in wealthy Member States .
In particular , research and innovation should play an important part in all the regions as a means of improving the EU 's competitiveness , which is why it is necessary to continue to promote these areas in the future .
Although the EU 2020 objectives are defined at Community level , it is vital that the local and regional authorities are involved more in their implementation ; a bottom-up approach is essential if we are to implement the economic objectives of the EU 2020 strategy efficiently .
Cohesion policy must continue to be a key EU policy after 2013 , with sufficient funding and with the following conditions : simplification of procedures for assigning resources from the structural funds , creation of a framework for public-private partnership , infrastructure established as a basic precondition for increasing global competitiveness , partnership as a condition for developing real partnerships with regional and local bodies and civil society and as a means to effectiveness , legality and transparency at the stage of programming and making use of structural funds , and the application of multi-level management , both on a vertical and horizontal level .
There are certain other conditions as well , but if we want to fulfil the tasks of the 2020 strategy , I consider it essential to comply with the conditions mentioned previously .
Europe is currently going through a difficult period .
The financial crisis of 2008-2009 is still being strongly felt in the economy , which is causing a widening of the gap between the wealthy regions of Western Europe and the poorer regions of Central and Southern Europe .
This situation is making it necessary to strengthen mechanisms which are effective in fighting the crisis .
The most important of these at Union level are cohesion policy and the regional funds .
As a result of the cofinancing of investment at local level , they have become an effective symbol of a European cooperation which has risen above national interests .
They also made a significant contribution to extending the area which enjoyed economic growth between 2004 and 2007 , as well as to reducing the gap between the countries of the old and the new Europe .
This is why it has become so important to increase Union funds for cohesion policy in the Financial Framework for 2013-2020 , to maintain convergence as a primary objective , and to maintain the current mechanism for selecting beneficiaries based on GDP levels in different regions .
I think the possibility of raising the level of investment cofinancing from 75 % to 80 % while , at the same time , reducing financing for the remote regions is also important .
From the point of view of the countries of Western Europe , I think it is also important to continue the financing of infrastructural investments , particularly in the vertical strip which joins the north and south of Europe .
Impact of advertising on consumer behaviour ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Juvin , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , why a report on advertising ?
Because advertising can be the best of things and also the worst of things .
It can be the worst of things if it is misleading , if it is intrusive , if it is deceptive , if it does not play the game , if ultimately , it does not deliver what the consumer expects of it , which is information .
It can be the best of things because advertising is also an amazing tool for economic development .
Advertising oils the wheels of the economy , and as some people have said , advertising , if it is well done , also gives the consumer a means of making comparisons and , in some ways , it stimulates competition .
Advertising is not , therefore , something new , so why a new text when there are texts in existence already ?
For several reasons .
Firstly , because advertising nowadays is not what it used to be .
Recently , I read in an American report , but things are fairly similar in Europe , that on 29 November last year , in one day , online trade accounted for a turnover of more than USD 1 billion .
That is a considerable increase in online trade and online advertising tools .
One of the justifications for this report is that texts regulating advertising are sometimes completely unsuitable for the tools that have emerged in recent years .
Advertising can be intrusive , and increasingly it is so ; it invades private life .
There is also something quite new in advertising , which is not covered by the texts .
Advertising may be covert . Advertising may not declare itself .
There is a famous example on Facebook , one of the social networks - a new tool that is not covered by the legislation - where groups of people report some alleged fault or other in a product .
All that can literally destroy a brand within a few days or a few weeks .
It is clear , therefore , that yesterday 's advertising is not at all like today 's advertising , which uses tools that did not exist before .
I am thinking here of behavioural advertising , of targeted advertising , and of reading your private emails .
Does anyone here want or accept their private emails being read ?
Well , that is what happens today for the purposes of advertising .
Basically , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we have to think about some very simple values : respect for private life , protection of the most vulnerable people , because we know very well that children are among those most vulnerable people who receive so-called behavioural advertising , which means advertising that targets their habits .
These children do not understand that this advertising is not just advertising that is sent to them by chance .
It is advertising that targets their individual choices .
An adult might understand this , but a child does not .
Well , new technology brings new challenges : considerable economic challenges .
We see that basically , this is really a political debate .
The matter has been resolved , according to some professionals who , above all , do not want the advertising world to be affected .
It is also true that we hear some professionals explaining to us that , after all , consumers are warned by long and very detailed confidentiality policies on websites .
In reality , we know that no one reads these long , incomprehensible confidentiality policies and when they are read , they are not understood , they are actually impossible to read .
We see that , in the end , we keep coming back to the same issue .
Advertising must be fair , it must respect other people and it must respect private life .
Consumers must not be spied on and must not be targeted without their knowledge .
Consumers , citizens , must be respected .
Mr President , and I shall finish here , we must therefore have two objectives .
Firstly , advertising must be fair : more fair , more respectful , more effective , therefore , and more respectful of private life , but also citizens , that is , citizens who are consumers , must be more aware , not manipulated , better informed and more discriminating .
That is the whole purpose of this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that you will accept this report and will vote for it , in general terms , in this House .
( CS ) Mr President , I welcome the report on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour .
As the report does not talk about the regulation of gambling advertisements , I would like to mention that Internet lotteries and advertisements for these in particular recognise no borders and are easily accessible to young people .
Seven Member States prohibit on-line gambling , but it is still accessible in these countries .
I firmly believe there is a need to try and prevent the negative consequences of becoming dependent on gambling .
We must promote a ban throughout Europe on gambling advertisements which target children and young people , because exposing children to the influence of advertisements for virtual lotteries amounts to putting their future lives at risk in the same way as exposing them to unrestricted advertising for alcohol , cigarettes and other addictive substances .
Moreover , casinos and gambling advertisements are sometimes not subjected to restrictions even outside the context of the Internet , so that casinos and advertisements are often found in close proximity to schools .
I hope that today 's debate will give a fresh impetus to the Commission to propose a ban on gambling advertisements in view of the undoubted public interest .
( EL ) Mr President , my congratulations to the rapporteur , Philippe Juvin , on his report on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour .
The report evaluates current legislation , underlines problems in its application and unfair trading practices , and highlights the importance of self-regulation , protection for vulnerable consumers , such as children , teenagers and the elderly , and the need to use advertising as a powerful catalyst in combating stereotypes and prejudice .
I prepared the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and am delighted and I thank the rapporteur for including all our proposals for safeguarding gender equality and human dignity .
I call on everyone involved to cooperate closely in combating pejorative or misleading advertisements which downgrade the image of women and to promote healthy standards , so that advertising can exert a positive influence on social perceptions , with respect for human dignity and the roles of the sexes .
Mr President , I would like to talk about the last indent of paragraph 25 , which will be up for a separate vote and which I hope we will be able to delete from the report .
This indent says that when search engines display ads in connection with a certain search word - i.e. somebody types in a search word and that search word is a brand name - this should require the authorisation of the brand owner .
This may sound sensible on the surface , but it goes completely against trademark law as it stands .
First of all , trademarks are registered in 45 different classes of goods and services and you can have the same mark in different classes in the same register .
This would , for instance , mean that if somebody wants his ad displayed connected with the word ' golf ' , that would require Volkswagen to authorise it for everybody .
The second problem is the sheer number of trademarks .
There are millions of trademarks in Europe .
There are 600 000 at the OHIM in Alicante alone , and many others , so if somebody wanted to advertise something connected to the word ' silver ' , he would probably have to get clearance from thousands of trademark owners .
This is simply not practical .
If this were enacted - which I hope it will not be - it would pretty much kill off the search engine business in Europe , and it would kill off legitimate advertising and legitimate competition .
So I ask colleagues to vote ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to begin by stating that it is a good thing a discussion is beginning on the floor of the European Parliament on dishonest practices in advertising , especially in connection with the development of new advertising methods and technologies .
New methods of digital communication have opened up a wide range of possibilities for advertising agencies .
Along with the new possibilities for advertising , however , come new problems with hard sell , deception and the exploitation of gullible children and young people in the face of powerful assaults on their feelings .
The regulation of advertising on the Internet must respond to the ingenuity of copywriters , and it is essential to restrict methods and techniques that violate protection of privacy or ethical frameworks , or interfere in the special nature of child development .
We must therefore concentrate on a thorough analysis and examination of current trends , focusing on using new rules to restrict those technologies and those possibilities which violate the privacy of families and the privacy of children , and which damage the healthy development of the family , and we must apply these rules consistently .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur .
From the perspective of the values I adhere to , we were discussing one of the most important topics of the recent period .
The only thing that pains me is that this discussion took place at such a late hour .
As the report underlines , the persons most vulnerable to advertisements are children and adolescents , whose free will is not yet strong enough and who are easily influenced . This does not only apply to irregular , false and aggressive advertisements , but also to advertisements in general , as we live in a new world where people are faced with the overwhelming pressure to fit in with the consumer society already at an early age .
All types of advertisement should be expressly prohibited in children 's programmes .
Furthermore , I must specifically highlight the fact that it may not even be the traditional media , such as television or radio , that pose the greatest threat to young people , but the world of the Internet .
Advertising is at its most aggressive there , and it is there that it can inflict the greatest damage to the targeted consumer .
The most unscrupulous companies show a disregard even for personal data , and invade the privacy of people through the use of social networking sites .
This must definitely be prohibited and penalised .
In this regard , all of us must motion for action to be taken within the European Union .
( SK ) Mr President , the various types of advertising that have been spreading via the new communications media in recent years have become a social phenomenon , bringing with it the risk of exploitation of the trust of the ordinary consumer .
In my opinion , consumer protection in this area requires minimal legal underpinning at the very least , and I agree with the rapporteur and congratulate him on his report and for seeing the matter in such a constructive way , in favour of vulnerable groups such as children and young people in particular , as some earlier speakers have already mentioned .
As a doctor , I strongly support this .
We must prevent cases of deliberate deception , where consumers make decisions on the basis of information which they assume is made up of objective facts or proven studies , when the information is merely of a promotional or commercial nature .
I am alarmed by the development of advertising practices directly targeting private consumers , such as the reading of email by third parties who exploit the contents thereof for commercial purposes .
Advertising practices used by companies must , without exception , respect the confidentiality of private correspondence and comply with legislation protecting privacy .
( GA ) Mr President , it is difficult to be certain in this regard , especially when the impact of advertising on the behaviour of citizens is being considered .
Every day , survey after survey appears , and they all contain different results .
Nevertheless , advertising does pay ; private companies spend millions and millions on radio , TV and newspaper advertisements as well as covert advertising like sponsorship .
At the same time , there is a dilemma in assessing it .
On the one hand , you have people saying that one of the cures for alcoholism is to ban advertising .
Yet we have seen the use of drugs grow exponentially in recent decades , and because they are illegal not only are they not advertised but they cannot be bought over the counter .
Therefore , I think that there is a need for independent analysis and proper surveying at EU level , without any vested interests involved , to really establish what is good and what is bad , what is beneficial and what is not , and then we can regulate accordingly .
Without that , I think we are going to have different surveys , day in and day out , producing the results that the people who commission them want .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of the Commission and , in particular , Vice-President Reding , I want to thank the rapporteur for this valuable report analysing several key aspects concerning the influence of modern advertising and consumer behaviour .
In order to find out how to best address the challenges arising from the development of the Internet and new technologies , the Commission has consulted widely on the existing legal framework for data protection throughout 2009 and 2010 .
The consultations have confirmed that the underlying principles of the current EU data protection legislation are still very much valid .
However , it became equally clear that the EU needs a more comprehensive and more coherent approach in its policy for personal data protection for the EU and beyond .
As a consequence , on 4 November , the Commission adopted a communication on a comprehensive approach on personal data protection in the European Union .
Online advertising delivers many benefits to European citizens , in particular , by giving them free access to services .
Many of the targeting techniques - display , contextual and certain search-related adverts , etc . - do not involve any tracking and are not a subject of major concern .
My colleague , Vice-President Neelie Kroes , has called on the industry to establish a self-regulatory framework for online behavioural advertising based on the EU legal framework and the four principles of effective transparency , an appropriate form of affirmation or consent , user friendliness and effective enforcement .
The Commission will monitor the industry 's efforts to assess whether more regulatory action is necessary .
As regards advertising emails and the confidentiality of communications , the telecoms reform adopted a year ago strengthened and clarified the EU privacy rules .
It also created a clear obligation for Member States to enact dissuasive sanctions and to ensure that the competent authorities have not only the necessary powers to enforce them but are also provided with appropriate resources .
The Member States have until May 2011 to transpose these provisions into national law .
The Commission acknowledges that there are certain differences in the transposition of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive between the Member States .
The Commission considers that such differences , some of which the Commission is solving through cooperation with the Member States , are marginal , and that the desired level of harmonisation seems to have been attained .
The use of general clauses gives some leeway to the Member States but ensures , at the same time , that the directive is future-proof .
In this connection , the guidance on the application of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive is one of the initiatives taken by the Commission to make sure that full harmonisation is effective ; in other words , to ensure that the same rules are interpreted and applied in the same manner in the Member States .
As suggested by the draft report , we will definitely continue our work on the guidance and update this document to take account of new issues and developments .
The Commission is also developing a legal database on the legislation , jurisprudence and academic work which will foster uniform application of the directive in the Member States .
As regards the statements in relation to advertising in the form of comments posted on social networks , forums and blogs , it is important to note that , whenever consumers acting on behalf of a trader and / or are in any way financed by a trader to make certain representations without this being made clear in the opinion or statement , this is actually covered by the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive as a form of hidden advertising .
As far as mere opinions are concerned , these , of course , do not qualify as advertising .
In this connection , the Commission considers that marketing legislation is not the most adequate instrument , as it is a matter of freedom of expression .
The directive nevertheless contains specific safeguards concerning vulnerable consumers .
Age is a factor which national authorities must take into account when assessing the fairness of a practice .
The report on the application of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , which is due in 2011 , will build on the Member States ' experience , including in the field of advertising to children and adolescents , to the extent the data on this aspect will be available .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 : 30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I share many of Mr Juvin 's views on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour .
I believe , however , that preventing the dissemination of comments on social networks , forums and blogs - which , by their very nature , risk becoming a modern kind of ' hidden advertising ' - can be achieved by identifying the new forms of offences favoured by the Internet and by extending the rules on data retention to online content providers , rather than by resorting to forms of censorship , since I consider it a priority to respect everyone 's right to express his or her opinion on the Internet as well , unless it is proven that it infringes the law .
I am amazed that people should think of censoring a comment on a forum that they believe might affect consumers ' buying decisions and yet they consider it to be an invasion of privacy to extend the current Directive 2006 / 24 / EC on the retention of data to make it possible to identify paedophiles who groom children through social forums .
Is that a case of double standards ?
Consumers , especially the youngest consumers , must be protected from hidden advertising .
Nonetheless , it is proportionally important to protect freedom of expression , which is one of the pillars underpinning our democracies .
I therefore hope that the relevant authorities can be given the tools they need to identify the perpetrators of Internet crimes through the extension of Directive 2006 / 24 / EC to include content providers , as called for in Parliament 's Declaration P7 _ DCL ( 2010 ) 0029 of 23 June 2010 .
Regulation of trading in financial instruments - ' dark pools ' , etc . ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Swinburne , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on regulation of trading in financial instruments - dark pools , etc .
( 2010 / 2075 ( INI ) ) .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I have difficulty explaining to those uninitiated in financial jargon precisely what my report on ' dark pools ' refers to .
The report formally refers to the trading of financial instruments , including dark pools , which are financial transactions and shares conducted without pre-trade transparency , otherwise referred to as non-displayed trades .
The report , more broadly , is an assessment of the implementation of the Markets in the Financial Instruments Directive ( MiFID ) of 2007 with respect to equities and seeks to address structural issues currently apparent in the equities markets .
Despite this being a highly technical report , I am encouraged by the high level of debate that has occurred in the committee .
I am glad that the hard work of my colleagues has managed to establish a broad base of support across political groups , turning 194 amendments into 26 compromises , which most groups were able to sign up to .
Given the timing of this own-initiative report and its culmination in a plenary vote this week , I also believe that the European Parliament has added significantly to the Commission 's recently released consultation on the MiFID II review ( MiFID II ) , which takes into account many of the issues raised in deliberations in the committee .
The European Parliament , through this report , has asked for a number of investigations into the different trading venues that are currently regulated under MiFID and seeks a closer analysis to ensure that venues providing equivalent services are regulated to an equivalent level .
I believe that the Commission , in their consultation document , may have gone a step further in widening its definition of organised trading facilities to include all venues that bring together buyers and sellers .
This means a significant loophole may be closed .
Yet this solution ensures that proportionality can be maintained in allowing for significant differentiation within the categories for regulated markets , MTFs , SIs , BCNs and derivative platforms .
The new level of scrutiny being suggested for operators of dark pools should be welcomed by investors as , while they currently provide protection from the wider market , they at least have the potential for abuse .
Allowing regulators full access to business models should ensure that they can continue as a venue for the discretionary crossing of client orders without allowing them to expand to proportions that will affect price discovery or to provide a cover for market abuse .
As well as this , in terms of MiFID waivers , the European Parliament and the Commission agree that these need to be redefined and their implementation needs to be standardised across the EU .
The possibility currently to arbitrage across EU Member States to find the best interpretation of the same rule should no longer be a possibility .
During the compilation of this report and its amendment , it was clear that the biggest deficit in MiFID implementation has been the lack of a market version of a European consolidated tape .
Investors in the US cannot understand how we in the EU operate without such a tool .
There has been general industry acceptance , particularly among investor groups , of its necessity but , for the three years since MiFID implementation , the market participants have failed to come together to provide a European consolidated tape .
Like the Commission , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is reticent to go beyond mandating the approved publication arrangements , but if a market solution is not found , then legislation should be supported .
The micro-structural issues currently affecting the equity markets have been a topic of heated debate in committee .
There has been agreement that practices like flash orders , spoofing and pinging are unfair or even abusive .
However , the committee found it much harder to come to agreement on the role of certain market participants , in particular , the benefits or not of high-frequency trading strategies .
In the absence of clear data , it is difficult to draw any solid conclusions on their role - positive or negative - and so , before we propose legislative actions , we need to make sure that we have data so that we do not impose legislation that may be detrimental to the effective functioning of European markets .
Fundamentally , we must ensure the integrity of our financial markets .
They are not there for intermediaries or the interlopers to interact with one another .
They are there to provide a market place for investors to channel capital to businesses and corporates who act in our real economy .
This fundamental function of the markets must be kept centre stage in all of our minds as we go through the legislative process of MiFID II .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Swinburne , of course , this text is extremely complex but , basically , what is it about ?
Once again , it is a matter of learning the lessons from the crisis .
No , we must not do as we did before , yes , we must change the rules of the game , and we must put order back into the system .
There are those people in the different countries of the Union who are now taking advantage of the crisis and of people 's anxiety in order to put all the blame on Europe .
Everywhere you hear people saying , ' it is because of Europe that things are not working , it is because of the euro , and here is the solution , we must get out of Europe , we must put an end to the euro ... '
To all those people , we have to keep on repeating that yes , we do need common rules , we have to keep on saying that if the countries of Europe were not united , if they were isolated , they would now be dead .
Yes , we need regulation , common policy , common rules , and an overhaul of our rules and better functioning of the system .
Ladies and gentlemen , ultimately , the matter is quite straightforward : together we are strong , in isolation we are dead !
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to thank you for allotting time so generously .
From now on , I will pay particular attention to which sittings are conducted by you , and I will attempt to attend all of them .
Mrs Swinburne 's report is very important in that we are finally discussing the regulation of trade in financial instruments .
The first and most significant mistake in connection with the report is that the report and the call for further regulations is a belated step .
Secondly , if the regulatory framework has been unclear so far , we must explore retrospectively and in depth everything that has happened .
I believe that the exclusion of major investments from the scope of stricter supervision is a meaningless and outright mistaken step .
Not only the nature of trading , but also the derivatives issued need to be investigated , and new issues must be subject to stricter regulation .
Inflation is actually stimulated by derivative financial market products .
The burden of this is borne by the population , while the profits are cashed in by various international legal entities , whose background is not always clear .
Moreover , it would not be favourable to redirect profits pocketed in this manner into the real economy , as this may lead to the entire planet gradually slipping into the pockets of the wealthiest .
( RO ) Mr President , Mrs Swinburne 's report focuses on ensuring that there is a level playing field between multilateral trading facilities .
I think that it is also just as important to apply the same level of supervision to them .
I would like to stress the need for more suitable legislation , with the aim of reducing systemic risk and ensuring fair competition on the market .
At the moment , there is a worrying lack of information available about trading strategies .
The only way to really understand whether the market is operating properly is for the regulatory authorities to have sufficient information .
ESMA should draw up common reporting standards and formats applicable to all data , both on organised trading venues and OTC .
I think it would be useful to carry out an investigation into the effects of setting a minimum order size for all dark transactions . It could therefore be established whether an adequate flow of trade is maintained .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of the Commission and of Commissioner Barnier in particular , I will answer by saying that improving transparency in financial markets and ensuring that all relevant market actors are subject to appropriate levels of regulation are key aims of this Commission and of the G20 .
I would like to congratulate Dr Swinburne and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the report on trading in financial instruments , ' dark pools ' , etc .
The report marks an important step in the context of the ongoing review of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive ( MiFID ) .
Its recommendations are being closely integrated into the Commission 's thinking as we prepare the proposal for amending the existing directive in 2011 .
The MiFID review is an important part of the Commission 's agenda towards a more stable and transparent financial system working for society and the economy as a whole .
Many pieces have already been put in place , not least , the launch of a new EU supervisory authority as of next month .
The Commission is committed to delivering proposals in the remaining areas by summer 2011 .
We count on the support of the European Parliament in moving swiftly to adopt the necessary reforms in order to ensure they are applied as soon as possible thereafter .
As you know , MiFID is a cornerstone of the EU regulatory framework for financial markets .
It pre-dates the financial crisis but has , on the whole , proven to function well , even in the difficult and turbulent times of recent years .
Of course , some shortcomings have emerged .
Technological progress and rapid developments in financial markets have also ensured that regulatory devices which were state-of-the-art some years ago are clearly outdated today .
On 8 December , the Commission published draft proposals for a consultation .
We intend to be ambitious and comprehensive in tackling all challenges .
While recognising that the original objectives of MiFID are still valid , the issues at stake are critical aspects of how our financial markets function , how open and transparent they need to be and how investors can gain access to financial instruments and investment opportunities .
Like the draft Economic Affairs Committee report , we perceive the need for improvements in the regulation of new types of trading platforms and trading methodologies .
This should take proper account of the nature of the business with a view to ensuring a level playing field between actors and proper protection for investors as well as against disruptive market practices .
We also agree with the need to improve transparency rules applicable to trading in shares and to introduce new requirements for trading in other instruments .
Another important area touched upon also in Dr Swinburne 's report is to improve the functioning and regulation of commodity derivative markets in line with G20 principles .
Furthermore , we aim to introduce targeted improvements to the existing rules regarding investor protection .
Ensuring all products and selling practices are suitably covered under equal rules is a vital component in restoring investor confidence .
Finally , this review will reinforce supervision and enforcement across financial markets with a key role foreseen for the new European Securities and Markets Authority .
In taking the work forward , the Commission services are working closely with our international partners , notably with the responsible regulators in the United States who are looking at the same issues , to ensure international convergence and avoid any risk of regulatory arbitrage .
The report by Ms Swinburne comes at an important juncture in the process of regulatory reform .
We are encouraged by the commitment shown by MEPs and by the fact that your analyses and recommendations coincide very closely with ours .
This report reinforces the basis for our work ahead .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
The next sitting will take place tomorrow , Thursday , 14 December 2010 , from 09 : 00 to 13 : 00 , from 15 : 00 to 20 : 30 and from 21 : 00 to 24 : 00 .


The agenda has been published and is available on the European Parliament website .
The sitting is closed .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23 : 15 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 00 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2009 ) - Effective implementation after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Gál , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2009 ) - effective implementation after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon brought with it the vision and idea of a strong Europe in respect of Community powers .
To the citizens , it offers the promise of the fulfilment of this vision .
This also applies to the protection of fundamental rights , and therefore , in contrast to previous years , this year 's report deals with these new legal bases and with the strengthened and newly established powers and institutions , and provides a close examination of the situation thus created .
The aim of the report is to offer a new and comprehensive approach in the protection of fundamental rights .
Since December 2009 , the protection of fundamental human rights has rested on multiple pillars within the European Union .
On one hand , it is based on the Treaty of Lisbon , and on the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which has now become legally binding .
The Charter has become a standard for the creation and application of EU laws by both the EU institutions and by the Member States .
A similar pillar of the Community legal system will be our accession to the European Convention on Human Rights , a process that is currently under way , but the system of human rights guarantees enshrined in the Member States ' own legal systems will remain a similar pillar .
These legal bases will also be reinforced by the established Community institutions , both at Community and Member State level .
At Community level , I would like to mention the Commission , the portfolio of the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights , the Council working group , Parliament , and of the agencies , I would like to highlight the role of the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
The aim of my report is to raise awareness in order to ensure that these existing institutions and mechanisms operate in an efficient and transparent way , whether in the monitoring of decision making or legislation , data collection , or information transfer , and that they do not accord priority to some rights while neglecting others .
It is important that the individual institutions not only report , but also respond to and comment on each other .
They should make use of , and build upon , each other 's work in the field of the protection of human rights , and should take their decisions coherently , objectively , and on the basis of facts .
Thus , in this report , we reviewed what Parliament expects from these institutions .
We commented on the Commission communication issued in October , which follows a similar concept .
One of the principal aims of the report is to emphasise that the current fundamental rights structure must begin and end with the individual , that is to say , the citizen .
This means that we must provide citizens with sufficient information to ensure that they are aware of and understand their opportunities and are able to make use of them .
The system of protection of fundamental rights must be comprehensible , accessible and effectively useful , as the entire structure is only worth as much as the citizens of the EU can assert from it .
In achieving these goals , the aforementioned institutions and the Member States must assume a balancing role to ensure that the EU can increase its credibility in the eyes of the citizens .
Finally , my report focuses on those areas which not only require rapid action but also medium to long-term strategies , such as the integration of the Roma , the fight against child poverty and the issue of language use among minority communities , to name but a few .
I hope that with the report that will be adopted tomorrow , we will be able to send a readily comprehensible and clear message to the aforementioned institutions : to the Commission , the Council , the agencies , the Member States ' bodies and courts , so we can make this system even more effective .
In this , I request your support for tomorrow so that in the post-Treaty of Lisbon period , now that the foundations , the institutions , are already in place , we can act in this spirit .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the debate today on the fundamental rights situation in the European Union is very important , not only because it comes 10 years after the proclamation of the charter - the anniversary of the charter was at the beginning of this month - but also because it is the first discussion in Parliament dedicated to that which the rapporteur , Ms Gál , calls the ' new post-Lisbon fundamental rights architecture ' .
She is absolutely right .
We have started with a new beginning for the meaning of human rights and fundamental rights in Europe .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and the members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for their very valuable contribute to this debate .
We now have a legally binding charter which is part of the EU 's primary legislation .
What we need to do now is to put the charter into practice .
It was precisely for this reason that , in October , the Commission adopted a communication on the strategy for the effective implementation of the charter .
The key objective for the Commission here is to make the rights enshrined in the charter as effective as possible for the benefit of all the people living in the EU and , as Members of this House , you represent those people .
The charter must be our compass and we must lead by example , in particular , when we legislate .
This applies to the Commission 's internal preparation work and to adoption by the European Parliament and the Council , as well as to the application of the new rules by the Member States .
The Commission has enforced a systematic assessment of the fundamental rights impact of new legislative proposals through a fundamental rights checklist to be used by all Commission departments .
I am pleased to see that Ms Gál 's report supports this approach .
It highlights , in particular , how important it is for the European Parliament and for the Council to pay attention to compliance with the charter throughout the legislative process .
Not only must the text on the table comply with the charter , but the effects of later amendments to that text must be taken into account as well .
Each institution therefore needs to think about how to ensure that amendments to legislative proposals are properly assessed .
I welcome the call in the report for improved cooperation among the institutions .
We also have to see how the charter is applied when Member States implement EU law .
I would like to reiterate in this House that I will not shy away from starting infringement proceedings whenever necessary .
The report also highlights the accession of the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights .
The speedy accession of the European Union to the Convention is a high priority for the Commission .
Negotiations are well under way , and are moving forward in a swift and constructive manner .
If everything goes well , as seems to be the case , I hope that we will be able to reach a final agreement in the first half of 2011 . So things are moving quickly and they are moving well .
I also fully share the objective of ensuring smooth cooperation with international organisations .
We do this as a matter of course , on a daily basis .
The Commission already takes into account the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child when it prepares new proposals which can affect children .
Recently , we also had a discussion about the disabled , and it is clear that in that field , too , we are applying the United Nations Convention in the Member States and at European Union level .
The rapporteur spoke about the Agency for Fundamental Rights , which has a key role to play in providing us with comparable and reliable data on the situation in the 27 Member States in areas where the EU can act .
There , too , we want to work not only in theory but in practice .
I have , for instance , asked the agency to contribute to the work of the Roma task force .
The Commission is in favour of extending the mandate of the agency to ensure that it can also provide its expertise in the areas of judicial cooperation in criminal matters and police cooperation .
To make this possible , on 2 December , the Commission adopted a proposal to amend the multiannual framework , which lists the thematic areas in which the agency can work .
I should now like to move on to something new , which I think tallies perfectly with the rapporteur 's line , and that is the momentum created by the Lisbon Treaty which we have to uphold .
With this in mind , in spring 2011 , the Commission will publish its first annual report on the application of the charter .
The idea is for this to be published as an annual report every spring .
I believe this would be the time for Parliament to come in and provoke a real debate on how the charter is being applied in practice .
When we prepare our first annual report on the application of the charter in spring 2011 , I will pay particular attention to the European Parliament 's report , and to Parliament 's other fundamental rights activities .
This will not only allow us to hold a debate on human rights outside the European Union , as is customary in this House , but it will also allow us to hold a yearly debate on fundamental rights and how they are applied by the different governments inside the European Union , as well as to see whether the European institutions are doing their jobs as they should be .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Kinga Gál for her report and , in particular , for the focus she placed on such an important subject , that is , the Charter of Fundamental Rights for the European Union and its implementation .
I believe that Kinga Gál 's concentration on this issue was crucial this year .
I would like to make a point on how important it is that we keep considering human rights as fundamental human rights , because sometimes I fear that not everyone interprets the concept of fundamental rights in the same manner .
First of all , it must be made clear that human rights do not mean that we should ignore the concept of , say , subsidiarity , or that we should trample upon the different values that Member States embrace .
Unfortunately , there are some who are attempting to manipulate the issue of fundamental rights to do just that .
The European Union should leave it up to the Member States to deal with ethical issues such as euthanasia and abortion .
Secondly , we should take care to ensure that fundamental rights are indeed fundamental rights and do not include other rights which , albeit important , are not fundamental and therefore risk being unrealistic when viewed in today 's context .
A case in point would be the rights that are connected to immigration issues , which are of considerable importance , yet are not always fundamental rights .
Finally , we must seek to adopt reasonable positions on , for example , security and the importance of data protection .
Therefore , to conclude , I believe that we need fundamental rights , yet at the same time , we must ensure that they are both logical and realistic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Gál , as I think she has managed to fulfil the main aim of the report , which is specifically to clarify the roles which individual institutions and mechanisms will play in the new post-Lisbon architecture of fundamental rights .
I consider three areas contained in the report to be of key importance .
It is important for the Union to defend not only the rights of its citizens , or the people on its territory , but also to become a global leader in this area .
The newly-established European External Action Service can play a key role from this perspective .
I would therefore like to call on the Commission to ensure that the structure , resources and activities of the diplomatic service are established in such a way that European diplomacy can effectively promote fundamental rights abroad as well .
Secondly , following Lisbon , democracy and human rights have a new expression via the European Citizens ' Initiative .
The initiative boosts the role of EU citizens , who can use it to initiate the adoption of European legislation .
Thirdly , I would like to express my satisfaction over the fact that the report calls on EU Member States and institutions to redouble their efforts on raising public awareness of fundamental rights .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the rapporteur for being responsive to our comments , and for the fact that the report also contains the explicit reference we requested to the fight against poverty and social exclusion in the section mentioning the activities necessary for the protection of fundamental rights .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , tomorrow afternoon , we will be able to share our thoughts on the human rights situation in the world , but this morning , we are focusing on the state of play as regards these rights in the European Union .
Discussing the European Union first and the rest of the world afterwards is the right order in my view because , before criticising others , we should put our own house in order .
If we really want to be taken seriously , we must not turn a blind eye to human rights violations on our own soil .
This resolution , for which I want to congratulate our rapporteur , Ms Gál , focuses on the way forward for EU policy in the field of human rights protection and advancement after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
It deals not only with who bears responsibility for what , but also focuses on the topics that should be at the centre of our concern in the future .
I would just like to emphasise two aspects .
I was happy with the support given in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs to the idea of a kind of freezing mechanism , by which national contested policies or decisions can be frozen by the Commission until it has taken a formal decision as to whether to start the infringement procedure .
I believe such a mechanism will bring added value in creating a more credible fundamental rights policy within the European Union .
I hope , therefore , that the entire House will lend its support to this mechanism when we vote tomorrow .
The other aspect relates to the right and the duty of this Parliament continually to analyse the human rights situation in the Member States and to be critical in expressing its views , including naming and shaming when necessary .
Mr President , this is a very good report , and the first one after the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Gál , for her hard work , receptiveness and fruitful cooperation .
I would like to come back to four messages contained in this report .
The first concerns our requirement for the Commission to fulfil its role with respect to the new resources at its disposal and to the entry into force of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The situation of the Roma people has sadly been the first practical case , and the Commission has , in the end , only gone halfway on this matter , basing itself solely on the Free Movement Directive .
The Commission has sidestepped the non-discrimination issue on the basis of Article 21 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , but it cannot be so half-hearted in future , with the ratification , by the Union , of the European Convention on Human Rights , and I am delighted to see the Union 's commitment to seeing this through .
The added value of this report also resides in the fact that it emphasises the need for early detection of potential violations through the implementation of a warning system .
This system makes provision , among other things , for measures suspected of constituting such violations to be suspended while the accelerated procedure for determining whether they are contrary to fundamental rights is carried out .
I would also insist on the need to set up a prevention system on the model , for example , of the Universal Periodic Review mechanism within the United Nations Council .
Once again , I would stress the absolute need for consistency between internal and external processes , as you have already mentioned , Mrs Reding .
In that respect , the signing of EU readmission agreements represents a real challenge .
We are blindly endorsing these agreements when the actual terms of their implementation are being decided in joint committees from which Parliament is excluded .
Mr President , now that the Charter of Fundamental Rights has become legally binding in Europe , we are dealing with two systems for the protection of human rights which are , to a certain extent , in competition with one another .
One of these systems is based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the case-law of the Court of Justice , and the other is based on the European Convention on Human Rights and the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights .
I think the fundamental challenge identified in the Gál report is that of ensuring coherence between these systems , both in terms of content and in institutional terms .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights must not be interpreted in such a way that it results in the presumption of new competences for the European Union .
Article 51 states this very clearly , but I think it is worth reminding everyone , particularly the Members of this House , that issues relating to marital law , criminal law and the legal protection of unborn life cannot be regulated at EU level , either directly or by the actions of any court or tribunal .
This politicisation of human rights protection instruments can lead to only one thing - a fall in trust in the international judiciary .
Mr President , I should like , in turn , to thank our rapporteur for her willingness to listen and for her work , as well as all the shadow rapporteurs who have contributed to the quality of this report .
For us , this report is important because it draws conclusions from one of the few positive outcomes of the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon , if it is effectively implemented .
Indeed , the effective implementation of fundamental rights in the European Union is an important , if not fundamental , issue for the European Union 's future .
However , using flowery language will not be enough .
The Treaty , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and , soon , accession to the European Convention on Human Rights , will provide us with new tools in this area and will enable the European Union and its Members to reach a new stage .
Many say that human rights are part of the European Union 's essential values but few recognise them as being truly universal and indivisible .
Indivisible , meaning that all the human rights enshrined in the Charter , but also in the European Convention , and in all the European and international conventions that stem from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , have the same value , whatever they may be .
Civil and political rights are no more important than economic and social rights .
The right to live in dignity is just as important as religious freedom for instance .
Universal means that human rights are the same for everyone , regardless of their nationality , regardless of their legal status .
However , we know that the right to education and the right to family life , here too for instance , are constantly flouted in nearly every Member State .
The situation regarding the Roma people is unfortunately symptomatic of this .
So yes , the Commission must resolve to start infringement proceedings and to be as strict as it is on economic matters .
Universal also implies that human rights have the same value throughout the world , meaning that the European Union must attach the same importance to human rights as it does to economic or diplomatic issues in its foreign policy and partnership agreements .
This is not the case in countries such as Tunisia , Libya and Colombia , and I could mention many more .
So yes , this is a fundamental issue ; the European Union 's credibility and the future of its foreign policy are at stake .
( HU ) Mr President , as a Hungarian and a female politician , I am proud that it was a Hungarian female Member , Mrs Kinga Gál , who created with considerable effort this very significant work on a better assertion of human rights , and brought it before the European Union .
For this , I would like to thank her .
What I find lacking , however , is an emphasis on traditional civil and political liberties , and there is hardly anyone in a better position here in the EU than we , Hungarians , to emphasise that in the European Union , the problem does not only lie with discrimination against minorities or the integration of the Roma when it comes to human rights , but with the freedom of expression , assembly and speech , and nothing illustrates this better than the situation in Hungary between 2002 and 2010 .
The Human Rights Committee of the Hungarian Parliament recently adopted a very thorough and detailed report , which demonstrates through court judgments , reports of the ombudsman and other means that the Hungarian socialist governments between 2002 and 2010 maintained their power by grossly and continuously violating human rights .
My question to the rapporteur , on the one hand , is whether this particular Hungarian report can finally be presented to the European Union in the current situation , and whether the European Union will investigate it , because that would indeed be a realistic indication that there has been some measure of change in the field of human rights .
On the other hand , if we are able to speak of an increased possibility to assert human rights in the European Union at all , how could we better avoid incidents like the one where people were shot in the eye in Hungary in 2006 , particularly if the Vice-President of the LIBE Committee is still an individual who , at that time , was a member of a government that had people shot in the eye ?
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , one can only remark favourably on a report such as the one so ably put together by the rapporteur , Mrs Gál , which has the strong point of describing the situation regarding the implementation of fundamental rights both accurately and in detail .
I should like to raise a few minor points regarding the implementation itself .
Thanks to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is now obligatory , and the Lisbon Process , which cannot now be halted , there is no doubt that this support for wellbeing and the person derives from a set of values that is truly shared , as is shown in tangible terms by the real results achieved .
Therefore , we must bear in mind the Treaty of Lisbon , the Stockholm Programme , and fundamental principles such as solidarity , integration and the fight against organised crime and terrorism .
We must bear in mind that the principle of subsidiarity obviously cannot stand in the way of the implementation of fundamental rights in a Europe of the people .
A few days from now , we shall approve a new dossier and the new regulation regarding the legislative initiative in favour of citizens against the trafficking of human beings .
These dossiers are integrated with each other and definitely form an updated legal frame of reference .
All the measures have a precise objective : to value human dignity .
I should like to conclude , Mr President , by saying that the power to make checks and apply real sanctions must be properly implemented in 2013 , the European Year of Citizenship .
This could certainly be an important factor to really assess the significance of the measure .
Mr President , pre-Lisbon , post-Lisbon , we have very little to be proud of .
In Europe , you can still be discriminated against if you are a woman .
We have heard it said here in the Chamber today : a woman cannot choose what to do with her body .
You can be discriminated against on the grounds of age , disability , religion , belief , sexual orientation .
On the supply of goods and services , there is no movement on the Council directive .
If you are in a same-sex partnership or a civil partnership or a marriage , you can be discriminated against by a Member State on the precept of the concept of subsidiarity .
On that basis , you can promote inequality .
We have a two-speed Europe where some people are equal and others are not .
We sit here and do nothing while we see rising xenophobia , racism , anti-Semitism , homophobia and transphobia and , yes , look at what is happening to the Roma .
Have we learnt nothing from the Second World War ?
Have we learnt nothing from the 1930s when we turned away and did nothing because people were different from us ?
Can we not see that religion , decent religion , is being used as an excuse to increase discrimination against LGBT people in particular ?
Can we not see that to diminish the rights of another is ultimately to diminish our own ?
We have nothing to be proud of .
( NL ) Mr President , it is patently clear that the Treaty of Lisbon takes a different approach to fundamental rights from that we have previously been used to .
First of all , of course , because of the European Union 's accession to the European Court of Human Rights , which has brought about a strange situation in which courts are competing with each other .
It is still unclear exactly what turn things will take in this respect .
I fear that , with the EU 's accession to the ECHR , we may have landed in a legal minefield .
Could the Commissioner comment on this ?
My second point concerns the lasting impact of the Charter of Fundamental Rights on European law .
I have a specific question for the Commissioner concerning a judgment handed down on 9 November 2010 by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
This is about the joined cases of Volker and Hartmut Eifert , under references C 92 / 09 and C 93 / 09 .
In brief , these cases were about the right to privacy versus the right of public access to European funding streams .
In these judgments , the Court decided that the right to privacy outweighs the general European transparency interest .
I was very surprised by this judgment and I would very much like to know the Commissioner 's point of view on this matter , in the context of the lasting impact of the fundamental rights guaranteed in the Charter on current and future EU legislation .
( SL ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Gál , on preparing a good report .
It is true that we have a new situation in the European Union as far as the protection of human rights is concerned .
It seems to me that freedom is expanding and that that is a good thing .
The report is quite contemporary , or modern ; it even speaks of a third generation of human rights and the like .
However , protecting human rights and freedoms also includes righting the wrongs of the past .
We may have highlighted many third generation rights , as they are called , in this report , but we have forgotten some issues , such as returning property that was confiscated by totalitarian regimes to its owners or giving a dignified burial to the many people who were brutally killed in Central and Eastern Europe in 1945 and only given makeshift graves .
For that reason , we , the present generation of political decision makers , are responsible for righting these wrongs of the past .
Only then will we be able to speak with a clear conscience about new , third generation human rights and freedoms , as they are called , for the present and for the future , too .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , with the Treaty of Lisbon , the Charter of Fundamental Rights has also become legally binding , and it created the possibility for infringement procedures to be launched in the case of its violation .
In some Member States , the social tensions that have arisen in the wake of the crisis have brought about a restriction of democratic rights , instead of steps having been taken in this direction .
They have brought about the restriction of the freedom of the media , the restriction of the right to strike , the circumvention and limitation of social dialogue , the strengthening of discrimination , and the shattering of the foundations of the rule of law and legal certainty .
The Commission , in its role as the guardian of the treaties , has an obligation to be mindful of such signs .
We believe that the creation of the portfolio of a Commissioner for fundamental rights is an important step , and we call on Mrs Reding to regularly monitor the Member States and call attention to cases where fundamental rights and the basic principles of democracy are violated , in order to ensure that these are not only mandatory for candidate countries before their accession , but also later on , as the failure to do so would further undermine the credibility of the EU .
( RO ) Mr President , let me begin by congratulating Kinga Gál for her report .
We currently have a community of values and principles , reflected in a complex system of human rights protection , which includes the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the most progressive regional code of human rights .
Member States must abide by the Charter 's provisions when applying EU legislation .
The Charter 's provisions can be applied directly by national courts , thereby also giving them great responsibility .
Secondly , we have the European Convention and the case-law of the Court of Justice in Strasbourg .
They provide a guarantee for individual rights in Member States .
The European Union 's accession to the Convention will ensure that the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights is also applied to the actions taken by the EU as an institution and by a Member State which applies EU legislation .
We certainly must monitor closely the reform of the Court in Strasbourg and its impact on shortening proceedings .
Thirdly , at national level , Member States have the duty and opportunity to implement directly the provisions which guarantee fundamental rights , to apply them in their own countries through the decisions of their own institutions .
Therefore , both legal and institutional mechanisms exist .
The keyword is implementation , which must be rapid and effective for victims .
Another keyword is coordination between the institutions which deliberate on the violation of rights and award damages .
( PL ) Mr President , incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into EU law does not extend the scope of the EU 's competences and complies with the principle of subsidiarity , since the Charter is an integral part of EU policy .
I therefore call once again upon the Polish authorities to meet their obligations and adopt the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Poland 's opt-out from the Charter has no substantive justification .
It is a political decision which compromises my country and is detrimental to Polish citizens .
Adoption of the Charter is particularly important in the context of the upcoming Polish Presidency .
All Europeans must have equal rights , regardless of where they live and the extent to which their country is in thrall to the clergy .
Unfortunately , even the Constitutional Tribunal in Poland does not always understand this .
In my opinion , respect for the rights of women , the only majority to be discriminated against , is particularly important .
I therefore call once again for a European directive on violence against women , including sexual and reproductive violence , as practised by certain Member States with the full sanction of domestic law .
( HU ) Mr President , the forward-looking part of the report has already been pointed out by many of my fellow Members .
Finally , we have a report that encompasses the various issues related to human rights without giving preference to one area to the detriment of another .
I am particularly pleased that that the report specifically highlights non-discrimination and equal opportunities .
The report is based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This is the point of my speech .
Adherence to , and enforcement of , the Charter can only be successful if European society recognises that all human beings are equal , and that this equality can only be realised through equal treatment .
If anyone is put at a disadvantage in any respect through no fault of their own , they must be given appropriate and proportionate assistance so that they can become persons of equal value , citizens of equal value .
The road that leads to this goal is a difficult one , and deliberate work will be required to complete it .
Mrs Gál 's report is a significant milestone along this road .
I am grateful for her very significant work .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to point out one danger .
The combination of different forms of combating discrimination may lead to discrimination .
There was also talk of this at the OSCE meeting last week in Vienna .
It is a paradox , but as anti-discrimination policy becomes an ideology , people begin to discriminate .
We see how the actual concept of discrimination goes beyond its definition .
If the European Union has any serious shortcomings in this area , it is in the need to restore the original meaning of the word ' discrimination ' , because it is no longer understood either by human rights activists or sometimes even by our own EU Agency for Fundamental Rights .
I am therefore calling for democratic control of this institution .
If this does not happen , it may even become a financially costly burden , detracting from the reputation not only of the European Commission , but , indirectly , of the entire European Union .
( HU ) Mr President , the rapporteur has done an excellent job .
However , to quote a popular Hungarian saying , unless it is implemented , it will be worth as much as horseshoes on a dead horse .
I do not see a political will in the European Commission to enforce these rights and to initiate infringement proceedings against Member States .
I have much faith in Mrs Reding .
She has more courage than all the male Commissioners combined , as she dared to oppose Mr Sarkozy , even though Mr Barroso had tried to dissuade her from doing so for a long time .
In the upcoming period , she will be faced with a considerable challenge , as the Hungarian Government assuming the EU Presidency is committing serious infringements of fundamental rights .
It is restricting the freedom of the media , abolishing the rights of trade unions in relation to public servants , and it fails to protect private property when it appropriates the private pension savings of three million citizens .
This government is violating fundamental rights , and you , Mrs Reding , must have the courage to initiate an infringement procedure .
( IT ) Mr President , notwithstanding the European Convention on Human Rights , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union and the national constitutions , serious violations of human rights persist on a daily basis in the European Union and in the Member States .
In my country - Italy - there is a regime in force in which freedom of the press is violated , political parties take part in elections by submitting fake signatures , State secrecy covers up violent attacks ( including by the Mafia ) , our Prime Minister - though not for much longer , we hope - profits from international cooperation with regimes like those in Russia and Libya , as was also confirmed by WikiLeaks .
The European Union cannot allow itself to turn a blind eye to all of this .
For these reasons , I support the report , which contains many of the amendments submitted by me and approved in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Amongst these , I should like to single out paragraphs 20 and 40 , which call for human rights violations to be monitored and penalised , and for national legislative proposals with the potential to violate human rights to be frozen before they become law , until the EU approves them .
I also supported the incentive to use Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union to address human rights violations and to bolster the mandate of the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
The report makes numerous positive references to minorities , rights , lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people , immigrants and asylum seekers , freedom of the press and social rights .
For these reasons , I would urge my fellow Members to vote in favour of the report .
( PT ) Mr President , we are all aware that many kinds of discrimination still exist in the countries of the European Union , affecting different sections of the population and cultural minorities .
However , we cannot forget that there is general discrimination against women : discrimination against women continues to make itself felt to a greater or lesser degree in many different areas in the EU Member States .
Women workers still have difficulty in getting jobs and in being promoted in their careers , and they still fall victim to low wages and other forms of discrimination that always affect them .
The gender pay gap in the EU stands at about 18 % .
Urgent measures are therefore needed to combat these discriminatory situations .
( DE ) Mr President , accession on the part of the EU to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms also conceals the risk that the European Court of Human Rights ( ECHR ) will be able to pass judgment on any EU legal act ; the judges of the European Court of Justice have already warned against taking this step .
I very much doubt that the ECHR will always pass neutral and appropriate judgments .
Its President has himself admitted that he would examine cases brought by asylum seekers more closely than other cases .
Preferential treatment for certain complainants is not fitting conduct for a neutral judge .
The ECHR is currently attempting to suspend the Dublin Convention and prevent deportations from Austria to Greece .
Why is this ?
Is Greece unsafe ?
Do we really want to be subject to a court that wants to ban the cross in classrooms ?
The cross is the symbol of Christianity , one of the foundations of Europe and of our fundamental values .
If the European Court of Human Rights clearly has no respect for such human rights , I cannot see that it is possible to recognise it here as an approved and appropriate decision-making body .
( HU ) Mr President , the European Union has always been ready to criticise countries outside its borders in order to promote fundamental rights .
In the case of its own Member States , however , it has often been powerless following their accession .
This should not be the case any longer , as today it is not only economic principles that bind us together .
The report of Mrs Kinga Gál summarises the most urgent and most important steps in the development of internal fundamental rights protection .
We need an effective rights protection system , and thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , we will now be able to establish one .
Violations of the fundamental rights of citizens cannot remain without consequence .
We must be able to hold those committing infringements to account at both Member State and European Union level .
I can only agree with Mrs Reding in that the Commission should exercise the right to initiate infringement proceedings in all justified cases .
The addition to the set of available procedures of a procedure with a blocking effect can serve as an effective tool in the protection of rights against Member State measures violating fundamental rights .
Yes , we need to protect persons with disabilities , we need to eliminate discrimination and , last but not least , we need to protect European linguistic diversity .
( LT ) Mr President , the issue of human rights must be addressed at European level and the Member States themselves must also take responsibility for guaranteeing the fundamental rights of their citizens .
At European level , for instance , it is very important to establish a European Union strategy on the rights of the child , because not all Member States are capable of guaranteeing the protection of children 's rights at national level .
It is therefore necessary to develop practical measures to combat child abuse , sexual exploitation and child pornography .
Disabled people , who still suffer from discrimination in their social , professional and cultural lives , are another priority .
We must therefore establish a concrete system of EU legislation on the rights of disabled people and develop an EU strategy on the disabled .
I would like to stress that combating trafficking of human beings , especially women and children , is still a huge problem and one of the worst violations of human rights .
It is also very important to combat poverty and social exclusion , particularly as regards elderly people , who have suffered most during the recession .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the committee members who worked alongside the rapporteur , Mrs Gál , on these areas , as well as all those MEPs who took the floor today in this House , thereby showing that fundamental rights are very important .
I can only support what has already been said by several MEPs , namely that it is high time that we focused on fundamental rights within the European Union in order to be credible and be able to talk about fundamental rights outside the European Union .
This issue has been somewhat neglected .
It will no longer be in future .
I think that the Commission 's annual report on the application of the Charter , which will elaborate on all the observations made by everyone regarding specific types of discrimination , will truly enable us every year to discuss what is not working and try to correct it .
Correct it how ?
There is this idea of a ' freezing mechanism ' , as the rapporteur called it , this prevention system where one would intervene with regard to a measure being taken in a Member State up to the point at which it is implemented .
I have asked my experts to analyse this , and the institutional issues that such a mechanism raises are very complex .
For the time being , although we will have to continue the analysis and see what is really happening , it seems to me that there is no legal basis to act in such a way and that a change in the Treaty would be needed to activate such a prevention mechanism .
It is an attractive idea .
We will carry on looking for a mechanism that could be used without changing the Treaty so as to deal with the most pressing issues .
Nevertheless , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Charter is not applicable in absolute terms , because this is a common misconception .
It is applicable only when Member States implement European rules , for instance , when a European directive that has been decided between the Council and Parliament is then integrated into European law .
In that situation , the Charter does apply , but not in absolute terms .
In absolute terms , that is to say , for all other cases , jurisdiction lies with the national courts .
When the European Union becomes a member of the Council of Europe Convention , there will be an extra dimension that we will then have to implement , and it concerns the way in which we manage our rights policy .
This is what seems to me to be of utmost importance , beyond all the specific questions that have been asked - and I will respond individually to the MEPs who asked them - I think that the main issue is the fundamental one .
Outside the EU , in our Member States , within governments , the importance of the Charter has not yet been fully realised .
Therefore , we have some work to do to raise awareness so that this culture of rights , this policy of values exists throughout Europe , so that , when a law is passed , when a law is applied , people everywhere ask themselves if it complies with the values we have subscribed to ; that is to say that , as political leaders , we must ask ourselves almost systematically , when we act , whether what we are doing is compatible with the fundamental rights we have subscribed to .
This seems to me to be the most important element .
As a matter of fact , I can tell you that the Commission is due to take a decision today on whether to scrap the exequatur , in other words , that a proposal will be submitted to make court rulings valid anywhere in Europe .
This is a decision of major importance , and for the first time , when proposing this new legislation , we focused on respect for fundamental rights .
We did not just carry out an economic analysis , or study the impact on the market ; we also studied the impact on values .
As you can tell , we are gradually moving towards this new policy , and I think that , between us - the Commission , the Council and Parliament - we should ensure that this annual report on the application of the Charter , which I will submit on behalf of the Commission and which Parliament will criticise or approve , is a great moment of truth and an opportunity to take a close look at matters .
This is also about truly showing to the outside world , to our voters , that the Charter is a living entity .
The Charter is not merely a text ; it is there to be put into practice .
And if it is not put into practice , the elected representatives of the people will say so loud and clear .
This is what we must try to establish during the two or three years before the next elections .
I think we can achieve this goal gradually , with the first exercise of this kind in spring , then the establishment of a tradition in this House , so that no one can ever say again , when you examine human rights outside the Union on Wednesdays or Thursdays , ' You have not put your own house in order ' .
Let us do it together !
Mr President , thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for the encouraging words and the words of support .
I would especially like to thank Mrs Reding for the openness and cooperation in which we have been working together for quite some time now , and for the clear and specific answers and messages .
I believe that the considerations of the shadow rapporteurs and fellow Members are , after all , all included in this report , and that acceptable compromises have been reached .
Therefore , I cannot accept the letters of amendment that have now been re-submitted to the plenary , as I think that this report is acceptable as it is .
I would like to point out that we should by no means throw the baby out with the bath water in the general fundamental rights protection system , and therefore , we should always be mindful of the concrete facts and attempt to translate the expectations we are debating here today into something tangible .
I am therefore pleased that in tomorrow 's plenary sitting , we will see these concrete facts in the topic of combating human trafficking , where special protection will be provided to child victims in the field of victim protection .
This will also be under debate now with the adoption of the Citizens ' Initiative , as a result of which we will truly be able to speak of a citizens ' Europe , as these European citizens will be able to influence the legislative procedure .
However , I also consider it symbolic that we will debate on and adopt the report on the situation of human rights in the world tomorrow .
The fact that the Hungarian Presidency is also setting its priorities in a similar spirit , and is placing emphasis on the strengthening of an EU that is close to its citizens , is welcome .
However , I would like to remind my fellow Members that we should avoid employing double standards , especially here in this House .
I say this to my fellow Members who assisted , perhaps for years - and here I address my Hungarian socialist fellow Members - in the gravest human rights infringements , and are now criticising others with unfounded accusations only to regain the voter confidence they may have lost due to these very infringements of human rights .
I thank everyone for their cooperation and assistance .
Mr President , I must refute the slight that was made by Ms Gál against Socialists , saying that they have been undermining human rights .
You cannot make challenges like that without being absolutely specific and bringing forward absolutely crucial , concrete-based evidence .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the rapporteur , Kinga Gál , for her effort to open up the problem of the violation of human rights in the European Union .
How can we reproach or teach someone outside the EU if , in our own Community , the law is regularly violated ?
So far , Latvia , a Member of the EU , has not implemented a resolution of the European Parliament of 11 March 2004 , where Parliament ' proposes that the Latvian authorities envisage the possibility of allowing non-citizens who are long-time inhabitants to take part in local self-government elections ' .
Three hundred and thirty-five thousand permanent inhabitants ( 15 % ) of Latvia lack their basic rights , but it does not worry anyone .
The European Parliament can discuss cases of breaches of human rights everywhere except in its own territory .
I have voted in favour of Kinga Gál 's initiative .
I offer my total support and the gratitude of 335 000 people .
in writing . - I would like to use this opportunity to thank the rapporteur for shedding light on such an important issue .
The Lisbon Treaty has redefined competences and responsibilities in many fields and , among them , made the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding .
The European Parliament has been acting as watchdog of fundamental rights and the Lisbon Treaty has consolidated the fact .
I very much support the notion of enhancing the role of the European Parliament with regard to a systematic approach to legislative proposals and amendments .
While we are critical of human rights violations around the world , we must apply the same scrutiny to what is going on within the borders of the European Union .
There is no reason to be overly pleased , as we receive signals of racism , xenophobia , sexism and other forms of discrimination in the Member States far too often .
The work ahead of us remains vast , but I am more than sure that consistent work on upholding fundamental rights in the EU will help us prevail .
The European Union , as a community of states that offer a high level of protection of human rights , always boldly raises its voice against serious infringements taking place in other parts of the world .
The European Parliament usually condemns practices that show complete disregard for the universal fundamental principles of human rights , wherever they may occur , in commendable unison .
It is less often , however , that we respond with similar determination to infringements within the borders of the EU , even though this would be the most effective way to send out a message to those countries around the world that do not respect human rights .
A common EU action would achieve the greatest result if we voiced our dissatisfaction with the same determination and peremptoriness within our own area in respect of the assertion of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
In very few cases do we call ourselves to account in connection with these ideals , which are an integral part of the European spirit , and which have been legally binding for a year now thanks to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
And in the event that we actually do so , we come across as powerless and impotent in the absence of appropriate sanctions .
This , in turn , inevitably affects the force and credibility of our criticisms toward third countries and our foreign policy efforts for the promotion of human rights and democracy .
I do not believe that Europe can give these up in the future .
European Protection Order ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio and Mrs Romero López , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the draft directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Protection Order ( 00002 / 2010 - C7-0006 / 2010 - .
Mr President , today is an important day for all victims , because today we shall adopt the European Protection Order , which is a significant step forward in terms of their rights .
Victims are unfairly forgotten about , and it is paradoxical that aggressors often have many more rights and that there is more said about aggressors ' rights than victims ' rights .
Today , Parliament will honour all victims , reminding those who believe that the borders will shield them while they persecute their victims , that this European Protection Order will protect all victims equally in the European Union from this day onwards .
We started working more than a year ago to achieve this objective and make progress with the area of freedom and security that was mentioned in the Stockholm Programme , and today we can say with a degree of pride that , although the path has not been easy , as many people have frequently failed to understand the order , and doubted its effectiveness and clarity , we have achieved it .
I must say that , following the trialogues with the Belgian Presidency , and many conversations with the Commission , we have achieved a text that almost all the political groups were happy with .
This report was therefore adopted by a huge majority with no votes against in the joint vote by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I hope that today , Parliament will reflect the decision made by those committees and by those of us who produced this report , which was adopted by a huge majority .
This would send a clear message to the Council about what Europeans want , which is nothing more than to live in an area of security and justice , to be protected , and for a victim who has a restraining order against her aggressor in her country not to have to begin further court proceedings when she moves to another country .
We have an obligation to facilitate access to justice for Europeans , and especially for victims , who are the most vulnerable .
The protection of all victims , without exception , has been my beacon throughout the development of this report .
I therefore wanted to include victims of terrorism , people trafficking , organised crime and honour crimes , along with a special chapter for minors , who are the most vulnerable victims , and we never think about how to protect them .
Although this order will protect all victims , women who suffer from domestic violence will benefit most from this instrument for judicial cooperation , as their aggressors will not be able to travel through Europe with impunity , and will know that they will be pursued in the same way as in the country where they attacked their partners .
Parliament must therefore send a clear message to the Council today about what we want .
We will therefore vote with our eyes fixed on the victims , on those who suffer , on those who need us to protect them , on those who are afraid and need to live in freedom and hope .
We are not going to give up on such a fair and necessary aim that is supported by the majority of Europeans just because there are some who are afraid and never dare to take that one step further .
We need to be brave , the Member States need to be brave , and I hope that the vote today will be a majority in favour and encourage those who still have doubts as to whether this instrument will open a door for victims .
I also hope that in the near future , the Commission will put forward wide-ranging legislation in favour of victims ' rights , for which it has my full support and , I am sure , Parliament 's support .
I repeat : this small but major step that is the European Protection Order will improve protection for all victims , preventing further crimes and relieving the consequences of those that have already been committed .
Today , we have an obligation to remove the obstacles that have so far prevented real protection across Europe .
Through our vote today , we have the opportunity to save lives , which is what we are going to do , and we should be genuinely proud of that .
Mr President , this proposal for a directive that we are bringing to plenary today to keep away aggressors who pursue their victims until they kill them , wherever they hide , is a clear message that Parliament must send to European society and to the Council .
We are not going to remain defenceless against the crimes that are still repeatedly committed on a daily basis in European countries , and remain hidden in the shadows of people 's homes .
These crimes also remain in the statistical shadows , as if the law of survival of the strongest took sole precedence at the heart of cohabitation , but we are trying to enforce the Charter of Fundamental Rights that we adopted in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Did it not occur to those drafting Chapter I of the Charter that a threat to physical integrity and dignity could come not only from the public institutions and the state , but also disguised as affection ?
For the 25 % of European women currently suffering some form of violence , their torturers have private names , and defending themselves against the attacks does not allow them to be citizens .
According to non-governmental organisations , more than 2 500 women die every year in the European Union without us having asked ourselves whether those crimes can be prevented or avoided .
European women have therefore welcomed the initiative by the Member States and the Spanish Presidency to bring a European Protection Order before Parliament .
We are creating a European area of security : the European arrest warrant means that none of our countries can be a haven for criminals .
Let us create a climate of mutual trust ; through the protection order , we are creating an area of justice and freedom , because the victims of these crimes can be received in any country without having to go through further proceedings , as my co-rapporteur , Mrs Jiménez-Becerril , said .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about ' private terrorism ' , which is the name now given to this continuous crime of attacks hidden in the privacy of the home .
We are also talking about preventive measures from a different source .
Not all countries have or are going to have the same legal traditions : the more progress we make , the more an instrument that can provide for our diversity is and will be necessary The Council 's legal services have taken this view , as have Parliament 's legal services .
Where does the resistance lie ?
Ladies and gentlemen , it does not lie in the complexity of our legal system , which will continue to exist .
The law is not a tool for creating conflicts , but for resolving them .
This has been the view of the conservative governments that have supported the initiative based on sound judgment .
If we were talking about guarantees and fundamental rights when we talked about terrorism , how could we have implemented international agreements if it was not because we were talking about security ?
Are 2 500 women every year not a security problem for Europe ?
It is not the first time in history that the law has faced a challenge .
We therefore regret the Commission 's position throughout the procedure , because we cannot talk about legal basis when we are talking about political will .
Let us not invoke the law just when it suits us .
This text is the result of an agreement .
The improvements that we have incorporated regarding the right to information , translation and procedural guarantees have taken into account the fact that this is a recognition instrument , and Parliament has decided that it is a priority for the Member States to put the existing data on the table out in the open .
We have not forgotten about victims ' rights to psychological assistance and legal aid .
We will continue to fight for these things , and let us hope that they will be included in the next package on victims .
We would like to thank the Belgian Presidency for the work that it has done , along with all the shadow rapporteurs and our team .
Through this vote today , we want to send a message to the Council that this is Parliament 's will ; now it is up to the Council to take on its responsibilities .
We will not succeed in tackling prevention if some Member States believe that we do not have a problem because we do not have the data .
Now it is the Council that is going to decide whether Europe is truly getting involved in combating violence and defending fundamental rights .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the protection of citizens , in practice mostly women , subjected to or at risk of violence is very high on the agenda of all the institutions working on this subject at the moment .
It is important that it be on the agenda because we share the same objective : providing protection for victims in the best possible conditions across the borders of the EU .
That is also why I have supported the aim of this protection from the outset , and that is the reason why I am preparing the ambitious package on victims ' rights to be adopted in spring 2011 .
I am fully aware of the work of the co-rapporteurs , Ms Jiménez-Becerril Barrio and Ms Romero López , and of both the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , who have added a lot of value to the ongoing work in order to improve the protection of victims .
I look at some of the proposals you have made : for instance , that victims do not have to bear the costs , that they receive translation and interpretation services or that delays in the recognition procedures are reduced .
I am ready to work on an effective and legally sound mechanism designed to help victims benefit from civil law protection measures across the European Union .
We have been working on the procedural rights for persons who are accused .
The corollary of this is that we work on the rights of persons who have been victims , because we very often speak about the accused in court proceedings but forget that there has been a victim , so we have to ' re-put ' the victim at the centre of attention .
That is why the Commission 's future victims package will build on and develop the excellent work undertaken by the Spanish Presidency , the Belgian Presidency , the Council and , of course , the European Parliament .
All this work is very important .
It will be put together so that when the victims package is on the table , it will be comprehensive , it will be complete , and it will make a real difference to all victims - be they women , children or men , although most are women and children - to enable us to quickly come up with concrete measures which are applicable and do not create legal uncertainty .
Thank you for this work .
It is going to be taken into consideration when we prepare the victims package .
Mr President , roughly 8 000 Romanian women in Spain have benefited this year , as victims , from protection orders which are valid in Spain .
They must also be extended to Romania and other Member States in which they travel .
According to unofficial estimates , there are roughly 100 000 women in Europe benefiting from protection orders which are valid in the state that issued them .
The draft directive changes the limited , territorial aspect of these protection measures .
The instrument being introduced will ensure that a protection order issued in one Member State will be recognised in the Member States in which the victim travels so that the area of freedom , security and justice becomes a reality and the victims of violence or other victims can live and travel without fear .
Parliament 's desire is for victims ' protection to be extended .
This is why , after this directive , we are asking for and anticipating from the Commission that the next step will be to extend protection to victims in this common area of justice and security .
We are therefore awaiting the package with eagerness and interest in spring 2011 .
I would like to end by reiterating that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) gives its support to protection for victims , this draft directive and extended protection for victims .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , through this proposal for a directive - for which I should like to express my great thanks to the rapporteurs , with whom I worked as a shadow - Parliament is supporting and expanding the Council 's proposal , which was designed to protect people across all 27 Member States who suffer forms of persecution or serious and repeated threats from known and previously identified persons - often ex-boyfriends , husbands or partners - who threaten their physical and sexual integrity , dignity and personal freedom .
Indeed , the number of attacks and killings - particularly against women - is on the increase .
Their complaints are often not taken seriously enough by the police and the judiciary , and protection orders and measures against the aggressor are currently only valid in the country in which they are issued .
Commissioner Reding , the measure under approval may not be perfect , but it plugs a legislative vacuum .
After all , in creating the European area of freedom , security and justice , we have always acted empirically , at times pushing matters through where necessary .
Indeed , we believe that this initiative is important because it will allow all citizens of the European Union - men and women - and all European residents to travel freely across borders , taking their human rights and their rights to protection and security with them , as stated in Article 3 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament intended as the legal basis , in order to give a more coherent direction to the structure of the proposal .
Through the establishment of the European Protection Order , the protected person is guaranteed to be looked after even in other Member States , through a fast and free-of-charge procedure .
Each Member State must appoint a competent authority to inform victims of their rights , carry out campaigns , collect statistics and inform the person as soon as their national protection order has been issued .
Furthermore , it gives a great boost to the creation of the European legal area and the implementation of freedom of movement , and it also applies the ordinary legislative procedure involving codecision between the Council and Parliament for the first time .
I hope that the Council will confirm this commitment and I hope that the Commission - though showing particular attention to the coming ' Security for Victims ' package of measures - does not miss this particular chance to respond right now to this extremely serious situation , which is also demonstrated by European and national statistics .
Amongst other things , this could lead to important legal convergence among Member States .
I would therefore suggest that we avoid any delays and make a specific commitment to this particular type of victim protection .
Mr President , I want the European Protection Order to be particularly effective in preventing violence against women and to serve as a helpful prelude to the proposal that the Commission is preparing in order for us to have a similar instrument for all types of crime .
I regret the fact that the drafting of this text has been so difficult and complex , despite the fact that we all share its central objective .
I would also have liked this order to have incorporated two issues .
Firstly , the European register of protection orders , with the corresponding privacy guarantees , in order to prevent bureaucracy for the beneficiaries and have the orders applied immediately .
Moreover , this would reduce the cost of the processes that have to be carried out by the competent authorities , and would ultimately provide standardised , constantly updated statistics .
Secondly , I believe that we should have made an effort to explore cooperation in this field with third countries , especially if we pay attention to the statistics regarding the origins of the victims and their possible changes of residence .
The incipient European External Action Service has thus lost the opportunity to publicly introduce itself with a mission such as this , which Europeans understand and which solves problems that are real to all Europeans at the moment .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs for all their work , and I hope that Commissioner Reding will be sensitive with this initiative .
Mr President , I think that we in Parliament need to be very responsible and act within the mandate that we have been given , which tells us that , at European level too , we must protect women who are victims of violence and put a stop to murderers .
As has been said , this is about combating a type of social terrorism , which is chauvinist violence .
We must not , therefore , get caught up in statistics or legal ins and outs .
We are talking about justice , basic rights , life and death , defending those that must be defended against their attackers , and , most importantly , not having to regret the fact that 2 500 women every year are victims of the legal lethargy in which we are all immersed .
We are all aware of the legal difficulties and that this is an innovative exercise in the post-Lisbon interinstitutional dynamic .
However , those difficulties should not , under any circumstances , be an excuse for not moving forward .
The protection of the rights of the women who have been or could be victims of violence and murders and the prevention of such acts cannot be subordinated to a few legal issues .
We need to adopt the political will required by the urgency and importance of this case .
It goes without saying that it is important to do things well but , above all , it is essential that we do them and , in my view , that is the fundamental vision that we can send to both the Council and the Commission through this text that I hope we are going to adopt .
It needs to be understood that under no circumstances can we paralyse initiatives because there are technical difficulties that we have not been able to resolve before .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the two rapporteurs and both the Spanish and Belgian presidencies for the work they have done in order to continue making progress , working and overcoming the scourge of what is , I repeat , chauvinist violence .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I have been following the trialogues closely and would like to thank my colleagues , especially from the EPP and S & D Groups , for the work they have been doing .
As a lawyer in the UK , I have had experience over the years of providing legal advice and support to people who have been victims of domestic abuse , stalking or harassment by a relative or a former partner .
I have seen at first hand the distress that physical , psychological and sexual abuse can cause and the state of vulnerability of its victims .
I fully support the aims and objectives of this proposal .
However , I also have to express concerns regarding the legal base and scope .
It seems clear to me that this proposal has a criminal base only , through the use of Article 82 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU .
By their nature and by law , some of the offences that this proposal intends to cover are civil law matters , yet there is a noticeable absence of the use of Article 81 .
Whilst I do not object to EU legal cooperation , I strongly believe that we need to ensure that the legislation we produce at EU level is legally sound , robust and can be effectively implemented at Member State level without compromising existing Member State legal systems .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I support the protection of victims .
However , when I first came across the European Protection Order , I thought it sounded scary , like the European Arrest Warrant , which , in my opinion , is one of the most intrusive and dictatorial pieces of legislation ever to be imposed on the British people .
The proposal for the European Protection Order which is being touted says it is about the protection of women .
We were told that the European Arrest Warrant was about helping to fight terrorism - and we all know it has gone on to be a lot more than that .
Let us be clear and honest here : the underlying goal is to put in place footings for a pan-European justice system which will undoubtedly undermine British law .
If proof were needed , we only have to look at the European Arrest Warrant .
I also see these orders as being extremely difficult to enforce in the UK , for we will end up in a situation whereby an order is handed down by a foreign judge in a foreign land who knows nothing about the conditions of a British town or our way of life .
We have a saying in England : ' once bitten , twice shy ' .
We have been bitten once by the European Arrest Warrant .
I suggest that we shy away from the European Protection Order .
( PL ) Mr President , taking the proposed amendments into account , there is no mistaking the fact that the directive in question is one of the first initiatives aimed at achieving these important goals .
We should ensure not only that the victims of violence are safe from further harm in their own country , but also that they benefit from such protection measures throughout the European Union .
For this reason , I believe that we should support the rapporteur 's position .
It should be noted , too , that the initiative has a deliberately broad scope .
Although the majority of protection orders issued relate to women who are victims of gender-based violence , the initiative can cover all victims of violence - children and adults of both sexes , provided the perpetrator has been identified .
In this context , the Stockholm Programme states that the victims of crime , including terrorism , who are most vulnerable or who find themselves in particularly exposed situations , such as persons subjected to repeated violence in close relationships , victims of gender-based violence or persons who fall victim to other types of crimes in a Member State of which they are not nationals or residents , are in need of special support and legal protection .
In connection with the above , the European Protection Order should apply to the victims of all crimes , including human trafficking , the victims of female genital mutilation , forced marriages , honour killings , incest and other crimes of this type .
This initiative should therefore be supported , and I lend my full support to the rapporteur .
( NL ) Mr President , one hundred thousand people are currently benefiting from the European Protection Order .
One of them is Rasja , who would like to move to Spain with her children .
If the order pronounced against her stalker in the Netherlands does not relocate with her to Spain , she and her children , too , will become a sitting target there , unless the Spanish authorities recognise or enforce the same order .
Fortunately , however , Spain does recognise it .
This protection also applies to those being persecuted for exercising their right to free speech .
They have to be able to speak in other European countries with the knowledge that those who have threatened them will not be sitting there in the audience .
The European Protection Order makes that possible ; it is a splendid initiative and one that has been supported by the Dutch Government .
Unfortunately , with the new coalition , the status of people enjoying such protection has undergone a 180 degree reversal : women , men and children who are having to live in fear every day are callously being left high and dry .
It is simply unacceptable that an individual 's safety should stop at the border .
For the sake of one hundred thousand people , I am now saying ' yes ' to the European Protection Order .
I expect all governments , including that of my own country , to do their utmost to increase the safety , protection and freedom of their citizens , so that all people can live in freedom and security .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should , of course , like to thank the two co-rapporteurs who , following difficult negotiations in the trialogue , are proposing a compromise agreement which , as shadow rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and for my group , I naturally invite you to adopt .
Secondly , although I regret , as some have said today , that certain points such as , for instance , the translation of documents for victims , were not included in the body of the text of this agreement , or that the simplification elements were not sufficiently detailed - and I am counting on the ' victims package ' to polish them up - I want to stress that in the end , all this sounds like common sense today , like a logical continuation of the ever-greater integration of a European area of freedom and justice and , in essence , of the establishment of a corresponding legal system .
This bears witness to a certain amount of political boldness and of the will to go beyond political posturing for a large majority of us , in order to have a clear tool for cooperation in criminal matters .
That tool represents to a certain extent , as Mrs Reding highlighted earlier on , a true ' rights ' policy in Europe , that is to say , a real policy for the people , especially for women , whose physical integrity can be threatened , a policy that corresponds to the freedom of movement which has existed for a long time , hence , a ' rights ' policy .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I say first of all that I find the Council 's absence since yesterday regrettable , since the Council has generally been present in the negotiations on all the issues we have been discussing since yesterday , namely , those concerning civil liberties , justice and home affairs .
We regret the fact that the Council is not here to listen to Parliament 's voice ; it is a real shame .
I wish to congratulate the two co-rapporteurs - who have done a huge amount of work on this text - on this landmark progress for victims of all kinds : victims , firstly , of domestic violence - did you know that 45 % of European women are victims of domestic violence , as are some men , for we should not forget those men who are subjected to violence by women - and then victims of terrorism , including children , particularly vulnerable ones of course .
The text being presented to us today is an extremely important text , and I once again extend my congratulations .
We are anxious to see the ' victims package ' that you will be presenting to us next year , Commissioner , and which will complete the text that we will vote on tomorrow .
Madam President , domestic violence , genital mutilation , honour crimes , forced marriages and trafficking are just some of the types of violence against 45 % of women across Europe .
Women and minors need improved protection .
The European Protection Order is a good step forward to doing just that , in full compliance with the vision of the Stockholm Programme for a united Europe : an area of freedom , security and justice serving the citizen .
Protection orders issued in one European country against an offender will thus be enforced in all the other 26 EU Member States .
The initiative of the Spanish Presidency , embraced today by all of us , emphasises the protection of victims and prevention , and promotes uniformity in legal order procedures .
It empowers victims to break their silence in seeking protection beyond geographical boundaries in Europe .
I hope the Commission fully endorses the report of the two co-rapporteurs in its ambitious package on victims ' rights .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that this directive on the European Protection Order to safeguard victims is another sign of a momentous shift in real guarantees , above all for women , but not exclusively so , as has already been said .
The guidelines for this measure had already been developed , firstly by the Treaty of Lisbon , and then by the Stockholm Programme .
In particular , I should like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio and Mrs Romero López , on their diligent work and on tackling the many problems encountered in the Council to smooth the way for this particularly important proposal , for an area of freedom , justice and security that will really serve citizens .
The proposal combats domestic violence firmly and determinedly , has quite a significant range of measures and a scope that appears to be wholly consistent .
These ready-made , timely and effective precautionary measures lead us to believe that this proposal could also be used effectively to protect victims ' families .
We await with interest the more structured package announced by Commissioner Reding regarding the protection of victims of violence , which will be ready in the coming weeks .
I should like to conclude , Madam President , by affirming how important it is to have close cooperation between the Member States as well as great sensitivity for the application of this measure in practice , just as it is crucial not to forget the importance of psychological support for the victims .
I am sure the Commission will duly bear this in mind in the final phase of the legislative process .
( FI ) Madam President , the European Protection Order is an important step towards the protection of victims throughout Europe .
We are now sending a powerful signal to the Council and the Commission that the European Parliament is keen to have this protection order and that it should enter into force soon .
We should now try to overcome the opposition that there is to it in the Council as well as all the legal reasons that the Commission is putting forward for opposing it .
It is important that the directive should be applied over a wide area .
It must incorporate not just orders in respect of criminal acts but also various other kinds of protection order .
It should not involve any sort of legal hairsplitting .
This protection order should also be flexible enough to take account of the differences in national legislation .
It is important that Parliament focuses attention not only on the victims of genderbased violence , but on other victims of violence .
The directive needs to spell out what a victim 's rights are and what the procedures are for lodging a complaint , and these are some of the things that I myself have tried to highlight in Parliament 's position .
It is also important that the country in which the protection order is being requested informs its citizens of these procedures .
When the protection order enters into force , the work will not have really stopped there .
The authorities need to be educated , and we cannot be completely satisfied with an information campaign that is simply restricted to the framework of the present one .
( PL ) Madam President , the provisions included in the report under discussion today fill me with great enthusiasm .
The guarantee that protection granted to victims in one Member State will also apply in any other European Union Member State to which they are forced to travel for fear of repeated violence represents an opportunity for them to lead a normal life .
The European Protection Order will mean that protection measures adopted in one EU Member State can be recognised , applied and enforced by courts in another Member State .
What is more , extending the application of the directive to the victims of any kind of violence , not just the victims of gender-based violence , represents a further milestone .
All victims deserve respect and expect that the perpetrators of their suffering will be punished fairly .
It seems to me that only a protection mechanism which follows the victim can be fully effective and prevent a repeat of the same offence , as well as offering real protection to the victim .
I am delighted that Poland was one of the countries that put forward this initiative .
( SK ) Madam President , if the European Union is to become a genuine area of freedom , security and justice , we must eliminate the differences still persisting in this area between Member States .
Victims of violence must be protected against the perpetrators not only in their own countries , but must have protective measures made available to them throughout the EU .
Although this is a broad proposal , it directly concerns women who are victims of domestic violence .
It is good that this also provides an opportunity to deal with the situation of other potential victims , whether victims of human trafficking , forced marriages , honour killings or incest , or the situation of witnesses or of victims of terrorism and organised crime .
I personally very much applaud the effort to provide the best possible protection to victims also by ensuring the necessary legal certainty , among other things .
Victims should be able to rely on clear rules and should always be informed about the measures that are available to them in their country of origin and in the countries they want to move to , or to which they have already moved .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I greatly appreciate the work carried out by the two rapporteurs .
However , the problem with this draft directive is that it is based on the most usual kind of stalking , in which a person has been a victim of violence by another and therefore must be defended against a repeat of whatever physical or mental abuse took place .
Obviously , this is a matter of fundamental importance for hundreds of thousands of women in the European Union and therefore I fully support its content .
Unfortunately , however , these measures do not take into account the victims of organised crime who , in the majority of cases , do not need to be defended from an identified or identifiable person , but from organisations against which a restraining order certainly cannot be applied .
Therefore , I think that the European Parliament should regard this directive as a first step in implementing the Stockholm Programme , which talks expressly about measures to protect the victims of criminal activity , and it seems to me that Mrs Jiménez and Commissioner Reding are of the same mind .
I appeal to the European Commission to ensure that the package of measures to protect victims , which is planned for 2011 , also protects victims of organised crime and victims injured in the course of duty on a European level .
( DE ) Madam President , the European Protection Order is a step in the right direction .
The principle must be that recognised victims of violence are afforded the same level of protection in all Member States .
The best solution would be harmonisation of the laws of the Member States on this matter , but it was not possible to achieve this .
A positive aspect of this protection order is that it is to benefit every victim of violence as much as possible and its scope is broad : sexual violence , stalking and , above all , exploitation of minors , which I consider to be very , very important .
It therefore sends a positive message to the victims of violence and to women in particular .
However , there is one fly in the ointment : the grounds for non-recognition in Article 9 are very extensive and may also , to some extent , represent a means for Member States to avoid compliance with the directive .
Therefore , in a year 's time , we need to assess very carefully how we can take this debate further , because all victims in all countries need the same protection .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to support the idea contained in the draft European Protection Order .
The protection of persons under threat at the level of individual Member States appears to be insufficient in many cases .
Thanks to the openness of the European space today , young people often enter into international marriages and international marriage commitments .
Not all of these commitments last long , however , and the children often then become hostages to disputes between their parents .
Hostile parents often refuse to respect the decisions of courts from other countries granting custody of the children to one of them and simply take justice into their own hands and carry off the children of former partners to their own countries , exploiting differences between the legal systems of individual Member States to overcome valid court decisions .
The victims of this European legal anarchy are often small , innocent children .
I hope this problem will be resolved by the European Protection Order .
( DE ) Madam President , even though some measures have been taken in recent years to protect victims , many of the people affected often feel left in the lurch .
While lawyers and judges hear a great deal in their training about the rights of defendants , they learn very little about dealing with victims .
This is not the only area where greater awareness is necessary .
It is also needed in medical training so that the use of violence can be better recognised .
For child victims , the matter of the statutory limitation of civil compensation claims in the case of sex offences is essential .
Only those who have an unblemished criminal record are allowed to work with children .
If , for example , forced marriages are now being prosecuted in Liechtenstein , even without the consent of the victim , and it is possible to take legal action in the case of genital mutilation performed on a minor , this clearly shows the potential danger of the much lauded multicultural enrichment .
In my opinion , it is important to take this development in the EU into consideration , as well as its significance in the fight against human trafficking .
( HU ) Madam President , as a lawyer , I have dealt with cases of victims of violence against women and children for over ten years , whether it was domestic violence , rape or trafficking in women ; and I had the opportunity to see for myself that the protection order , which is the topic of today 's debate , is one of the important and indispensable means of protecting victims , but it is far from being the only one .
Complex measures are required , such as legal advice , psychological support , support to the children concerned , and it is very important to listen to the victims , who are , I am sorry to say , the greatest experts in terms of what they need .
I have two questions for Mrs Reding and the rapporteurs .
First , I would like to know to what extent they are involving the victims of violence against women in this work in order to enable them to share their experience .
Secondly , I would like to know how familiar Mrs Reding and the rapporteurs are with the convention on violence against women that is currently under preparation by the European Union 's twin , the Council of Europe , and to what extent we are participating in the preparation of this work .
( DE ) Madam President , the safety of the women affected really ought to be a matter of concern to all of us .
Regardless of where victims are , it is a question here not only of them receiving physical protection from their aggressors , but also of their human dignity being taken into account .
This European Protection Order should apply to all victims of violence , irrespective of their age or gender .
Madam President , I would like also to thank the rapporteur .
Safeguarding life , physical and psychological integrity , as well as sexual integrity and freedom , are priority objectives where victim protection is concerned .
With our political support for the European Protection Order Directive , we have given the issue the visibility it deserves and provided a Europe-wide , comprehensive package of special protection measures that are effective within the Union and grant legal protection and assistance for victims of crime , in particular , violent crimes .
The right to protection from violence is a basic human right regardless of ethnicity , legal status or immigration status , and it is therefore a moral duty for all of us to uphold this right within and beyond national borders .
I am convinced that this new approach to the protection of vulnerable victims is a very strong political message with a view to strengthening freedom , security and justice within the European Union .
Madam President , I think that in this debate , we have clearly seen that we are all in agreement in supporting the objective of this report .
The various political groups have shown their support for this directive , which offers greater protection to victims .
My question is , therefore : what obstacles are there to adopting this instrument ?
I repeat : what fears are there regarding something as essential and simple as protecting victims equally across Europe finally becoming a reality ?
In the hope that Parliament will adopt this report by a majority , I would like to address the Council and the Commission to remind them that we have overcome the legal hurdles in our negotiations , and I welcome the fact that the Commission acknowledges our work , just as we acknowledge the work that it will do in the future .
We should not therefore exclude ourselves , but rather help ourselves by adopting this more specific instrument today , and tomorrow by adopting the broader package of measures to help victims that will be presented by the Commission , with which I promise to cooperate .
Let us therefore be brave and responsible , and let us help all those who have the right to live in a safer Europe .
I repeat : let us help everyone , be they men , women or children .
Let us help those who are looking to us today to give them a better life , a life that will restore to them their freedom , their security and , above all , their dignity .
Madam President , Commissioner , we know that there are no legal measures included in the package that is being prepared for victims .
This has just been criticised by the European women 's lobby in Parliament : there is talk of good practice and coordination , but we still have a long way to go
I would also like to say that the origins of the violence that we are experiencing are not exotic : it is our own violence .
I would like to say to the Council and the Member States that violence that comes from other cultures also requires a legal instrument .
It is not possible to combat genital mutilation , honour crimes and all the harassment suffered by women from other cultures without an instrument of this nature .
This is why it is so important that they are also included , and Parliament has worked , through all the amendments from the shadow rapporteurs , to ensure that all these victims are also included in this legal instrument .
This is why it is so important that we work together on this issue , and why we regret the fact that Parliament and the Commission have not agreed on the same text throughout this procedure .
Even if Parliament and the Commission had agreed on the same text , we would still have a battle to fight .
Commissioner , it does little to help victims of violence to consider that delaying the initiative by two , three or four years would be better for them , because that is not the case .
You said during your previous appearance that we had not realised the significance of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We did realise its significance .
The problem is that it has to be applied ; the problem is that we need to take measures , and sometimes when measures need to be taken , they are legal measures , and sometimes there are obstacles in their path .
The greatest obstacle is political will .
This is why it is so important that we all agree on an initiative of this nature , and it is now up to the Council .
It is now up to the Member States to decide whether this instrument is really one that is going to be effective for victims and necessary .
We believe that it is , which is why we have defended this instrument and why we are here .
We also defend its urgency .
That is why we wanted Parliament to vote in favour by a huge majority , so that the countries that have not yet decided or have decided that they are against this initiative will see it as the only procedure that can be used now and in the future .
It is an instrument that is difficult and complex in nature , but which opens the way and will protect victims and the citizenship of women .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I did not intend to speak again , but what has been said needs to be corrected .
The measures which will be part of the victims package include an overarching communication , the Lisbonisation of the 2001 framework decision on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings , a proposal on civil protection measures and , if necessary , a proposal on criminal protection measures .
This will be put on the table of this House in May next year .
We cannot just go ahead and put our ideas on paper .
All our proposals must be accompanied by a thorough impact assessment .
We need to take this very seriously , aiming for sound studies with real added value .
That is what we are doing at the moment .
We are finalising the impact assessment in order to determine the details of any actions on legislative and practical measures , with the aim of legal certainty and rapid and efficient protection measures .
Having said that , I would also like to inform this Parliament that , to date , four opinions have been sent by national parliaments on the protection order : positive ones from the Italian , Greek and Portuguese parliaments and a negative opinion from the German Bundesrat arguing that the directive goes beyond the scope of Article 82 , as it covers non-criminal measures and the prevention of crime .
It has been rejected on the basis of subsidiarity .
We are in the middle of a very complicated issue .
By carrying out a serious analysis before putting the legal and non-legal proposals on the table , I will try to propose measures which are sound enough not to victimise victims a second time when it comes to protection measures .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
In Romania , domestic violence incidents are estimated to affect 1 200 000 people every year , yet only 1 % of the victims of violence are brave enough to report it to the authorities .
Frequent domestic tension , brawls and beatings turn family members into traumatised victims who are forced to accept this situation as being the norm .
Violence affects a child 's normal , harmonious development .
Studies show that the pattern of violent behaviour is passed down from one generation to another in 75 % of cases .
Stockholm syndrome must be treated , but not through feeble reforms , as is happening in Romania .
Proactive measures are required to combat this phenomenon , along with amending the relevant legislative framework and establishing dialogue and cooperation between all the state institutions with powers in this area and civil society .
In this respect , the European Protection Order must be a strong instrument capable of providing a safer haven for victims of violence across Member States ' borders .
This will also include protection against acts of violence committed by groups of people and will apply to all victims of crime , such as victims of human trafficking , female genital mutilation , forced marriages , honour crimes , incest , gender-based violence , as well as witnesses and victims of terrorism and organised crime .
Trafficking in human beings ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Bauer and Mrs Hedh , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings , and protecting victims , repealing Framework Decision 2002 / 629 / JHA - C7-0087 / 2010 - .
co-rapporteur . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to express my gratitude to my co-rapporteur , Ms Hedh , the Council and the Commission and all those who were involved in this demanding work .
The current trafficking situation is worrying .
The estimated volume is several hundreds of thousands of victims inside Europe , the second biggest crime-related business , with an estimated profit of USD 32 million .
There are new trends in trafficking in human beings .
We have more victims in forced labour .
We have more victims coming from Member States and , in addition , we have more children among the victims .
The estimated global share of child victims is between 40 % and 50 % .
A recent report from the OSCE called on countries to change their perception of considering human trafficking as a marginal phenomenon and instead encourage them to recognise it as modern-day slavery on a massive scale .
Combating trafficking in human beings needs a holistic approach , although we only have a limited set of tools .
Our task is to amend the legislation .
The Lisbon Treaty gave us a new legal basis - Article 83 .
This gives us the means to establish a common approach with a view to creating a more dissuasive environment for traffickers and , at the same time , stronger protection for victims .
The proposal , which is a consolidated text agreed upon with the Council and the Commission , broadens the definition of trafficking , bearing in mind that the forms and trends are changing .
The draft gives opportunities for higher penalties , defining a minimum for maximum penalties , encouraging seizing and confiscating the proceeds and assets resulting from trafficking .
The proposal opens the issue of the victimisation of victims , entitling courts not to impose penalties on criminal activities of victims which are committed under duress .
Assistance and support should be provided for victims before , during and for an appropriate time after criminal proceedings , while assistance and support for victims is not made conditional on the victims ' willingness to cooperate in criminal investigations , prosecutions and trials .
The proposal contains a special provision to enhance the protection of children during the investigation and assistance .
The draft directive also has a provision on the European Anti-Trafficking Coordinator who , in the future , could contribute to a more comprehensive , more coherent and more coordinated anti-trafficking policy .
co-rapporteur . - ( SV ) In 2010 , people are being bought and sold as slaves in Europe .
This is happening despite the fact that slavery was prohibited more than 250 years ago .
They are being forced into prostitution , forced labour or begging .
They suddenly find themselves with an owner , who they absurdly enough often believe they are indebted to .
Human trafficking is one of the most serious crimes in the world and , unfortunately , it is growing in extent all the time .
It is a serious violation of the human rights which we in the EU defend fiercely and fight every day to uphold .
I would therefore like to begin by thanking Mrs Malmström for producing a legislative proposal on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings so quickly .
I would also like to thank my fellow Member from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , Mrs Bauer , for her excellent cooperation , and all of the shadow rapporteurs who have worked on the directive .
Finally , a big thank you to all of the other members of staff , who have done a fantastic job .
Human trafficking is currently the fastest growing cross-border crime .
According to the UN report ' Trafficking in persons ' for 2009 , human trafficking is the activity that provides the second-largest income for criminal networks after arms trafficking .
It is absolutely clear that no country can solve the problem of human trafficking on its own .
Trafficking in human beings is going on in all countries in Europe and the human traffickers move their victims across national borders every day .
We therefore need to work together , and our legislation in this area needs to be as harmonised as possible .
Therefore , the proposal for an EU Anti-Trafficking Coordinator , who will review and coordinate the EU 's work together with the national coordinators , is also a good one .
In order to tackle the problem of human trafficking , we need to have penalties that reflect the seriousness of the crime and that really hurt those who are making money out of trafficking in human beings .
I think that we have made some progress with the proposals for penalties contained in the legislative proposal .
It has also been proposed that the Member States should , in a legally certain manner , seize the human traffickers ' assets gained from their crime .
However , it is not enough to punish the perpetrators .
Protection for victims of human trafficking must also improve .
Without protection for victims , we will never be able to prosecute the human traffickers .
Victims must receive the help they need and it is important , above all , to create a safe environment that will enable them to choose to cooperate with the police .
A passage is also proposed concerning enhanced protection for children who are victims of human trafficking , and that is something that I am very pleased about .
Since 79 % of victims of human trafficking are women and because sexual exploitation is by far the most usual type of human trafficking , it is crucial to view the legislation from a gender perspective and for all measures that are proposed to be analysed from the point of view of gender .
Ultimately , if we are ever to get to grips with this problem , we must do something about the uneven distribution of power between men and women .
Inequality between men and women is a contributory cause of the vulnerability that leads to human trafficking .
In order to really tackle the problem of human trafficking , all Member States must put a great deal of effort into preventive work .
In principle , this is a matter of reducing the demand in our countries for services provided by victims of human trafficking .
If we can reduce demand , then access to services will also reduce .
This means that we must deal with those who make human trafficking profitable .
We therefore proposed that it should be mandatory for all Member States to criminalise those who knowingly use the services of victims of human trafficking .
Under current EU legislation , it is a punishable offence for employers to exploit victims of human trafficking .
The same principle ought to apply to individuals who exploit victims .
Unfortunately , we did not succeed in getting this proposal accepted .
Thus , the Member States will not be forced to criminalise these people , but they will have to report on the measures they have taken to tackle demand for services provided by victims of human trafficking .
However , we have put this issue on the agenda , and at EU level we received support for our proposal from the relevant committees in Parliament as well as from experts , the police and voluntary organisations .
I think that , with the agreement that we are to vote on today , we have come a good way along the road .
Let us now stand together to put a stop to the trafficking in human beings in Europe , which is a modern form of slavery .
We must not give up , because people 's right to decide when it comes to their own life and their own bodies is a human right that cannot be bought and sold for money like shoelaces or bananas .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me start by recalling that this is indeed an historic text we will adopt today - hopefully - in the vote in a few minutes .
This is the first EU criminal law instrument after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
I think we can be satisfied with the agreement that we have today .
It is a balanced compromise between the institutions .
I am aware , of course , that Parliament , as represented by the rapporteurs , and the Commission would have preferred some different phrasing in some paragraphs .
Globally , however , this is a good result which is fully in line with the objectives of Parliament , of the Council and of the Commission , namely , to fight human trafficking , this horrible modern slavery , this horrible crime which is not worthy of Europe in 2010 and which is a grave violation of the fundamental rights of so many citizens .
I have met some of these victims : children , men and many women in the sexual slavery business .
Their stories are , of course , horrible .
Today , when this directive is adopted , we will have a better tool to help them .
This is , indeed , a good Christmas present .
I would really like to thank Parliament , in particular , the two rapporteurs , Ms Bauer and Ms Hedh , the shadow rapporteurs and all the others who made it possible to reach an agreement .
There are several examples of the European Parliament helping to improve the directive .
I would note the specific provision concerning the status and rights of unaccompanied minors who are victims of trafficking in Article 14 .
That was introduced at your request , and we agree that this made the directive better .
There are other examples as well .
I would like to mention one point where I regret that the Commission proposal was not supported by the Council , although we had your support .
However , it was not possible to reach an agreement in the Council regarding extraterritorial jurisdiction for offences committed abroad by habitual residents of the EU .
I still believe that a provision guaranteeing that all persons living with us in Europe who commit trafficking offences in other countries could be prosecuted in the EU would have added considerable value .
However , it was not possible .
The issue will be back again when we deal with the directive on child exploitation and child pornography .
Extraterritorial jurisdiction for habitual residents will be even more important when we discuss the possibilities of bringing paedophile sex tourists who live in Europe to justice .
I believe that we should together continue , in talks with the Council , to insist that such a provision should be included in the directive .
As I said , we have all done very good work together .
Today , we have a very important tool to fight trafficking , protect victims , and make sure that we send the message that this is a very severe crime .
It should be punished accordingly and it is now defined in the same way in all Member States .
Again , thank you for your contribution .
Madam President , Commissioner , trafficking in human beings is a harsh reality in the EU .
Sexual exploitation is the main objective of the mafias that traffic human beings , followed by forced labour , domestic service , forced marriages , exploitation of children for begging , illegal adoption and the removal of organs , which are other scourges and aspects of the problem .
The new powers that Article 63 of the Treaty of Lisbon gives Parliament must be used in order to strengthen EU legislation in this field .
This includes , among many other issues , calling for the classification of crimes that are still not covered by some European criminal legislation .
We need to strengthen our legislation to protect victims of trafficking from two perspectives : prevention and protection , and integration into society and the labour market .
We need to establish specific measures to protect minors ; to criminalise traffickers and middlemen ; to establish measures to discourage demand and confiscate the proceeds of the crime ; to establish the criminal responsibility of any legal persons that take part in any phase of trafficking ; to step up employment inspection and penalties for the exploitation of employees and illegal hiring of irregular immigrants ; to strengthen the role of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders and of the immigration liaison officers in detecting the channels used by traffickers and their modus operandi ; and finally , strengthening the role of the joint investigation teams of the European Police Office ( Europol ) in combating the mafias .
I would like to conclude by adding that the figure of the EU Anti-Trafficking Coordinator could make a significant contribution to achieving the objectives that I have mentioned , although his powers and capacities must be clearly defined in order to prevent actions from being duplicated or interference with the functions entrusted to Europol .
Madam President , I would like to begin by applauding Mrs Bauer and Mrs Hedh for their comprehensive treatment of this extremely important issue .
Human trafficking is a reprehensible phenomenon in today 's civilised society .
It is the third most lucrative illicit trade in the world , after arms and drugs trafficking .
This so-called modern form of slavery is a serious crime which violates fundamental human rights .
The Treaty of Lisbon has enhanced the activity of the European Union in various areas of criminal law , including the fight against human trafficking .
The European Parliament plays an important role here as joint lawmaker .
Experience shows , however , that the current legal framework is not sufficiently effective and we must do even more to protect human rights .
We must adopt preventive measures targeting human trafficking itself .
The greatest attention must be paid to children and women , as the most vulnerable groups .
We must do all we can to contribute to dignified living conditions for potential victims of this crime , who tend to be people living on the margins of society .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , despite increasing efforts to combat trafficking in human beings , this complicated problem continues to flourish and expand across Europe .
This is the reason for intensified actions and adequate measures to protect individuals from the practice of trafficking for different purposes , to prosecute traffickers and to provide effective remedies for victims at national and EU level .
The current legal framework will effectively deal with complex transnational problems and will coordinate joint efforts at both national and EU level when addressing this profound human rights abuse and a particular form of violence against women .
By means of this legal instrument , we make a joint commitment to ensure that women 's rights across Europe are elevated to a priority level , taking into consideration that this wider phenomenon indisputably has a disproportionate impact on women and girls .
I would like to point out another important issue which I propose should be included in this piece of legislation .
It relates to the socio-economic aspects of this widespread problem with European countries or regions where social and economic inequalities are the most important single cause of trafficking .
Thanks to our joint efforts , we have achieved a positive outcome in the provision on the issue related to practices such as illegal adoption .
In conclusion , I would strongly highlight that the primary responsibility for combating trafficking rests with the Member States .
They should take concrete actions to prevent and suppress trafficking and to protect the human rights of trafficked persons , and should play a greater role in addressing this significant problem .
Madam President , let me start by thanking Mrs Hedh and Mrs Bauer for their hard work as co-rapporteurs .
This directive concerns prosecution , prevention and protection in the area of human trafficking .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would have liked to have seen somewhat more thorough work , in particular , as regards protecting the victims of human trafficking .
I refer here particularly to the right of residence in a country after the victim has been trafficked and , perhaps , rescued .
How do we ensure that victims really can build a new life ?
Now , that question has not been sufficiently regulated by this directive .
Here , we are merely talking about a form of temporary residence permit , after which you do not know whether or not you will be sent back to the place from which you have been trafficked .
We are therefore pinning our hopes on the directive being recast , so that we can sort out some solution or another .
We are hoping that that will enable us to start giving real help to the victims .
Another aspect that leads to heated debate in this House is the question of whether or not those who use the services of a trafficked individual should be penalised .
However , the majority of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance remain of the opinion that penalising such people only serves to push the trafficked individual into deeper misery , because his or her activity then becomes totally illegal .
I am also pleased to see that , in this directive , Member States will retain freedom of choice on that score , but I would like to ask any Member State dealing with such issues the following : how should we then empower the victim ?
Madam President , I consider the improved legal measures for the fight against human trafficking , together with the European Protection Order , to be extremely important , as they represent a further step towards protecting women and children in particular from violence .
A large part of the text is devoted to the protection of child victims and to helping these victims , who are the most vulnerable section of the population .
I am delighted that there has been a compromise with the Council , and that this text is sufficiently emphatic while making it possible to retain the key provisions of substantive criminal law .
In my opinion , a European level legal measure criminalising clients who use the services of trafficked persons could be highly problematic .
I would therefore like to express my thanks for this directive , which deserves our full support .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs .
They have done a huge amount of work and , as a result , definite progress has been made .
It could be said that the draft directive is extremely important for the hundreds of thousands of victims of human trafficking and it should put an end to their lawless status .
It goes as far as to say that not only protection , but also prevention and , above all , compensation , should play a part .
It has a broad area of application relating to human trafficking .
We believe this to be right , even though we , of course , have difficulty with the problem of begging - which I openly admit - and also in many respects with illegal migration .
It is right that references to gender are to be found throughout this directive and - what to me is the most important point - that the welfare of children is taken into account in the case of unaccompanied minors .
I would also like to say from a German point of view that in this respect , we have a lot of ground to make up and I am very pleased that this aspect concerning the children plays a very important part in this draft directive .
Another point worthy of recognition is the fact that , when dealing with this problem , special account must be taken of pregnant women and people suffering from illness or disability .
Preventive measures , such as the training of public officials and the introduction of coordinators in the Member States , constitute major steps in the right direction .
If we vote in favour of this today , we deserve to be congratulated .
I also hope that this subject will be taken more seriously in the Member States , because in any case , they now have to present reports .
Perhaps that will also go some way towards achieving this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , according to estimates from international organisations and police forces , trafficking in human beings is now globally the second largest source of profit for organised crime , after drug trafficking .
It is thought that around 30 million people are victims of organ trafficking , prostitution and forced labour .
This means that the fight against this enormous criminal phenomenon is , above all , a battle for the safety of our citizens against illegal immigration and against crime that generates crime .
Faced with a problem of these proportions , Europe must rightly take drastic measures against those who exploit human beings in various ways .
The fight against this phenomenon requires cooperation between Member States and between police forces but , above all , certainty regarding the punishment for traffickers .
It must also be remembered that many people are exploited because they do not have decent living conditions in their countries of origin : they live in poverty and in desperation and are ready to do anything - even leave their own country for the promise of a better life , which , alas , is never to be found .
As well as preventing crime and protecting the victims of trafficking , Europe must also make a greater and more deliberate effort to ensure that these people can find acceptable living conditions in their own countries .
The basic principle of European political action must be to ' help them in their own homes ' , so that our efforts are directed not only at suppression , but also at prevention .
Madam President , human trafficking is , quite rightly , a pejorative term because it describes a disgusting practice .
Human beings , disproportionately women , are treated as though they were commodities , even livestock , to be transported , used and often abused .
However , the term is used too narrowly .
Very little legal economic migration is truly voluntary .
Most people , other things remaining equal , would prefer to remain with their own people in their own countries .
They migrate for economic enrichment or because economic forces have removed their means of maintaining their livelihoods .
Migration is the by-product of global capitalism that sees people not as human beings , but as factors of production that are expendable .
Economic migration is as much a form of human trafficking as illicit migration organised by criminal networks .
The human traffickers are the governments that quite deliberately unleash supposedly blind economic forces in the service of global capitalism .
Economies should exist to serve the people .
People do not exist to serve economic forces .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the gender dimension of this proposal for a directive facilitates the instrument to defend the most vulnerable people .
The fact that there are numerous references to the trafficking of human beings in the Treaty of Lisbon confirms the immediacy and the seriousness of the problem .
Article 5 ( 3 ) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union bans the practice , recognising it as a form of slavery and forced labour .
The rapporteurs have extended the scope of the protection , with a particular focus on children and women , and on the vulnerable situations that make this form of slavery easier to carry out .
The report is also correct in remarking that trafficking in human beings also hides illegal forms of adoption and forced marriages .
I feel I must point out the difficulties that border EU Member States have in fighting illegal immigration .
Above all , Italy , my own country , has to deal on a daily basis with instances of trafficking that spill out onto our roads and our spaces .
We need to communicate and therefore raise awareness so as to involve civil society .
The report , as tabled , provides for the careful protection of victims , with the aim of eradicating the phenomenon .
I should therefore like to show my support for this proposal , as tabled , and also congratulate the two rapporteurs .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur , I should like to thank the rapporteurs and say that I think this directive is extraordinarily important because it is the first time that the European Union has taken legally binding action in the fight against the trafficking of human beings .
Fifty years after the United Nations convention , there are still hundreds of thousands of people in our civilised Europe - mainly women and children - who are reduced to slavery .
For the first time , the EU is equipped with a single instrument to fight against the trafficking of human beings , whether for reasons of sexual or labour exploitation , including forced begging .
Our group had three priorities : to hit traffickers with uniform , more severe sanctions , including confiscating assets and using them to support the victims of trafficking ; to ensure a high level of protection and social rehabilitation for victims , with free legal representation and immunity from prosecution for crimes committed in connection with being trafficked ; and to promote the crucial role of the non-governmental organisations , both secular and religious , that work to support the victims .
However , I am hoping for a revision of the 2004 directive on the resident permit for victims .
I would also underline that in the proposal , we provide for the safeguarding of children through strengthened measures and I support Commissioner Malmström 's call for further measures against sex tourism and child pornography .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I , too , would like to express my sincere thanks to the two rapporteurs .
Thank you for your cooperation .
I think we have put together a good document today .
We can take a decision on something today that can really put paid to human trafficking .
However , the challenge will be getting the Member States to put this directive into practice .
It is crucial that the enforcement bodies , such as the police and the courts , are made aware of how to actually recognise and to prosecute this crime .
This is vital , and it is also very important to raise public awareness - as Mrs Matera has already mentioned - so that people are aware of the fact that human trafficking is happening within the EU .
It is not just happening somewhere else ; theoretically , it could also be happening right outside my front door .
Another important point that , as Liberals from Germany in particular , we had difficulty with - although this has now been resolved in a positive manner by empowering the Member States - is the criminalisation of people who make use of this sort of service , because if someone is liable to prosecution , he can refuse to make a statement in a subsequent trial .
If someone makes use of this right to refuse to give evidence - for example , a man who had been with a prostitute who had been endangered through human trafficking - information will be lost that could be used further to finally uncover this network of human traffickers .
It is therefore a good thing that this rests with the Member States , and I would like to thank you very much for your cooperation .
( NL ) Madam President , the basis of many of the current developments was laid down as far back as hundreds of years ago .
I am thinking here of the Industrial Revolution , the advent of representative democracy and the abolition of slavery .
The current fight against human trafficking is a continuation of the struggle that William Wilberforce once began .
Unfortunately , human trafficking is one of the worst covert problems in the European Union .
It undermines the fundamental rights of our people and the foundations of our democracy .
For that reason , I fully support the present report .
However , as I understand it , the proposed sentencing tariff for reoffenders will , unfortunately , remain low .
The current proposal does not require that any particularly heavy penalties be imposed on human traffickers who have been arrested a number of times .
That seems to me to be an unfortunate state of affairs .
I am in favour of an approach where a trafficker who is arrested for a second or a third offence must receive a mandatory life sentence .
( PT ) Madam President , it is important for everyone to join in the fight against trafficking in human beings , with a view to eradicating it .
This kind of modern-day slavery is known to be highly lucrative for criminal organisations , which conduct it in a multitude of ways , from sexual exploitation and forced labour to the illegal trade in human organs , or even domestic work and other kinds of undeclared work .
These practices - which particularly involve women and , increasingly , children - therefore need to be fought effectively , by criminalising the perpetrators of such crimes and providing support for the victims to escape from their dependency on the criminal organisations .
That is also why it is vital to combat the causes of this situation , by creating the conditions for lifting people out of poverty , promoting policies for the fair redistribution of wealth , ensuring access to essential public services , and promoting the creation of jobs with rights and pay levels that afford a decent living .
That is also a way forward which it is essential to promote here in the European Union .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it has been proven that the most effective way of combating trafficking in human beings is to set an example by imposing strict penalties on traffickers .
I strongly recommend , as we tend here in Parliament to set targets and to say ' 20 % ' or ' 30 % ' , that we recommend a standard European legislation which sets a minimum prison sentence for human traffickers of 10-15 years , which cannot be reduced or replaced by a fine .
You will see how effective that will be .
Standard EU legislation and a minimum term of imprisonment of 10-15 years .
I think it will be the most effective measure we have ever taken .
We cannot adopt measures here on climate change and environmental pollution without setting quantifiable targets for combating this crime .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I must congratulate Mrs Bauer and Mrs Hedh on the excellent work they have done in this report .
Trafficking in human beings is a disgrace to our society and requires a strong , concerted reaction from everyone .
The organised crime behind sexual exploitation , forced labour , the trade in the removal of human organs and other ignoble practices must be fought effectively , but primarily it must be prevented .
What is at stake is the defence of human rights and the protection of the most vulnerable individuals , women and children in particular .
Experience has shown that the legal framework in force is not effective enough and that the European Union has to work harder .
Closer cross-border cooperation is essential , including the effective sharing of information and good practice .
This proposal rightly emphasises a victim-centred approach .
Policies in this field should cover aspects linked to social affairs and social inclusion , such as the social rehabilitation of victims .
Madam President , this is no ordinary day for Parliament .
We should be proud of the historic step that has been taken today , both on human trafficking and , indeed , on the European Protection Order .
For the first time , criminal law and all the tools we have at our disposal after Lisbon have been brought into action on one of the most complex and horrific problems that we have to face collectively .
We are proud , in the S & D Group , of the work done by Anna Hedh and her co-rapporteur , Ms Bauer , and we are proud of the ' firsts ' that are marked by this report .
For the first time , the EU will define , in a binding legislative act , a high level of sanctions against trafficking .
For the first time , there are strong guarantees concerning the protection of victims , special attention for child victims , the non-prosecution of victims who break the law due to their enslavement and the recognition of the role and support of NGOs in the process .
Finally , the complexity of this cause in relation to children and women - because we were moving into criminal law - should not have been a reason to stop a very good report .
We are very proud in our group that this has happened across the House .
It is a very proud day for the whole Parliament .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , with this directive , we are taking a huge step towards combating human trafficking in an efficient manner .
The rapporteurs have achieved a good result in relation to minimum thresholds for sentences , jurisdiction , non-prosecution and statutory limitation - not all of this is perhaps quite what we would have liked to have seen , but it is nevertheless a very practicable solution .
Anything else would also , to some extent , have disrupted national criminal law in the legal systems of the Member States .
We need to be more restrained in this regard .
I am also convinced that we would have done ourselves a disservice by making customers of prostitutes liable to prosecution , because this is not something we would have prosecuted otherwise .
However , I would like to come back to the general question of criminal law and criminal procedure in the Member States .
This is a very sensitive area of national legislation , which has developed over hundreds of years .
We should therefore tread very carefully where this is concerned .
I am also mentioning this in view of the imminent European Investigation Order .
However , we have today established a good basis for cross-border cooperation in criminal matters .
I am pleased that we have now taken this step .
( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if we know that several hundred thousand people are sold as slaves each year to Western Europe , we have a duty to take action .
I am therefore very pleased that an agreement has successfully been reached between the Council and Parliament on this new directive on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings .
The new legislation is significantly stronger than the current legislation and it is a major victory in the fight to ensure better help and protection for victims . At the same time , the hunt for the unscrupulous people behind this will become even more targeted and efficient .
I am pleased that the directive emphasises the fact that the victims shall be protected from any form of prosecution or punishment .
When someone has been forced to carry out criminal acts , it is the people behind this who must be punished , not the victims .
The European Parliament also believes it is important that the help being offered to victims is always provided in a language and in a format that they can understand .
Moreover , we must not forget that voluntary and non-profit-making organisations play a crucial role when it comes to both preventing and combating human trafficking .
Today could be an important day for decency , as the European Parliament will hopefully vote in favour of this new legislation , which will provide a much needed helping hand to the victims and result in an intensive hunt for the people behind these crimes .
( SK ) Madam President , the punishment of legal persons for crimes connected with human trafficking helps to intensify the fight against this modern form of slavery .
Of course , the punishment of a legal entity must not exclude the punishment of specific natural persons who have taken part in this activity in any way .
Apart from the imposition of financial penalties , effective measures against legal entities include , in my opinion , exclusion from the right to public grants or assistance , suspension of commercial activities and , above all , court decisions on the closing down of said entity .
Member States must ensure the adoption of legal measures so that national bodies can decide not to pursue or impose punishments on the victims of human trafficking , and so that they can continue with investigations even when victims withdraw their statements .
Last but not least , I would like to point out that the victims of these appalling crimes often continue to be victimised , and find themselves in very precarious circumstances , which is the reason for special protection and support .
Special attention must also be paid to underage victims , for whom it is necessary to find even more comprehensive and lasting solutions .
( CS ) Madam President , all of the reports discussed this morning have one thing in common - the protection of fundamental human rights in the European Union and a common European process in this area .
It is almost beyond belief that in the EU in the 21st century , several hundred thousand people a year fall victim to human trafficking , most of them women and children .
It is a sad fact that in the current era , this problem is highly topical , and the statistics unfortunately do not indicate that it is in decline .
Quite the reverse .
The perpetrators of this serious crime earn astronomical profits from human trafficking , estimated at up to USD 32 billion annually .
The protection of human rights and human dignity must be a clear priority in our work , and a common approach by the Member States is essential .
I therefore fully support the proposal for a directive , which will introduce further instruments for combating this type of crime , and more effective protection for the victims , compared to existing legal measures , and which will attempt to achieve a more coordinated approach at EU level .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that , in the final version of the report , involvement in criminal organisations for offences relating to the trafficking of human beings is an aggravating factor that doubles the minimum penalties from five to ten years in prison .
In addition , Article 6a makes explicit reference to the seizure and confiscation of instrumentalities and proceeds from this kind of offence .
This approach - which I believe is absolutely right and I hope may also be carried over to other legislation - looks the facts in the face and recognises that the trafficking of people for various forms of exploitation , such as , for example , prostitution , criminal activities and organ trafficking , is carried out by international criminal organisations .
I am also pleased with the provisions of Article 7 , which directs Member States not to prosecute people for their involvement in criminal activities that they have been compelled to commit as victims of trafficking .
Often , in fact , those who suffer the violence of trafficking not only suffer injuries , but also the insult of being incriminated for doing what they were compelled to do , prostitution being a typical example .
Therefore , I support the report and I should like to thank the two rapporteurs .
( FR ) Madam President , one cannot but endorse the draft directive by the two rapporteurs , which should be extended to all Member States for a stronger and firm jurisdiction in order to prosecute and severely punish the perpetrators of the crime that is human trafficking , and also to protect , help and rehabilitate victims , who are overwhelmingly women and children .
However , to be more effective and credible in this fight , Europe , as the heir to the history of the European States , should recognise the slave trade and slavery as crimes against humanity , as some Member States have done , and I want to mention France in particular .
( IT ) Madam President , the plague of trafficking in human beings is a phenomenon that has taken on particularly worrying dimensions .
Whereas originally , it essentially involved women and children being recruited for prostitution , now the victims are people of all ages and both sexes , who are placed into a cycle of exploitation that is not necessarily sexual but also economic .
Organised crime networks take advantage of social vulnerability , family difficulties , domestic violence and disabilities to favour immigration , exploiting the people involved through the use of force , abuse and threats .
We are in favour of the proposed directive .
We need to increase the penalties for traffickers of human beings , confiscating their assets .
In addition , there should be a concerted effort by all Member States to strengthen policies preventing trafficking in human beings and training people to identify victims or potential victims .
Madam President , this report was certainly a major step along the road to fighting trafficking in human beings in general and trafficking in women in particular .
The next major step should be to explore the crystal clear relationship and connection between trafficking in women and prostitution .
On the one hand , we rightly talk about trafficking in women as a brutal , terrible crime that we should fight .
On the other hand , we talk about prostitution as ' sex work ' , as a service .
We talk about pimps and brothel-keepers as entrepreneurs , and we normalise prostitution .
What I want to say is that the client who goes to a brothel , or the client who asks for the services of a prostitute , has basically no way of knowing whether she is a ' normal ' prostitute - if that even exists since it is another matter whether there is ever consent to prostitution - or a trafficked woman .
There is therefore no way of really attacking trafficking without attacking the sex industry .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you for this important debate .
I would like to inform you that today , the Commission will appoint an Anti-Trafficking Coordinator , who will take office in the next month .
That person will improve coordination and coherence between the EU institutions and agencies and the Member States , will help ensure that best practices are shared in the different Member States , develop existing and forthcoming policies and be a contact for third countries .
This is very important .
By bringing together prevention , law enforcement and victim prevention , this person can ensure that appropriate methods to combat trafficking are used and mobilised appropriately .
I will ask the Anti-Trafficking Coordinator to liaise closely with the European Parliament and to keep you informed on these developments .
The criminalisation issue merits a debate in itself , but it is stated in Article 19 of the directive that the Commission will , in some years , submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council ' assessing the impact of existing national law criminalising the users of services which are the objects of exploitation of trafficking in human beings on the prevention of trafficking in human beings , accompanied , if necessary , by adequate proposals ' .
We will surely come back to this issue and I do not rule out our having further proposals on this .
Having said all this , I think we can be proud of this directive today .
It is a very important tool for fighting trafficking and protecting the victims .
It has given us an important tool , it has shown the world our commitment to fighting modern slavery and it will strengthen our efforts .
I would like to pass on my sincere thanks to the two co-rapporteurs , Ms Bauer and Ms Hedh .
Today 's debate has shown how important your work has been , because you have the support of all the groups .
I would like to congratulate you on that .
Madam President , I would especially like to thank Mrs Malmström for calling the report an historic text .
This statement is probably accurate , as it is the first time that we are adopting a criminal law based on the Treaty of Lisbon , but I should also hope that this is a great step forward in ensuring that not a single perpetrator , not a single perpetrator of human trafficking , can remain unpunished .
What was especially reassuring to see in the debate that took place here was the presence of a political will .
I myself have frightfully often seen , and have sometimes myself shared the view , that there is a lack of political will to make any serious progress in this area .
What I have heard today was the opposite of that , and I would like to thank my fellow Members for exhibiting this political will to take a tremendous step forward in relation to human trafficking .
We have received two motions for amendment from the EFD , and I would like to ask my fellow Members not to support them , as they intend to reduce the penalty to a minimum .
I would also like to thank Mrs Tzavela for requesting the very opposite , that we make the penalty even stricter .
I am convinced that this is an important step , but today 's step must be followed by an array of subsequent steps .
We have much work to do in combating demand .
We can certainly not solve all the problems related to supply , but there is much we could do about demand , and I have a feeling that in this area , the time is not yet ripe , that here , the political will is perhaps insufficient for taking a step forward .
I am convinced that the scope of the law will sooner or later need to be extended to third-country perpetrators residing in the EU with a residence permit , as I am also convinced that we will need to review the directive on temporary residence permits to ensure legislative consistency in this area .
Thank you very much for your support .
Madam President , I would like to offer my thanks for all of the excellent contributions and the support that we have received in the Chamber for this legislation to prevent human trafficking .
I now hope that , in the future , we may even improve on this legislation and tighten our common EU rules against human trafficking .
However , we must not forget to go on working continually on what are the real reasons for , and root of , all trafficking in human beings , namely poverty , social exclusion and demand .
We must apply our energies to these problems , above all , so that we can tackle the problem of human trafficking .
As I said earlier , we must not give up .
People 's right to decide when it comes to their own life and their own bodies is a human right that cannot be bought and sold for money like any old commodity .
The fight against human trafficking in Europe and the rest of the world will continue .
Thank you for all your support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , in a few minutes .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Trafficking in human beings - in the various forms that this can take , including sexual exploitation , illegal trading in human organs , forced labour or illegal adoptions - represents a serious violation of the human rights set out in the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The extent of this problem is striking , and experience has shown that the European Union 's current legal framework on the issue is not effective enough .
Cooperation between Parliament , the Commission and the Council therefore plays a strategic role in developing a European policy to address this problem effectively .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthened the powers of the European Union regarding judicial and police cooperation between Member States in criminal matters .
However , I believe that the penalties for traffickers in human beings still need to be increased and that the assistance given to victims of violence needs to be developed yet further .
I agree that , in order to discourage demand , it would be a good idea for the European Union and the Member States to make a greater commitment to awareness-raising campaigns in the countries of origin , transit and destination of trafficking .
Lastly , I support the appointment of a European Anti-Trafficking Coordinator to manage the European Union 's work and policies in this specific sector .
I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs for the work they have done , because this historic directive is a very important step in combating the scale of trafficking in human beings , by laying down clear levels of penalties and sanctions .
Although numerous EU and national laws have already been adopted and multiannual political commitments have been made in this area , it is calculated that several hundred thousand people are trafficked each year within the EU and beyond its borders .
This demonstrates that combating trafficking in human beings , in particular , women and children , remains a huge problem and one of the worst violations of human rights .
I would like to emphasise that considering the fact that children are more vulnerable and that they face a greater risk of becoming victims of trafficking in human beings , particular attention should be paid to this group of victims .
Given that trafficking in human beings is a modern form of slavery and an extremely profitable business for organised crime , more attention must be paid to preventive efforts , the protection of victims and social issues .
Furthermore , a hostile environment must be created for human traffickers .
The level of penalties and sanctions for people who profit from trafficking in human beings should reflect the gravity of the offence committed and act as an effective deterrent to such activities .
In addition to penalties , the Member States should include such sanctions as the seizure of assets and take the necessary measures to seize and confiscate instrumentalities and proceeds from the offences , because then these offences would not be economically viable .
in writing . - Today 's vote on human trafficking comes at a crucial juncture in the ongoing fight against this form of modern-day slavery .
As Irish director Ciarán O 'Connor outlined last year in his film ' Trafficked ' , which documented the ongoing impact of trafficking in Ireland , it is a crime which is becoming more advanced and more ruthless as authorities fight harder to drive it away .
Measures such as this are crucial in order to give authorities the tools and common purpose they need to tackle this Europe-wide problem .
At a national level , legislatures need to come down hard on those convicted , and resources must be given to police forces so that it is not for lack of finance or manpower that trafficking is allowed to continue .
However , this is a crime without borders , and as such , it is European legislation as much as national laws that will truly put an end to slavery in Europe .
The European Union 's action on trafficking in human beings cannot be limited to denouncing it , but recognises the need for precise , ex-post actions to ensure that those responsible for such a barbaric practice do not go unpunished .
These actions include the harmonisation of penalties , as well as the coordination of the interventions provided for by the EU with those already implemented by other international organisations , such as the United Nations .
The ex-post actions must be combined with preventive actions , which are just as important .
Above all , there must be close cooperation between judicial and financial police authorities to ensure that the economic systems that revolve around these criminal activities are blocked at source and all ramifications cut off .
Furthermore , it is increasingly important to have accurate and reliable databases that distinguish between the various specificities and provide a starting point for a variety of interventions that contribute to hitting each individual case right at its core .
Through this proposal for a directive , the European Union is aiming to attack the entire supply chain of an inhumane trade that tramples on its principles and founding values .
in writing . - The phenomenon of organised crime is something that the European Union needs to tackle head on .
We need to be seen as proactive rather than reactive to situations of human trafficking .
It is important that we research new emerging ways of human trafficking , in order to intercept and pre-empt emerging human trafficking routes .
As a member of the S & D Group , I would like to emphasise that one of our key objectives is to fight cross-border crime .
I therefore voted in favour of this legislative initiative .
As legislators of the European Union , we must ensure respect for the right to human dignity , the right to integrity , prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and the prohibition of slavery and forced labour .
We cannot allow the trafficking and subsequent auctioning of children to continue .
Traffickers are also using Internet recruitment .
This is very alarming as many children have access to the Internet .
in writing . - Trafficking in human beings is a crime against human dignity that ruins the lives of many children and women throughout the world .
The current proposal is a breakthrough because it puts victims first and tackles the problem in a complex , cross-border manner .
These new measures will facilitate the reconnaissance and prosecution of trafficking cases and will encourage victims to cooperate with the authorities .
This will be binding legislation , subject to state enforcement .
This type of regulation is the only one that can make a difference for all vulnerable people who might fall prey to trafficking .
I also call on Member States to follow the proposal in this text and punish those who knowingly accept the services of a victim of trafficking .
Fighting demand is key to fighting the roots of trafficking .
This report is an excellent proposal , morally and professionally , and I congratulate my distinguished colleagues , Bauer and Hedh , for this .
I am particularly happy that the Council and FEMM and LIBE Committees managed to create a text that is backed by all relevant institutions in the EU .
I hope that it will soon be formally adopted and transposed into national law .
The victims are eager to see it .
The directive relating to human trafficking is an important step forward , because human trafficking is a reality , even in Europe .
What is most important is to prevent human trafficking by addressing the problems of poverty and inequality and by making people more aware of the issue .
It is vitally important to recognise the existence of human trafficking and to help its victims .
Victims can be women or men , children or adults .
An employee on a construction site could be a victim of human trafficking .
The situation surrounding a Roma beggar may match the human trafficking criteria if it is organised and based on compulsion .
Unfortunately , often human trafficking is linked to sexualised practices : women and girls end up as prostitutes or they are forced into it .
It is important that the victims of human trafficking are given the chance of protection and legal advice .
in writing . - As a result of the harmful tendencies affecting Roma communities - such as low levels of education , deep poverty , marginalisation and discrimination - Roma women and children are extremely vulnerable to trafficking .
This modern-day slavery is deeply rooted in poverty and exclusion and , therefore , the elimination of the unacceptable living conditions that many Roma face must be a major strategic objective .
Furthermore , the EU and the authorities of the Member States must take much more vigorous action to combat this phenomenon , particularly regarding the eradication of organised crime and the protection of groups at risk , namely women and minors of minority origin .
This initiative aims to adopt a broader concept of what should be considered trafficking and I believe that exploitation for begging , including the use of a trafficked-dependent person for begging , regardless of his or her relationship with the perpetrators , must fall within this scope .
Penalties should be more severe when the offence is committed against persons vulnerable on grounds of age , gender , pregnancy , health conditions , or disability , and must pay due account of cases where the victim has been subjected to torture , the forced administration of drugs or medication , rape or other serious forms of psychological , physical and sexual violence .
Every year in Europe , hundreds of thousands of people are sold as if they were objects and , fortunately , today we feel an ever-increasing need to protect the victims of trafficking in human beings from the use of false documents , from prostitution and from immigration .
When we speak about trafficking in human beings , we must think about not only sexual exploitation , forced labour and illegal adoptions , but also the problem of trafficking in organs , which is becoming an increasingly widespread crime .
The European legal structure is not effective enough and the European Union and Member States must do more .
We need an established structure for coordination between the institutions and the agencies of the EU , as well as those of the Member States and international partners .
In today 's debate , I should like to touch on the problem of child trafficking .
We should make every effort to develop and improve the legal and institutional systems and childcare systems in all Member States .
The scope of activities covered by the term human trafficking should be revised and extended .
This is the only way we will be able to prevent problems such as : 1 ) commercial adoption , or , in other words , private adoption involving the relinquishment of rights to the child before the family courts , most frequently for payment ; 2 ) pregnant women leaving the country and returning with no child ; 3 ) the disappearance of children whose parents have died in countries affected by armed conflicts .
Given that a good many crimes are now committed via the Internet , it is worth appointing special interdisciplinary teams specialised in fighting this type of crime .
They would deal not only with the surveillance of criminal milieu , but also the collection of evidence by means of monitoring the financial situations of individuals involved in trafficking children .
We should train public officials and make them more aware of the situation of children in families from which children may be trafficked .
This applies particularly to services working with families receiving state assistance due to difficult material circumstances .
The only way we will have any chance of eliminating or at least limiting human trafficking and , in particular , child trafficking , is by means of multilateral and harmonised measures , taken at the level of the 27 Member States .
( The sitting was suspended for a few minutes )
Welcome
I am delighted to inform you that there is an official delegation in the Chamber made up of religious leaders , in particular , from the Christian world in the Middle East , from Iraq and Lebanon .
( Applause )
We are aware of the difficult situation in the region for many Christian communities , and consequently we are delighted to express our support .
You are therefore very welcome to the European Parliament .
1 .
Mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund : Portugal - floods ; France - Xynthia ( storm ) (
2 .
Draft amending budget No 9 / 2010 : EU Solidarity Fund ( floods in Portugal , Xynthia ( storm ) , France ) - Economic recovery : European offshore wind grid system (
3 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : SI / Mura , Slovenia (
4 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG / Germany (
5 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Wielkopolskie Automotive from Poland (
6 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Aragón - Retail trade from Spain (
7 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Comunidad Valenciana - Textiles / Spain (
8 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Comunidad Valenciana - natural stone from Spain (
9 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Lear from Spain (
10 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : H. Cegielski-Poznań from Poland (
11 .
Extension of the scope of Directive 2003 / 109 / EC to beneficiaries of international protection (
12 .
EU-Georgia agreement on facilitation of issuance of visas (
13 .
EU rapid response capability (
14 .
Regulation of trading in financial instruments - ' dark pools ' , etc . (
15 .
Strengthening Chemical , Biological , Radiological and Nuclear Security in the European Union - an EU CBRN Action Plan (
Mr President , chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) risks are inherent to possible terrorist attacks , industrial accidents or natural disasters .
Incidents of this kind , whether accidental or criminal in origin , know no borders and are potentially devastating for human lives , infrastructure , the environment and public health .
They do not occur just in remote areas : we need only recall the recent disaster caused by the leak of toxic sludge from a factory in Hungary and the series of letter-bombs posted from Yemen to various addresses in the United States and Europe .
It is crucial for the European Union to make every effort to develop the necessary cooperation between the Member States ' civilian and military capabilities and resources in order to prevent , detect and respond effectively to CBRN attacks or disasters .
Such cooperation requires a special European crisis-response mechanism , working in collaboration with a European civil protection force .
In fact , this House has long been calling for such a force to be established .
The EU Action Plan therefore needs strengthening .
The existing plan , which the Council approved in 2009 , is weak and , in practice , is not being implemented by all Member States .
It just needs one link to crack for the whole chain of intervention to fail .
It is vital to give the Commission a stronger monitoring , guiding and coordinating role , and the plan urgently needs to be implemented in all Member States .
This report proposes greater civilian-military cooperation in terms of pooling efforts for CBRN disaster prevention , detection , preparation and response .
The EU has to bring all the Member States together to put in place integrated national systems for implementing the plan .
In this respect , the CBRN Action Plan is an opportunity to put the Treaty of Lisbon solidarity clause into practice .
16 .
Good governance and EU regional policy (
17 .
Creation of an immigration liaison officers network (
18 .
Single application procedure for residence and work (
( IT ) Mr President , is it possible to put the list of amendments back on the screen ?
Yes , Mr Speroni , they are looking into what is happening .
However , can you see it on your small screen ?
Yes ?
Well that is something .
Following the vote on the amended proposal :
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , as you are aware , I am just listening and I am looking .
I got the message that I have to sit here and take the message - and it is a clear one - to the college .
I promise you that I will take the message and , of course , it will be an objective one , as there was quite a lot of action .
But my colleague will return to this after a discussion in the college .
Consequently , the proposal shall be sent back to the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , in accordance with Rule 175 ( 56 ) , we need to know whether the Commission is withdrawing this legislative proposal .
Therefore , the proposal is not automatically sent back to the responsible committee .
The Commission needs to decide now whether it is withdrawing its proposal and tabling a new proposal before Parliament .
Mr Cercas , I deduced from the Commissioner 's words that it will go back to the Commission .
That is what I deduced .
We will , however , ask the Commissioner to clarify the Commission 's position .
Commissioner , please clarify the Commission 's position .
Mr President , I must admit my surprise .
( Noise )
We have already been negotiating this text for a year .
For a start , I would like to tell you that we had reached an agreement with the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
I then discovered at the last moment that voting advice had been given that totally contradicted the agreements we had reached .
I discovered that the agreements that we had with the ALDE Group have not been adhered to .
We went to plenary with agreements that had not been honoured .

Secondly , Mr Cercas is proposing that we amend - I would like to be able to speak , otherwise there is no point - the Socialist Group , and Mr Cercas in particular , are proposing that the Commission amend its proposal .
But , Mr Cercas , we have now been discussing this for a year .
You are proposing a number of things .
For a year now , we have failed to reach an agreement . So , what is the point of starting all over again ?
We could debate for 10 years , Mr Cercas , and you would still disagree .
We have tried everything possible and you have never agreed with anyone .
I do not see , therefore , how submitting more proposals will mean that we move forward .
That is a real shame .
You opposed migrants entering the European Union .
The Socialist Group is denying these migrants the same treatment as that enjoyed by European workers .
( Protests )
That is all I have to say , and it is a real pity because the group was in agreement on this issue of equal treatment , and I find this situation regrettable .
( Applause )

Ladies and gentlemen , please stop shouting for a moment , and we are going to apply the Rules of Procedure .
The Commission has to tell us whether or not it is maintaining its proposal .
Therefore , please allow the Commissioner to tell us , welcome objective messages aside , whether or not she is maintaining her proposal .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , you will not blame me , following this discussion which was not completely clear , for taking the outcome of this discussion home to Brussels .
I will certainly put it on the table of the college .
The Commission will inform you later of the outcome of its discussions .
The Commissioner has therefore clearly told us something : that for now , she is not withdrawing the proposal .
That is what she said ; we will see what happens next .
For now , the Commission is not withdrawing the proposal .
19 .
European Protection Order (
Mr President , I have asked for the floor to remind you of the importance of today 's vote in order to send a clear message to the Council , aimed at the countries that have still not equipped themselves with security in this field .
I believe that today , we have an opportunity to defend victims and ensure that they can live without fear and in freedom .
It is very important , not only for women , but also for men , children , victims of terrorism , victims of organised crime , victims of trafficking of women and for victims in general .
Mr President , there are two of us who are rapporteurs .
I just want to remind the liberal ministers of the European Union that currently , it is also very important that this report is endorsed in order to support the fundamental rights of women .
It is in the hands of a liberal minister , but also of other governments that have so far not signed up to it .
We will see if they support this initiative now .
20 .
Trafficking in human beings (
21 .
EU-Georgia agreement on readmission of persons residing without authorisation (
22 .
Territorial , social and economic cohesion (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take a few seconds to express my disapproval of the Council 's decision to reject the report by Mrs Estrela on maternity leave .
Today , I am acting as the spokesperson for millions of European mothers and fathers who , like me , are very disappointed by the Council 's decision .
It is an admission of a lack of values , which I do not identify with and which I condemn with every fibre of my being .
I wonder what kind of Europe we are heading towards .
Rejecting this proposal is a decision that hurts not just the families of today but , above all , the families of tomorrow .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
We will now proceed to the explanations of vote .
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , not for the first time in this Chamber , I feel that I have fallen through some kink in the space-time continuum , some warp or tunnel that has led me back to the 1970s .
Here we are in a world of state control of industry , of price and income policies , of limited working hours and of subventions to unprofitable corporations .
I can do no better than to read out the voting list of what we have been voting on today : subsidies to SI / Mura in Slovenia , to Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG in Germany , to the automotive industry in Wielkopolskie in Poland , to the retail trade in Aragón in Spain , to the textile sector in the Comunidad Valenciana in Spain , to the manufacture of natural stone products in the Comunidad Valenciana in Spain , to Lear in Spain , and to H. Cegielski-Poznań in Poland .
In the 1970s , we used to talk about picking winners .
What we are actually doing here is picking losers .
We are making the EU step in with money where the free market has decreed a failure .
Why are we doing so ?
Because the EU is now a mechanism for the redistribution of wealth to favoured client groups .
Mr President , you know as well as I do that this is nonsense .
You were a brilliantly successful Conservative leader in Catalonia .
You understand the importance of free peoples and free markets , and so do our voters .
The money is running out .
We are reaching the moment when , as in George Orwell 's magnificent metaphor , the people will shake off the system like a horse shaking off flies .
( LT ) Mr President , today , the European Parliament demonstrated a strong position by taking a step towards deeper cooperation between the European Union and the South Caucasus .
The South Caucasus and Georgia are regions that are strategically important for the EU .
My country , Lithuania , has always had a special relationship with Georgia .
We supported it at the most difficult moments and not simply at state level as a government .
There was always huge public support for this country .
I believe that the whole of the European Union wants Georgia to join the family of European nations .
This country has made huge efforts to be part of Europe and therefore , we must assess them accordingly .
Visa facilitation will help to ensure people 's mobility , their cooperation and , at the same time , both economic and cultural links .
I would very much like to welcome Georgia and its people with this decision , adopted today in the European Parliament .
The EU is sending them a message that we expect them to become members of the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , we cannot allow the huge sum of money we spend on cohesion policy to be wasted or squandered .
It is therefore vital to improve the way in which the money is managed , and also to ensure that it is spent more effectively .
Local authorities , which are most aware of the needs of their region , play a key role in this regard .
Attention should also be paid to cross-border areas , in order to facilitate their integration .
In order for there to be proper vertical and horizontal cooperation , procedures must be streamlined , and more money spent on the training of specialists from implementing bodies in the individual Member States .
We also need to support modernisation and expansion of the IT system , which will ensure easy and equal access to information for all beneficiaries .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the rapporteur that we should proceed towards multi-level governance for greater involvement of sub-national authorities in drawing up development policies , above all , in the convergence objective areas , which are interested in increasing their ability to come into line with the areas of the Member States and to compete on the global market .
In order for the regional development policies to be more effective , we need to involve those who know their own regions and can help drive their development .
That is the link between multi-level governance and territorial cohesion highlighted by the rapporteur .
Regarding the simplification of regulations , the lighter the burden of bureaucracy , the greater the acceleration and quality of European investments for regional development .
Greater assistance for the Managing Authorities from the Commission would contribute to reducing the mistakes made in the past at the first level of controls .
( HU ) Mr President , the controllability and efficiency of regional policy contributes to the security of the economic and social status of EU citizens .
I voted on the course of good governance laid out by Parliament because I agree that the key to the progress of our countries lies in closer regional cooperation .
It is therefore desirable to call upon the Member States to make better use of the available forms of cooperation across regional borders .
Priority multi-level governance is precisely what may help local regional authorities and the private and public sectors to find each other .
The idea formulated with regard to implementation , according to which the local and regional authorities must also be involved in policy making , also deserves support .
The large number of participants involved in the policy at Community , national , regional and local level represents both opportunities and uncertainties .
The framework set up by the EU must ensure an appropriate balance between the two .
( FI ) Mr President , firstly , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Mǎnescu , for her excellent work .
It is very important to point out that there is a need for good governance in regional policy .
In my opinion , good governance mainly involves the principles of fairness and impartiality .
We need to look at the European Union as an entity and not just cherry-pick and provide support for certain areas only .
The whole of Europe must be developed impartially , and we also have to ensure that that can and will be done , using the tools of regional policy .
I am also very concerned that when we look at the criteria for regional policy and funding , it should not just be GDP that we consider .
That is not a sustainable criterion in itself , as we will be examining remote regions in the EU , and for that reason , it is important to include the notions of sparsely populated areas and long distances .
When we talk about good governance , we are talking , above all , about impartial , fair governance in the European Union 's regional policy .
( FI ) Mr President , the immigration issue is a very topical one throughout the European Union .
For that reason , it is very important that we create a network of liaison officers .
We also need to try and act in a way where we are becoming more objective in these matters in Europe .
Recently , however , there have been worrying examples of our failures in some aspects of immigration policy .
People who have arrived in Europe and settled here have not been prepared to accept fundamental European values .
Accordingly , as Europeans , we need to ensure , in particular , that those core values , on which the whole of the European Union is built , are preserved , and that they are adhered to .
They include democracy , human rights and freedom of opinion .
It is these that we especially need to uphold .
For that reason , alongside the creation of a liaison officer network , it is also important to establish codes of ethics and values for it , as a point of reference when immigration policy is being laid down .
It is important that migrants can integrate and accept fundamental European values when they are resident in the European Union .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to talk about the vote on the European Protection Order , because I personally consider this instrument to be enormously important .
I can well imagine the position of the women to whom the order mainly applies , and who find themselves in situations where they are literally being persecuted , wanting to move and needing protection .
For this reason , I am concerned that the text we have voted on is not established on a reliable legal basis .
I firmly believe , however , that the text can be modified , and I believe that this obviously good idea will be fully implemented .
At this point in time , however , I have abstained from the vote for these reasons .
Mr President , I just want to say that my voting machine did not work for the vote on the European Protection Order , but I would have voted in favour because this is a very important issue and it was important for Parliament to adopt the European Protection Order today .
This legislation is essential for Europe .
The mutual recognition of judgment and judicial decisions is fundamental in an area of freedom , security and justice .
In order to prevent a crime , or a new crime , being committed against a protected person , the executing state is now given a legal base for recognising a decision previously adopted in another Member State .
This legislation is needed for the prevention of violence against women and the other victims of violence .
It is an essential and important step in enabling victims to reside or stay wherever they want in the EU and thereby be included in the freedom of movement .
Mr President , human trafficking is a very serious issue .
Since 2008 , 35 people have been rescued from exploitation in my own constituency of Northern Ireland ; 25 of these were rescued in 2009 .
However , no one has yet been convicted of an offence of human trafficking .
It is a form of modern-day slavery , a serious crime and a violation of a person 's fundamental human rights .
Indeed , many of the women taken or rescued in Northern Ireland are from the Far East and are there through organised crime gangs who are making huge profits and exploiting these people both for labour and sexual exploitation .
While there are many valuable aspects to this report , and I believe that this is an area where there can be considerable cooperation between national police forces - indeed the police force of Northern Ireland has been leading the way in this - I abstained in the eventual vote because I firmly believe that the setting of minimum tariffs is a matter for the Member State alone .
( FI ) Mr President , currently , human trafficking is one of the biggest and most crucial issues and one of the most serious threats facing the European Union .
We need to recognise the problem and admit that there is one , even if often , it is as if we were hiding behind the notion that we have already resolved it .
Unfortunately , that is not the case .
We need to ensure that the fundamental rights of each person can become a reality .
The term ' human trafficking ' is something of a misnomer , because there is nothing human about it .
It is an appalling business , where people are stripped of the onetime chance of life and of human dignity .
Women and children are in the special risk group .
Prostitution and the trade in organs are the most glaring examples of this .
I would like to call on the European Union actually to start to act - not just talk , but act - to bring human trafficking in the European Union to a complete end , using this report as a point of reference .
We need to take action to fight against it properly , using the sanctions that would ensure that each person would have a chance to preserve their human dignity and enjoy a good life .
( SK ) Mr President , I supported the directive , because human trafficking is a denial of freedom in the broadest sense of the word .
I am pleased that the new directive places a duty on states to improve their legislation with the aim of combating this crime effectively , but I would also like to point out that a Community-wide condemnation of exploitation must come before the pursuit of traffickers .
Every trade involves a buyer and these are often people from the rich democratic countries , and they may be our neighbours .
The report pays attention to victims , but we must do more , we must open our eyes and notice what is happening around us , so that people who see no way out of their poverty never become victims .
We must concentrate on educating children and young people , we must inform parents and teachers , and we must talk about this in the media , since the most effective form of prevention is a lack of demand .
( IT ) Mr President , I asked for the floor to give an explanation of vote on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings .
Obviously , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Bauer because the fight against trafficking in human beings is , and must remain , one of our priorities .
This problem has grown to such an extent that it can be called a new form of slavery .
The most vulnerable parts of society - women and children - are taken abroad and exploited through the most abominable forms of prostitution , slavery and pornography .
Each year , this phenomenon has 1 million victims around the world and 500 000 in Europe alone .
Those who take advantage of this phenomenon are committing a criminal act , financing the trafficking of human beings and using people as goods to be bought and sold .
As the report emphasises , we need to take action in the countries where the victims of trafficking come from and where they are moved to .
We will only be able to find a solution through a common effort , by carrying out collective awareness raising and supporting and assisting the victims and , above all , by fighting the root causes of this phenomenon so as to help those countries involved to develop suitable legislation to combat all forms of slavery .
( DE ) Mr President , I am pleased that , in Parliament today , we have talked not only about the agreement between the European Union and Georgia on the facilitation of the issuance of visas but also about the agreement between the European Union and Georgia on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation .
In this regard , it is important that we do not merely deal with the pleasant things in life , but also with the serious issues , and I hope that , as Parliament , in perhaps a year 's time , we will receive an interim report on how this agreement between the European Union and Georgia has been implemented and , above all , how well it has worked .
I would also like the European Parliament to be much more involved in the initial discussions next time .
Mr President , I wanted to explain why my group and I abstained on the vote on the EU rapid response capability .
The multiplication of major disasters outside the EU in recent years has led to increased calls to improve the effectiveness of the EU disaster response capacity .
While I can agree with many of the excellent points raised in this report , I cannot support the call for the establishment of a new EU civil protection force .
While I support calls for the EU to coordinate its response to humanitarian catastrophes with the wider development community , I can only support such developments when they take place within already existing mechanisms , such as the Community 's civil protection mechanism .
While it is extremely important that the EU responds effectively to humanitarian catastrophes , it is equally important that we are not the only ones responding .
In addition to focusing our attention on improving the EU 's response , we must also focus on strengthening the capacity of developing countries and regions and sub-regional capacity in the affected area , so that we do this together as an international community .
Otherwise , we will be doing all the hard work and they will be doing nothing .
( PL ) Mr President , many EU citizens are still not aware of the significance of cohesion policy for the development not only of individual regions , but also of entire countries .
Its main task is to create a level playing field for regions within the European Union .
As a result , populations from less privileged regions with difficult farming conditions and poor access to communications benefit from the same level of access to social , education , transport and energy services as the citizens of areas enjoying better social and economic positions .
The idea of cohesion is therefore one whose significance cannot be overestimated .
We must therefore support all measures aimed at making better use of money granted under the Structural Funds and at making more effective use of its integrating role , all the more so because the effects of cohesion policy measures are most keenly felt at local level and , therefore , to a significant extent in rural areas too .
These are the reasons why I voted in favour of this report .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to talk about the Luhan report , which is the final topic in today 's debate .
Competitiveness and cohesion are elements which complement and support one another .
The competitiveness of the EU as a whole , however , can be secured only if economic growth is genuinely sustainable .
Many investments co-financed from the Structural Funds have proved their worth , among which I would like to emphasise infrastructure improvement , because it has resulted in foreign investment being attracted into many regions , contributing to economic development .
Cohesion policy , however , has also proved its worth in a time of financial crisis as an effective instrument for responding flexibly to new socio-economic challenges .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's view that the economic competitiveness of EU regions is closely connected with the average level of employment , the education and qualifications of the workforce , social security and access to public services , because support for social cohesion is of key importance for overall regional competitiveness , even on a global scale .
Written explanations of vote
I voted for the report on the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( flooding in Madeira , Portugal , and a storm in France ) .
Portugal applied for assistance from the Solidarity Fund after unusual and abnormal rainfall on the island of Madeira in February 2010 triggered landslides and flooding , causing severe damage to public and private infrastructure , businesses and agriculture .
The Portuguese authorities officially estimated the damage caused by the floods in Madeira at EUR 1.08 billion .
The Solidarity Fund is contributing about EUR 31 million .
I was in Madeira myself and witnessed the need for this fund to be more flexible and generous in its support , particularly for the more remote and island regions , which are often battered by bad weather .

On the basis of the report by my esteemed German colleague , Mr Böge , I voted for the proposal for a decision by the European Parliament and of the Council on mobilising the European Union Solidarity Fund to the tune of EUR 67 million to help Madeira ( Portugal ) , which was hit by landslides and floods , as well as France , affected by floods following storm Xynthia in February 2010 .
I note that the amount represents 2.7 % of an estimated EUR 2.5 billion of total direct damage .
Of course , this is a substantial amount of funding , but given that it is a relatively small proportion of the total damage ( 2.7 % ) , I cannot help but wonder whether the European Union should not use this fund to finance a European civil protection force which could immediately come to the aid of disaster victims , in order to cope with extremely acute situations that are beyond the capabilities of national forces .
This force would not be very expensive because , initially , it would involve coordinating existing national civil protection forces .
In addition it could be used for missions abroad ( such as Haiti ) .
I welcome the adoption of the report awarding Portugal EUR 31 255 790 from the European Union Solidarity Fund , following the flooding that occurred in Madeira last February .
The torrential rain that fell on the island of Madeira caused chaos and extreme material damage , with landslides , collapsed bridges , closed highways , and houses and cars swept away by the floods .
Forty-two people died and 13 disappeared in the disaster that struck Madeira .
Today , the European Parliament here in Strasbourg has witnessed a genuine demonstration of European solidarity , which is one of the most important values of the European project and one that deserves to be emphasised .
I voted for this report because I agree that , in respect of the general budget of the European Union for the 2010 financial year , the European Union Solidarity Fund should be mobilised to provide the sum of EUR 66 891 540 in commitment and payment appropriations in order to address the application made by Portugal to respond to a disaster caused by landslides and flooding on the island of Madeira and also the application by France with regard to a disaster caused by storm Xynthia .
I , of course , welcome the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund to aid the victims of the tragedy that struck Madeira following abnormal rainfall .
I congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Teixeira , on his able and continual efforts to raise awareness in the European institutions and to establish a basis for the necessary support .
I reiterate my strong belief that the procedures need to be simplified so that the Solidarity Fund can be mobilised more swiftly in future .
Emergency aid that arrives too late tarnishes the Union 's efficient image and undermines the feeling of European solidarity .
Portugal applied for assistance from the Solidarity Fund after unusual and abnormal rainfall on the island of Madeira in February 2010 triggered landslides and flooding , causing severe damage to local public and private infrastructure , businesses and agriculture .
The Portuguese authorities , in conjunction with the regional government of Madeira , estimated the total direct damage at EUR 1.08 billion , equivalent to 0.68 % of Portugal 's gross national income .
The flooding caused considerable damage to many homes , farms , roads and water mains .
The financial aid released through the fund will enable the Portuguese authorities , particularly the regional government of Madeira , to recover part of the expenses they incurred in responding to the emergency .
I voted overall in favour of this report out of a sense of responsibility and a commitment to avoid unnecessary delays in mobilising financial aid for the regions of Portugal and France that have been struck by natural disasters .
Ten months after storm Xynthia hit the French coast , killing 53 , injuring 80 and causing substantial material damage , Parliament has adopted a budgetary amendment in order to mobilise the EU Solidarity Fund to the tune of EUR 35.6 million .
The reconstruction process aside , however , how many other tragedies will there have to be before we finally have a Community approach to preventing natural disasters ?
Natural and man-made disasters are becoming more and more frequent , which is why we must ensure that national measures are more effective and better coordinated , and that European measures are more flexible .
I also want to point out that since 2006 , we have had a report by Mr Barnier on establishing a rapid reaction force for responding to natural disasters : what is stopping us from adopting it ?
What is stopping us from using it ?
I voted in favour of this report today which means that the EU Solidarity Fund can be mobilised following the damage in the wake of major floods in Portugal and storm Xynthia in 2010 .
This demonstrates the strong ties between the Union 's Member States and underlines the importance of coming to the aid of regions struck by natural disasters .
I am delighted that over EUR 35 million have been released from the Solidarity Fund to repair the considerable damage caused by Xynthia in some coastal areas , primarily Charente-Maritime , Vendée and the Côtes-d 'Armor .
The Commission is proposing to mobilise the Solidarity Fund to provide a total sum of EUR 66 891 540 in favour of Portugal and France : EUR 31 255 790 for Portugal and EUR 35 635 750 for France .
Portugal requested assistance following a storm in Madeira in February 2010 , which caused severe damage to public and private infrastructure , businesses and farms .
France , for its part , requested assistance from the Solidarity Fund following storm Xynthia , also in February 2010 , which struck a significant part of the country , killing 53 people , injuring 80 , and also causing severe damage to dams and dykes , public and private infrastructure , road and rail networks , farms and businesses .
While I am wholly in favour of this mobilisation , not least because of its importance to the Autonomous Region of Madeira , I have to express my disappointment that the aid is only being made available in December , 10 months after the disasters that struck the French coast and the island of Madeira .
We urgently need to find faster ways of getting the Solidarity Fund procedure to work and we must focus our efforts on achieving that .
We , of course , voted in favour of this report , which proposes mobilising the Solidarity Fund to address the enormous damage that occurred on the island of Madeira following the storm that struck the region in February 2010 .
Nonetheless , we would like to reiterate some remarks here .
According to the Solidarity Fund Regulation , ' in the event of major disasters , the Community should show its solidarity with the population of the regions concerned by providing financial assistance to contribute to a rapid return to normal living conditions in the disaster-stricken regions ' .
The regulation also states that this instrument should enable the Community ' to act swiftly and efficiently to help , as quickly as possible , in mobilising emergency services to meet people 's immediate needs and contribute to the short-term restoration of damaged key infrastructure ' .
However , the rules and procedures involved in mobilising the fund have already shown that this principle of helping the affected populations quickly is not being observed in practice .
In this case , this House is only voting to mobilise the fund 10 months after the disaster .
That is why we have argued - and we do so again now - that the rules for mobilising this fund need to be adjusted to allow for more flexible and timely mobilisation and to reduce the time that elapses between the disaster and the point at which the funds are made available .
In my view , the EU Solidarity Fund , like the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , is one of the budgetary tools that give the strongest practical expression to the ' solidarity ' value that we Members of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament strive to promote when drafting Community policies .
On 27 and 28 February 2010 , storm Xynthia killed 53 and injured around 80 in Vendée and Charente-Maritime .
It was a genuinely traumatic experience for the region and the nation , and its psychological and economic impact is still being felt 10 months later .
As from the March 2010 plenary session , Parliament took action , adopting by a very large majority a resolution calling for the fund to be used to provide assistance to the victims .

Today 's vote , which confirmed the release of EUR 35.6 million for these departments , as well as EUR 31.2 million for Portugal , which suffered flooding in Madeira caused by this storm , is an example of this common desire to show true solidarity between European citizens .
This is the Europe we wish to build , a Europe close to its citizens , alert to the issues affecting them , and capable of addressing those issues collectively .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Solidarity Fund .
I believe , in fact , that the fund is a valuable tool for enabling the European Union to show solidarity with the populations of regions affected by natural disasters , by providing financial support to help ensure a swift return to normal living conditions .
Today 's vote concerned two requests for assistance .
The first was made by Portugal , following the abnormal rainfall on the island of Madeira , which triggered landslides and severe flooding , causing damage to public and private infrastructure , to businesses and to agriculture .
The second request for mobilisation was made by France following storm Xynthia , which caused the deaths of 53 people and flooded wide areas , including residential areas , and caused severe damage to dams and dykes , public and private infrastructure , road and rail networks , agriculture and businesses .
Lastly , I would add that the Fund was mobilised to the tune of EUR 31 255 790 for the flooding in Madeira and EUR 35 635 750 for storm Xynthia , totalling EUR 66 891 540 .
in writing . - I welcome this report which grants 31 million euro to Portugal and 35 million euro to France from the EU Solidarity Fund .
This is an important gesture of support following flooding and landslides in Portugal in February , and destruction caused by the storm ' Xynthia ' on the Atlantic coastline in France .
I voted in favour of mobilising the European Union Solidarity Fund for the areas hit by floods in Portugal and the French regions hit by storm Xynthia in February 2010 .
The Atlantic coastal regions were the worst affected , with the storm flooding vast areas , including residential areas , causing serious human and material damage .
Today 's vote responds to the request by the French authorities for these regions to receive , among other things , European financial assistance for an ' extraordinary disaster , mainly a natural one , affecting the major part of its population , with serious and lasting repercussions on living conditions and the economic stability of the region ' .
Of the estimated EUR 1 425.43 million of direct damage caused by the disaster , EUR 35 635.750 will be paid out to France .
The mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund is a practical expression of a Europe that is close to its citizens , which is what they expect .
The European institutions still need to work towards delivering swifter operations and procedures , which are justified by the urgency and scale of natural phenomena .
The aid that the European Union is allocating to Portugal and France following the storms in February 2010 is good news .
It is , however , regrettable that the EU does not act as swiftly to help citizens devastated by the consequences of climate change as it does when it has to bail out the banks .
The European Union is an area of solidarity , and the EU Solidarity Fund is a part of that .
Support from the fund is crucial for aiding areas affected by natural disasters , such as the flooding in Madeira ( Portugal ) and storm Xynthia in France .
After verifying that both applications meet the eligibility criteria of Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 , the Commission proposed to mobilise the Solidarity Fund for an amount of EUR 31 255 790 for Portugal ( Madeira flooding ) and EUR 35 635 750 for France ( storm Xynthia ) , resulting in a total amount of EUR 66 891 540 to be deducted from the ceiling of EUR 1 billion in commitment and payment appropriations .
I would , however , like to highlight the delay in mobilising this type of support .
The procedure needs to be made less bureaucratic and more streamlined in order to respond to future disaster situations in a timely manner .
Although I voted in favour of this proposal to grant aid , I consider that this is an analgesic and palliative measure for the consequences of the capitalist model , and that it does not represent any progress in the fight against the root causes of the crisis .
I agree with the mobilisation of resources from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for citizens made redundant due to structural changes in commercial models or as a direct consequence of the current economic and financial crisis .
I believe that the sum of more than EUR 250 million that is being requested as additional assistance and aid for the more than 600 employees made redundant from the retail sector in the Netherlands can help to achieve the ultimate goal of facilitating the reintegration of these workers into the labour market .
I also voted in favour because I am convinced that this assistance complements the redundancy aid provided for in all national legislation and collective agreements .
Therefore , this mobilisation of funds from the EGF cannot , under any circumstances , replace the legal responsibilities of governments and business vis-à-vis employees who have been made redundant , or enable the evasion of such responsibilities .
In such circumstances , support is essential , so that all EU Member States may feel they belong to a united family .
It would be many times cheaper if European Union funds were to be granted to projects that were capable of alleviating the consequences of natural disasters . For instance , construction of dams and protective structures , and investment in public information and warning measures .
I consider that it would also be useful to develop building regulations for higher-risk regions .
If the European Union merely provides funds and does not work towards prevention of natural disasters , this may have graver consequences in the future .
Portugal applied for assistance from the Solidarity Fund after unusual rainfall caused landslides and severe flooding on the island of Madeira in February 2010 , which resulted in damage to public and private infrastructure and to businesses and agriculture .
The Portuguese authorities estimate the total cost of the direct damage to be EUR 1 080 million .
France applied for assistance from the Solidarity Fund after the major part of France was hit by storm Xynthia in February 2010 , with the Atlantic coast region , particularly Charente-Maritime and Vendée , being worst affected .
The storm claimed 53 lives and nearly 80 people were injured .
For the designated zone , the French authorities estimate the total cost of the direct damage caused by the disaster to be EUR 1 425.43 million .
After verifying that both applications comply with the eligibility criteria of Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 , the Commission proposed to mobilise the Solidarity Fund to the tune of EUR 31 255 790 for Portugal ( flooding in Madeira ) and EUR 35 635 750 for France ( storm Xynthia ) , resulting in a total amount of EUR 66 891 540 .
As all conditions for the assistance are met , I voted in favour of the report in order to show solidarity with the victims and the states affected .
I supported the vote of the European Parliament , which today , Tuesday 14 December 2010 , approved the release of EUR 35.6 million for France , whose Atlantic coastline was partly devastated by storm Xynthia in February .
This money will be used to finance the rehabilitation of infrastructure damaged by the disaster .
As MEP for the worst affected regions , I welcome the allocation of these funds to repair the damage caused by the storm : it comes as a real relief to all the French départements affected .
This mobilisation proves that solidarity is not a hollow word where the European Union is concerned .
To conclude , I wish to point out that storm Xynthia in February 2010 affected a large part of France , with the départements of Charente-Maritime and Vendée being the worst hit , leaving 53 people dead and 80 injured .
The material damage was estimated at EUR 1 425.43 million .

A total of EUR 35.6 million has been released from the EU Solidarity Fund to repair this damage .
According to the Böge report , EUR 66.9 million have been made available to combat the effects of severe natural disasters in France and Portugal .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree that , in respect of the general budget of the European Union for the 2010 financial year , the European Union Solidarity Fund should be mobilised to provide the sum of EUR 66 891 540 in commitment and payment appropriations in order to address the applications made by :
Portugal to mobilise the fund in response to a disaster caused by landslides and flooding on Madeira Island ; and
France to mobilise the fund with regard to a disaster caused by storm Xynthia .
I warmly welcome the adoption of this report providing for the allocation of EUR 31 255 790 to Portugal to address the terrible damage caused by the disaster that struck the island of Madeira in February 2010 .
In this respect , I should point out the major commitment shown by the Portuguese delegation from the Partido Social Democrata , particularly the work done by Mr Teixeira , which proved decisive in obtaining this result .
in writing . - The Commission proposes to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund in favour of Portugal and France under point 26 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management ( IIA ) .
The IIA allows the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund within the annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
In 2010 , so far , only one proposal to mobilise the Solidarity Fund has been submitted by the Commission , a proposal of 24 September 2010 to mobilise EUR 13.02 million following severe flooding in Ireland in November 2009 .
This proposal and the corresponding draft amending budget ( DAB No 8 / 2010 ) are still in the process of being adopted by the two arms of the budgetary authority .
In parallel to the proposal to mobilise the Solidarity Fund in favour of Portugal and France , the Commission has presented a draft amending budget ( DAB No 9 / 2010 of 13 October 2010 ) in order to enter the corresponding commitment and payment appropriations in the 2010 budget as provided in point 26 of the IIA .
The Solidarity Fund was set up with the aim of demonstrating the European Union 's solidarity with the people of regions affected by natural disasters .
In February this year , the region of Madeira , where I come from , was struck by a disaster caused by landslides and flooding .
Following this tragedy , Portugal submitted an application to mobilise the Solidarity Fund in order to address the damage , particularly by repairing infrastructure and rebuilding the affected areas .
The French authorities also submitted an application to mobilise the fund following storm Xynthia .
The total damage caused by both disasters has been assessed at EUR 66 891 540 , and this amount will soon be mobilised once the amending budget has been changed as required to make it available .
The effects of February 's disaster made themselves felt straight away , and extensive and severe damage was caused to public and private infrastructure , businesses and crops .
However , even though the effects of the tragedy that devastated the region were so severe , European help was not immediately forthcoming .
Ten months have now passed .
Since I endorse the need to make the whole procedure less tardy , I am voting for the fund to be mobilised for the affected regions and appeal for it to be done as quickly as possible .
The adoption today in plenary of a budgetary amendment to mobilise the EU Solidarity Fund to the tune of EUR 35.6 million following a proposal by the Commission is good news .
This is in response to the request made by the French Government following storm Xynthia , which hit the French coast on 27 and 28 February 2010 , leaving 53 people dead and 80 injured in Vendée and Charente-Maritime .
The procedure is undoubtedly long and in need of improvement , but I am pleased to see European solidarity being shown in this way , in the face of the tragedy the victims have experienced .
I had written to Commissioner Hahn to support the French Government 's request for aid , and he has honoured the commitment he made to me during his visit to La Rochelle in early March .
This fund is more than much-needed financial assistance ; it symbolises the common values shared by our continent .
In view of the opinion by the Committee on Regional Development and the proposal to reduce payment appropriations from the line ' Energy projects to aid economic recovery - European offshore wind grid system ' so as to aid the countries ( Portugal and France ) affected by major natural disasters through the Solidarity Fund , and also bearing in mind the fact that this decision sets out the basic criteria for the operation of the Solidarity Fund , I agree with this report .
We all remember storm Xynthia , which devastated the Vendée coast nearly a year ago .
Since then , where water had destroyed everything , reconstruction has had to take place .
The European Union Solidarity Fund is the ideal instrument for supporting local efforts .
By voting for this text , I have helped to release EUR 35 635 750 , earmarked not for compensation of damage suffered by private individuals , but for infrastructure rehabilitation .
Created following the 2002 floods in Germany , Austria , the Czech Republic and France , the Solidarity Fund is meant to assist European regions affected by unforeseeable disasters .
This text also allocates an equivalent amount to the areas affected by recent flooding in Portugal .
I , of course , welcome the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund to aid the victims of the tragedy that struck Madeira following abnormal rainfall .
I congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Teixeira , on his able and continual efforts to raise awareness in the European institutions and to establish a basis for the necessary support .
I reiterate my strong belief that the procedures need to be simplified so that the Solidarity Fund can be mobilised more swiftly in future .
Emergency aid that arrives too late tarnishes the Union 's efficient image and undermines the feeling of European solidarity .
The sole purpose of Draft amending budget No 9 / 2010 is to formally enter the budgetary adjustment arising from the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund into the 2010 budget .
I have already voted in favour of a parallel draft report recommending that mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund be approved for Portugal ( Madeira flooding ) and France ( storm Xynthia ) , and so it is out of the same sense of responsibility that I am voting in favour of this report on the amending budget to mobilise EUR 31 255 790 for Portugal and EUR 35 635 750 for France , making a total of EUR 66 891 540 to be deducted from the fund 's ceiling .
Despite the importance of investment projects for energy infrastructure , and most especially wind energy , I am voting in favour of reducing the payment appropriations from budget line 06 04 14 03 so that the funds can be reallocated to the EUR 66 891 540 in payment appropriations ( line 13 06 01 ) required to cover needs relating to the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund .
As we vote on this draft amending budget , which will allow for the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund in favour of the people of Madeira and the regions of France affected by the storm Xynthia - which , of course , we supported - it is important to highlight a few points here , in addition to the delay in mobilising the fund , which we mentioned previously .
The Commission believes that the eligibility criteria for mobilisation have been met , particularly , in Madeira 's case , as regards the threshold for damage .
It should be noted , however , that the Union support now made available will only cover 2.89 % of the total damage caused by the disaster .
Madeira is an outermost region and , hence , has to bear the resulting constraints .
It is also pursuing convergence objectives ( despite the damaging changes in this field since the last enlargement ) .
These particular characteristics ought , therefore , to be taken into account by increasing support for the region , either from this fund or through other measures .
Consequently , when the rules of the fund were being discussed , we proposed considering the idea of increasing financial assistance to cohesion countries and convergence regions by introducing an indispensable cohesion dimension into this question of providing support for damage caused by natural disasters .
That would also reduce the disparities between the various regions and Member States in the European Union .
At a time when we are facing ever more frequent natural disasters in Europe , the European Union must be able to provide appropriate aid to its Member States when one of them is hit by a disaster of this kind .
Consequently , following storm Xynthia in March , which hit the coastal areas of Charente-Maritime and Vendée , and the floods that affected the island of Madeira in Portugal in February , it was only natural that I should approve the mobilisation of the European Solidarity Fund in order to compensate for the damage caused by these disasters .
To my mind , this vote illustrates the solidarity that exists between the nations of Europe , and which should exist in many other areas too , for that matter .
When faced with a natural disaster - and we are facing ever more disasters of this type - it is imperative that the European Union provide aid to Member States and regions which are grappling with the lasting effects of such tragedies .
The EU Solidarity Fund was established to precisely this end .
The fund makes it possible to grant financial assistance to victims in areas affected by ' major natural disasters ' , such as the Portuguese island of Madeira which was destroyed by floods , or the French regions devastated by storm Xynthia .
With the memory of this year 's floods in Poland and other parts of Europe still fresh in my mind , I concur with the proposal to grant support to the countries that have suffered , in solidarity with the thousands of citizens of regions affected by such devastating cataclysms .
in writing . - I voted for this report which approves the transfer of 66 million euro from the European offshore wind grid system to the EU Solidarity Fund in order to help the victims of flooding in Portugal and storms in France .
This draft amending budget makes sense , considering the purpose of the funds mobilised through the Solidarity Fund to address the effects of the landslides and severe flooding that took place on the island of Madeira , Portugal , and the effects of storm Xynthia in France .
After verifying that both applications meet the eligibility criteria of Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 , the Commission proposed to mobilise the Solidarity Fund to the tune of EUR 31 255 790 for Portugal ( flooding in Madeira ) and EUR 35 635 750 for France ( storm Xynthia ) , resulting in a total amount of EUR 66 891 540 to be deducted from the ceiling of EUR 1 billion in commitment and payment appropriations .
I would , however , like to highlight the delay in mobilising this type of support .
The procedure needs to be made less bureaucratic and more streamlined in order to respond to future disaster situations in a timely manner .
An increase in the budget in times of financial and economic crisis should , in principle , be rejected .
In this case , however , it is a matter of an adjustment on account of storm damage in France and Portugal caused by storm Xynthia .
Mutual aid and assistance in the event of natural disasters is a true sign of active European solidarity and is therefore to be welcomed and supported .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of the report .
According to the report , it must be ensured that the funds made available for Portugal and France are used to help in the rebuilding of infrastructure in both countries , and they are to be used as a ' tool of refinancing ' .
I therefore voted in favour of it .
The people affected must be helped and their living conditions and the economic stability of the region must be improved .
I fully support the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund in response to the natural disasters in France and Portugal .
I regard the Solidarity Fund as one of the most important ways to build European identity and a sense of community between EU citizens .
In 2010 , Poland was one of the countries to benefit from the Solidarity Fund , and this met with a positive response from the media .
I would like to highlight the need to raise public awareness of the Solidarity Fund and the effects of its use .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree that , in respect of the general budget of the European Union for the 2010 financial year , the European Union Solidarity Fund should be mobilised to provide the sum of EUR 66 891 540 in commitment and payment appropriations in order to address the applications made by :
Portugal to mobilise the fund in response to a disaster caused by landslides and flooding on Madeira Island ; and
France to mobilise the fund with regard to a disaster caused by storm Xynthia .
I welcome this draft amending budget making it possible to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund to provide a total of EUR 66 891 540 in commitment and payment appropriations , EUR 31 255 790 of which is to address the request for assistance submitted by Portugal following the considerable damage caused by the storm that struck the Autonomous Region of Madeira in February 2010 .
in writing . - According to Article 37 ( 1 ) of the Financial Regulation , the Commission may present draft amending budgets if there are ' unavoidable , exceptional or unforeseen circumstances ' .
On this aspect , and regarding the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund , the Commission proposes to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund in favour of Portugal and France on the basis of point 26 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management ( IIA ) .
The IIA allows the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund within the annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
The conditions for eligibility to the fund are detailed here as well as in Council Regulation No 2012 / 2002 establishing the EUSF .
It is important to note that the objective of the fund is not to compensate private damage but to repair infrastructure and is a tool for refinancing .
In 2010 , so far , only one proposal to mobilise the Solidarity Fund has been submitted by the Commission , a proposal of 24 September 2010 to mobilise EUR 13.02 million following severe flooding in Ireland in November 2009 .
The aim of this European Parliament document is to approve the Council 's position on Draft amending budget No 9 / 2010 with a view to implementing the changes needed for the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund .
The disasters that occurred in Madeira and France were considered by the Commission to be a ' major natural disaster ' and an ' extraordinary regional disaster ' , respectively , and both applications by the national authorities for mobilisation of the fund were accepted .
According to the Financial Regulation , the Commission may present draft amending budgets ' if there are unavoidable , exceptional or unforeseen circumstances ' .
In this case , the Commission proposed to mobilise the Solidarity Fund to provide EUR 31 255 790 for Portugal and EUR 35 635 750 for France , making a total of EUR 66 891 540 .
Today , in the name of European solidarity , we are approving the redeployment of this amount in payment appropriations from budget line 06 04 14 03 : Energy projects to aid economic recovery - European offshore wind grid system , for the repair of infrastructure and reconstruction of the areas affected by the disasters .
I welcome the measure that has been adopted , although I regret the slowness of the whole procedure for mobilising the fund , given the extent of the tragedy that devastated the region that I come from , the Autonomous Region of Madeira .
On the basis of the report by my excellent Italian colleague , Barbara Matera , I voted in favour of the proposal for a decision on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the sum of EUR 2.2 million in aid to Slovenia , which is facing redundancies in the textile industry .
The plant in question is Mura , European Fashion Design , which has laid off 2 554 workers .
I find it strange that 583 , or 22.8 % , of the 2 554 workers made redundant in total have a long-standing health problem or disability .
I am not sure they fulfil EGF criteria .
It should be noted that 1 114 of the 2 554 dismissed workers ' have not concluded primary school education ' .
It is legitimate to question the educational level of those recruited and their suitability with respect to current industrial standards .
I question the independence of the civil servants at the Slovenian Ministry of Labour , Family and Social Affairs who have to assume the role of certification authority for supervising this expenditure .
Like the proposals she tabled in the last plenary session , Mrs Matera 's resolutions advocating the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in six specific cases are entirely justified .
This fund will provide assistance to employees suffering from the harmful effects of globalisation in Slovenia , Germany , Poland and Spain .
I have always felt that using this fund was effective , because it produces concrete results and meets specific and perfectly identifiable needs .
As a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I simply had to vote in favour of adopting these resolutions .
Given that Slovenia has requested assistance for 2 554 redundancies at Mura , European Fashion Design , a company operating in the wearing apparel sector , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that the Commission 's proposal , in its explanatory statement , should include clear and detailed information on the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons that led to its approval , in accordance with the requests made by Parliament .
Aid to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation should be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In light of structural changes in international trade , it is important that the European economy is able to quickly implement assistance policies for workers affected by such changes whilst also giving them the skills required to return swiftly to the labour market .
Financial assistance should therefore be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities normally incumbent upon companies , nor is it intended for the financing and restructuring of companies .
Given that Slovenia has requested assistance in respect of 2 554 redundancies at Mura , European Fashion Design , a company that operates in the wearing apparel sector in the NUTS III region of Pomurje , and that 7 % of all people employed in the region of Pomurje were working for Mura and incomes in this region were already below the Slovenian average , I am voting overall in favour of this report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for Slovenia .
The number of times in recent months that this House has approved the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , which was set up to provide additional support for workers suffering from the consequences of major changes in the structure of world trade , is , in my view , highly indicative of the crisis that Europe is going through .
The EGF is not the answer to this crisis , but it is a considerable , significant help .
In this specific case , the aid is intended to address the consequences of 2 554 redundancies at Mura , European Fashion Design , a company in Slovenia that operates in the wearing apparel sector .
This sector has been particularly badly affected by changes in the structure of world trade and is the victim of cheap textile imports .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , proper utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European citizens and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , and , at the same time , developing a new , skilled workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in this context that this intervention plan for Slovenia is being put forward , in relation to 2 554 redundancies at Mura , European Fashion Design , a company operating in the wearing apparel sector .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects to implement measures to speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
Applications to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund are being submitted month after month .
Thus , there are now eight more applications from four Member States : Slovenia , Germany , Poland and Spain .
Several hundred more companies are shutting down in various industries , from car manufacturing to the textile sector via the retail trade .
In all , over 6 500 workers ( 6 592 to be precise ) have been made redundant .
That makes almost 10 000 , if we also add in the ones discussed here a month ago .
As we approve this mobilisation , I cannot avoid reiterating that what is needed is a clear break with the neoliberal policies that are causing the obvious economic and social disaster to be seen in the countries of the European Union .
Palliative measures are indeed necessary , but it is the causes of the disaster that have to be addressed .
It has become increasingly urgent to implement the proposal that we made during the debate on the 2011 budget , to create a European programme for employment and sustainable development , to which 1 % of EU gross domestic product would be allocated , supplemented with funds from the Member States .
The aim of this would be real convergence , promotion of each country 's potential , the sustainable use of its resources , investment in production and the creation of jobs with rights .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Slovenia because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 2 554 redundancies in Mura , European Fashion Design , an enterprise which operates in the wearing apparel sector , amounting to a total of EUR 2 247 940 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - I welcome the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Fund to help the 2 554 workers made redundant in the Mura , European Fashion Design , enterprise in Slovenia .
I hope the EUR 2.2 million will help the workers and the region recover quickly from the structural changes they are facing .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the Slovenian workers of the Mura Group , who have been sacrificed on the altar of globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could be inclined to vote against , given the pitiful amount of this handout .
However , the little that is being given may help to ease their pain .
This does not make the rationale of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses a rationale that has led the investment funds that own this Group and the banks that invest in them to make profits at their expense .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of the company relocations that occur in a globalised world .
More and more companies are relocating , taking advantage of the lower labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on those countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of company relocations , and it is fundamental in facilitating their access to new employment .
The EGF has been used by other EU countries in the past , so now it is appropriate to grant this aid to Slovenia , which has applied for assistance for 2 554 redundancies at Mura , European Fashion Design , a company operating in the wearing apparel sector .
I voted in favour , as I have done on previous occasions relating to mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
We must support people who have lost their jobs and give them the opportunity of applying their potential in different areas .
It is a real shame that , despite the fact that I made a personal approach to the Prime Minister of the Republic of Latvia , pointing out to him the opportunity of drawing on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , Latvia has nevertheless not made use of this opportunity , even though 15 % of Latvia 's population is unemployed .
It appears that a signal needs to be sent to the leadership of the European Commission about the inaction of the powers that be in the Republic of Latvia .
More than 100 000 people from Latvia have already left their native country .
It seems that the fate of these people is of no concern to the government of the Republic of Latvia .
The Slovenian clothing company Mura , European Fashion Design , had to make 2 554 workers redundant between 21 October 2009 and 20 February 2010 as a result of the economic and financial crisis .
Slovenia is therefore applying for EUR 2 247 940 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in order to be able to take measures for the rapid reintegration into the labour market of the workers affected .
I have voted in favour of the report , because mobilisation of the funding is fully justified .
According to the report by Mrs Matera , we need to support the reintegration into the labour market of workers in Slovenia who have been made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I think this is a positive thing to do and have therefore voted in favour of it .
Given that Slovenia has requested assistance for 2 554 cases of redundancy at Mura , European Fashion Design , a company operating in the wearing apparel sector , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that :
the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to establish an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused European Social Fund resources , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created as a separate , specific instrument with its own aims and deadlines , and that suitable budget lines for transfers must therefore be identified .
The request presented by Slovenia for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for 2 554 redundancies at Mura , European Fashion Design , a company operating in the wearing apparel sector , in the period from 21 October 2009 to 20 February 2010 , fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily expanded to cover its intervention in situations like this in which there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of four months in an enterprise in a Member State ' as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , in the hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will help these workers successfully rejoin the labour market .
Given that Germany has requested assistance for 1 181 redundancies spread across the four production sites of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen in Baden-Württemberg , a company operating in the printing machinery manufacturing sector , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that it should be ensured that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) supports the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors .
Aid to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation should be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In light of structural changes in international trade , it is important that the European economy is able to quickly implement assistance policies for workers affected by such changes whilst also giving them the skills required to return swiftly to the labour market .
Financial assistance should therefore be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities normally incumbent upon companies , nor is it intended for the financing and restructuring of companies .
Given that Germany has requested assistance for 1 181 redundancies spread across the four production sites of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen in Baden-Württemberg , a company operating in the printing machinery manufacturing sector , I am voting overall in favour of this report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for Germany .
Today , we are approving a package of EUR 8 308 555 in aid from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in favour of Germany , in order to address the consequences of 1 181 redundancies spread across the four production sites of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG in Baden-Württemberg , a company operating in the printing machinery manufacturing sector .
As I have always pointed out , although such assistance is extremely important in dealing with the current symptoms , it is not a final solution to the problems affecting European industries , which lie not only in the economic crisis that we are experiencing , but also in the need for Europe to adapt to a changing world , one in which it is essential to be competitive .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , proper utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European citizens and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , and , at the same time , developing a new , skilled workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in this context that this intervention plan for Germany is being put forward , in relation to 1 181 redundancies spread across the four production sites of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen in Baden-Württemberg , a company operating in the printing machinery manufacturing sector .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects to implement measures to speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
Today 's decision will result in the workers from the enterprise Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG in Baden-Württemberg who are threatened with redundancy receiving around EUR 8 million in assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
These funds are to be used to assist these workers in finding new jobs as quickly as possible .
It is important to me that these people receive these funds quickly and without significant bureaucratic frictional losses .
The assistance is needed now and not in six months ' or a year 's time .
The European Union and the Member States must also endeavour to do more than simply counter the negative consequences of globalisation .
Globalisation is a process the progress of which we can , and indeed must , control .
My abstention from this vote is not only due to the sceptical attitude of the German Free Democratic Party to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , but is also based on a possible conflict of interests as a shareholder in Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Germany because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 1 181 redundancies at four production sites of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG in Baden-Württemberg , an enterprise which operates in the manufacturing of printing machinery sector , amounting to a sum of EUR 8 308 555 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - The European Globalisation Fund was created in order to provide assistance for workers suffering the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns .
The 1 181 redundancies at four production sites of the enterprise Druckmaschinen AG in Baden Württemberg ( manufacturing of printing machinery sector ) fall exactly into this category and I therefore supported the mobilisation of EUR 8 308 555 to assist them .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the German workers of the Heidelberger Druckmaschinen Group , who have been sacrificed on the altar of globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could be inclined to vote against , given the pitiful amount of this handout .
However , the little that is being given may help to ease their pain .
This does not make the rationale of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses the rationale that has led this Group , a world leader in the manufacture of printing machines , to relocate with the aim of increasing its profits .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of the company relocations that occur in a globalised world .
More and more companies are relocating , taking advantage of the lower labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on those countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of company relocations , and it is fundamental in facilitating their access to new employment .
The EGF has been used by other EU countries in the past , so now it is appropriate to grant this aid to Germany , which has requested assistance for 1 181 redundancies spread across the four production sites of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen in Baden-Württemberg , a company operating in the printing machinery manufacturing sector .
The effects of the economic crisis are still being felt throughout Europe .
In Germany , too , some enterprises are still struggling to survive and are making numerous people redundant .
Between 26 January 2010 and 26 May 2010 , the printing machinery manufacturer Druckmaschinen AG , based in Heidelberg , had to make 1 181 workers redundant as a result of the crisis .
The Federal Republic of Germany has therefore applied for EUR 8 308 555 in assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I am voting in favour of the report , as all of the stipulated criteria for mobilisation of the funds are met .
I support the mobilisation of the fund in connection with this application because this measure can provide additional support to workers who are suffering the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and assist their reintegration into the labour market .
I therefore voted in favour of it .
Given that Germany has requested assistance for 1 181 redundancies spread across the four production sites of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen in Baden-Württemberg , a company operating in the printing machinery manufacturing sector , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that :
the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to establish an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused European Social Fund resources , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created as a separate , specific instrument with its own aims and deadlines , and that suitable budget lines for transfers must therefore be identified .
The request presented by Germany for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for 1 181 redundancies spread across the four production sites of Heidelberger Druckmaschinen in Baden-Württemberg , a company operating in the printing machinery manufacturing sector , in the period between 26 January and 26 May 2010 , fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily expanded to cover its intervention in situations like this in which there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of four months in an enterprise in a Member State ' as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , in the hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will help these workers successfully rejoin the labour market .
Apart from the application from the enterprise Heidelberger Druckmaschinen , I have , without reservations , voted in favour of all of the applications for mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund that have been voted on today , as I support the general idea of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund and , in particular , the direct support given to the people who , through no fault of their own , have lost their jobs as a result of globalisation .
However , with regard to the aforementioned enterprise , Heidelberger Druckmaschinen , I abstained from the vote .
In this case , I have definite reservations .
It is well-known that Heidelberger Druckmaschinen is a jewel of the German mechanical engineering sector .
The company made excellent profits for many years .
Then , admittedly , came two or three financially difficult years .
Heidelberger Druckmaschinen reacted with the reflex typical of large companies : it reduced staff numbers in the area where wages were high , in other words , in Germany , and , at the same time , invested and increased the number of staff in China , where wages were low .
If , during such a process , an application is made for mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , this represents a negative example of how a socially meaningful and very responsible EU measure is exploited by international companies to wheedle out of their social responsibility .
On the basis of the report by my Italian colleague , Barbara Matera , I voted in favour of the proposal for a decision on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the sum of EUR 0.6 million in aid to Poland , which is facing redundancies in the automotive sector .
Five hundred and ninety workers have been made redundant from two companies within the automotive industry .
I support the fact that this aid is being managed and controlled by the bodies responsible for the European Social Fund ( ESF ) in Poland , thereby limiting monitoring costs to a mere EUR 2 000 .
Like Mrs Matera , I congratulate the Commission on the fact that , in the context of mobilising the EGF , it has proposed an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused ESF funds .
Nonetheless , I regret the fact that , in order to mobilise the EGF in favour of this case , payment appropriations have been taken from a budget heading designed to support SMEs and innovation .
We must deplore the Commission 's shortcomings in implementing competitiveness and innovation programmes , especially during an economic crisis that is likely to significantly increase the need for assistance .
Given that Poland has submitted a request for assistance for 590 redundancies at two companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the NUTS II region of Wielkopolskie , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree with the Commission 's proposal , in relation to the mobilisation of the EGF , to establish an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused European Social Fund resources , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created as a separate , specific instrument with its own aims and deadlines , and that suitable budget lines for transfers must therefore be identified .
Aid to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation should be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In view of the structural changes in world trade , it is vital that the European economy is able to promptly deploy the instruments designed to support workers affected in this way , and to provide them with new skills so that they can be quickly reintegrated into the labour market .
Financial assistance should therefore be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities normally incumbent upon companies , nor is it intended for the financing and restructuring of companies .
Given that Poland has submitted a request for assistance for 590 redundancies at two companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the region of Wielkopolskie , I am voting in favour of this report or , in other words , in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for Poland .
The financial and economic crisis that we are going through , combined with the constant shifts in the labour market caused by changes to the structure of world trade , has resulted in countless victims of unemployment , which , in many cases , is long term .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was created to respond to situations like these .
In this particular case , we are talking about the mobilisation of in excess of EUR 600 000 in favour of Poland to support 613 redundancies at two companies in the motor vehicle manufacturing sector between 1 March 2009 and 30 November 2009 .
As the Commission has assessed this application and considers it to be suitable and to meet the set requirements , and as it recommends that the request be approved , I voted in favour .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , proper utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European citizens and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , and , at the same time , developing a new , skilled workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in this context that this intervention plan for Poland is being put forward , in relation to 590 redundancies at two companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the NUTS II region of Wielkopolskie .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects to implement measures to speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Poland because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
The request for assistance concerned 1 104 redundancies ( of which 590 have been targeted for assistance ) made redundant by two companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) , amounting to a sum of EUR 633 077 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - The Commission has proposed granting EUR 633 077 from the European Globalisation Fund to help 1 104 workers made redundant in Poland in two enterprises involved in the manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers .
I voted for this proposal .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the workers of the Polish car industry , who have been sacrificed on the altar of globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could be inclined to vote against , given the pitiful amount of this handout .
However , the little that is being given may help to ease their pain .
This does not make the rationale of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses the rationale that leads companies such as SEWS and Leoni Atokabel to shamelessly relocate in order to increase their profits .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of the company relocations that occur in a globalised world .
More and more companies are relocating , taking advantage of the lower labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on those countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of company relocations , and it is fundamental in facilitating their access to new employment .
The EGF has been used by other EU countries in the past , so now it is appropriate to grant this aid to Poland , which has applied for assistance for 590 redundancies at two companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the NUTS II region of Wielkopolskie .
In order to be able to prevent a significant increase in the level of unemployment as a result of the financial and economic crisis , the EU Member States need funds to be able to implement effective political measures quickly .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund makes available an annual amount of EUR 500 billion for this purpose .
If more than 500 workers from one or more enterprises are made redundant during a specific period , an application may be made for mobilisation of funds .
I am voting in favour of the report , as assistance amounting to EUR 633 077 for 1 104 redundant Polish workers from enterprises operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 is fully justified .
I voted in favour of the report because it concerns targeted measures to help workers suffering as a result of the economic crisis and its consequences .
Given that Poland has submitted a request for assistance for 590 redundancies at two companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the NUTS II region of Wielkopolskie , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that :
the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to establish an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused European Social Fund resources , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created as a separate , specific instrument with its own aims and deadlines , and that suitable budget lines for transfers must therefore be identified .
The request submitted by Poland for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for 590 redundancies at two companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the NUTS II region of Wielkopolskie fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily expanded to cover its intervention in situations like this in which there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , in the hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will help these workers successfully rejoin the labour market .
I voted in favour of the aid to Aragón .
This autonomous community has a population density of less than the EU average ( 112 inhabitants per square kilometre ) ; its traditional economy is growing cereals and rearing sheep ; its retail trade has suffered 1 154 redundancies from 593 businesses in a nine-month period ; 56 % of people in its service sector were unemployed in February 2010 , 73 % of whom were women ; 73.9 % of workers made redundant were sales assistants in shops and markets ; 14.4 % were doing unskilled jobs .
It is regrettable that measures began to be adopted too late , 11 months after the first redundancies .
It would be interesting to analyse the results of the temporary and extraordinary assistance measures for those made redundant which will be adopted for their reintegration into the labour market .
It must , however , remain clear that these actions must not substitute those that the businesses are obliged to adopt under national legislation or collective agreements .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance for 1 154 redundancies at 593 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 47 ( retail trade , except for motor vehicles and motorcycles ) in the NUTS II region of Aragón , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that the functioning and added value of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 , within the framework of the 2007-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework mid-term review process .
Aid to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation should be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In view of the structural changes in world trade , it is vital that the European economy is able to promptly deploy the instruments designed to support workers affected in this way , and to provide them with new skills so that they can be quickly reintegrated into the labour market .
Financial assistance should therefore be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities normally incumbent upon companies , nor is it intended for the financing and restructuring of companies .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance for 1 154 redundancies at 593 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 47 ( retail trade , except for motor vehicles and motorcycles ) in the region of Aragón , I am voting overall in favour of this report or , in other words , in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for Spain .
The financial and economic crisis that we are going through , combined with the constant shifts in the labour market caused by changes to the structure of world trade , has resulted in countless victims of unemployment , which , in many cases , is long term .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was created to respond to situations like these .
In this particular case , we are talking about the mobilisation of in excess of EUR 1.5 million in favour of Spain to support 1 154 redundancies at 593 companies in the retail trade between 1 June 2009 and 28 February 2010 .
As the Commission has assessed this application and considers it to be suitable and to meet the set requirements , and as it recommends that the request be approved , I voted in favour .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , proper utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European citizens and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , and , at the same time , developing a new , skilled workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in this context that this intervention plan for Spain is being put forward , in relation to 1 154 redundancies at 593 companies operating in Division 47 ( retail trade , except for motor vehicles and motorcycles ) in the NUTS II region of Aragón .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects to implement measures to speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Spain because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's request for assistance concerned 1 154 redundancies in 593 enterprises operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 47 ( retail trade , except for motor vehicles and motorcycles ) , amounting to a sum of EUR 1 560 000 financed by the EGF .
Lastly , I must emphasise the importance of the EGF , which has proved to be a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - The extent of the global downturn is revealed in this application from Spain to mobilise EUR 1 560 000 from the European Globalisation Fund to help 1 154 people made redundant in 593 different retail enterprises over a nine month period .
I supported this request .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of the company relocations that occur in a globalised world .
More and more companies are relocating , taking advantage of the lower labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on those countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of company relocations , and it is fundamental in facilitating their access to new employment .
The EGF has been used by other EU countries in the past , so now it is appropriate to grant this aid to Spain , which has applied for assistance for 1 154 redundancies at 593 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 47 ( retail trade , except for motor vehicles and motorcycles ) in the NUTS II region of Aragón .
There have been 1 154 redundancies affecting 593 Spanish enterprises operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 47 in the NUTS II region of Aragón .
The financial and economic crisis has resulted in a drastic downturn in sales in the retail sector .
This situation has serious consequences , particularly for the region of Aragón , which has a lower population density than the EU average .
Further emigration from this region , which , prior to the crisis , was experiencing a slight upturn , is to be feared .
I am voting in favour of the report , as immediate action must be taken to respond to increased levels of unemployment , particularly in small regions with struggling economies .
in writing . - ( DE ) Since this is a matter of additional support for workers made redundant as a result of the consequences of the global financial and economic crisis so as to provide them with additional funds for their reintegration into the labour market , I have voted in favour .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance for 1 154 redundancies at 593 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 47 ( retail trade , except for motor vehicles and motorcycles ) in the NUTS II region of Aragón , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that :
the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to establish an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused European Social Fund resources , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created as a separate , specific instrument with its own aims and deadlines , and that suitable budget lines for transfers must therefore be identified .
The request submitted by Spain for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for 1 154 redundancies at 593 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 47 ( retail trade , except for motor vehicles and motorcycles ) in the NUTS II region of Aragón fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily expanded to cover its intervention in situations like this in which there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , in the hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will help these workers successfully rejoin the labour market .
I voted in favour of European Globalisation Adjustment Fund aid for Valencia because , as a result of the structural changes in world trade and the financial crisis , there were 544 unexpected redundancies from 143 businesses between 13 April 2009 and 12 January 2010 in the Valencian textile industry , which have had a serious impact at local level .
Out of those dismissed , 61.7 % are men , 22 % are over the age of 55 , 79.9 % only have a basic education and four are disabled .
I believe that the training that they will be given during the 14 months of paid part-time work experience will improve their professional qualifications so that they can enter the labour market .
As in the previous case , it is regrettable that the measures were applied too late , one year and two months after the first redundancies .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance for 350 redundancies at 143 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 13 ( manufacture of textiles ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that the Commission 's proposal , in its explanatory statement , should include clear and detailed information on the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons that led to its approval , in accordance with the requests made by Parliament .
Aid to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation should be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In view of the structural changes in world trade , it is vital that the European economy is able to promptly deploy the instruments designed to support workers affected in this way , and to provide them with new skills so that they can be quickly reintegrated into the labour market .
Financial assistance should therefore be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities normally incumbent upon companies , nor is it intended for the financing and restructuring of companies .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance for 350 redundancies at 143 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 13 ( manufacture of textiles ) in the region of Comunidad Valenciana , I am voting overall in favour of this report or , in other words , in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for Spain .
The financial and economic crisis that we are going through , combined with the constant shifts in the labour market caused by changes to the structure of world trade , has resulted in countless victims of unemployment , which , in many cases , is long term .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was created to respond to situations like these .
In this particular case , we are talking about the mobilisation of in excess of EUR 2 million in favour of Spain to support 544 redundancies at 143 companies in the textile sector between 13 April 2009 and 12 January 2010 .
As the Commission has assessed this application and considers it to be suitable and to meet the set requirements , and as it recommends that the request be approved , I voted in favour .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , proper utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European citizens and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , and , at the same time , developing a new , skilled workforce to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in this context that this intervention plan for Spain is being put forward , in relation to 350 redundancies at 143 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 13 ( manufacture of textiles ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will redouble their effects to implement measures to speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Spain because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's request for assistance concerned 544 redundancies ( of which 350 have been targeted for assistance ) in 143 enterprises operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 13 ( manufacture of textiles ) , amounting to a sum of EUR 2 059 466 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - The textile industry is currently facing a challenging time all over Europe .
The Commission proposes mobilising EUR 1 422 850 in response to 528 redundancies in 33 enterprises in the sector in Spain .
I voted in favour .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of the company relocations that occur in a globalised world .
More and more companies are relocating , taking advantage of the lower labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on those countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of company relocations , and it is fundamental in facilitating their access to new employment .
The EGF has been used by other EU countries in the past , so now it is appropriate to grant this aid to Spain , which has applied for assistance for 350 redundancies at 143 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 13 ( manufacture of textiles ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana .
Between 13 April 2009 and 12 January 2010 , 544 Spanish workers were made redundant from 143 enterprises operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 13 ( manufacturing of textiles ) .
In order to be able to provide 350 of them with assistance , Spain has applied for the mobilisation of EUR 2 059 466 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I am voting in favour of the report , as all the criteria for the mobilisation of the fund have been met in full .
Since the proportion of small and medium-sized enterprises specialising mainly in the manufacture of furniture , shoes , textiles , ceramics and toys in Comunidad Valenciana is very high and the service sector represents 60 % of total employment in this region , this sector has been particularly badly affected by the high number of redundancies in the last two years .
This has a high impact at local level .
It is therefore particularly important for us to strengthen and continue to support the textile industry .
I therefore voted in favour of this application .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance for 350 redundancies at 143 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 13 ( manufacture of textiles ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that :
the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to establish an alternative source of payment appropriations to unused European Social Fund resources , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created as a separate , specific instrument with its own aims and deadlines , and that suitable budget lines for transfers must therefore be identified .
The request submitted by Spain for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) concerns 544 redundancies ( 350 of which are eligible to receive support ) at 143 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 13 ( manufacture of textiles ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana .
According to the Commission 's assessment , this application fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
In effect , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily expanded to cover its intervention in situations like this in which there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , in the hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will help these workers successfully rejoin the labour market .
I voted in favour of this initiative so that 330 people out of the 528 who were made redundant over a period of nine months from 66 companies in Valencia in the natural-stone processing sector can receive additional aid in order to make it possible for them to re-enter the labour market .
Of those dismissed , 62 % are over the age of 45 , three are disabled , 51 % do not have any training and 34.4 % only have a basic education .
This community has already received other aid due to job losses in the manufacturing sector .
Therefore , other measures urgently need to be adopted .
The mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund can only form part of those measures .
To conclude , I must once again regret the fact that the Spanish State applied measures too late : one year and three months after the redundancies , when these types of measures have to be applied immediately and urgently .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance for 300 redundancies at 66 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 23 ( manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that the functioning and added value of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 , as part of the 2007-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework mid-term review .
Assistance to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation must be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In the light of structural changes to international trade , it is important for the European economy to quickly implement instruments to aid workers affected by such changes , whilst also giving them the skills required for their swift reintegration into the labour market .
On this basis , financial assistance should be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for companies ' normal responsibilities , nor is it intended to finance companies or lead to their restructuring .
Given that Spain has requested assistance for 300 individuals who have lost their jobs at 66 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 23 ( manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products ) in the region of Comunidad Valenciana , overall , I am voting in favour of this report or , put another way , in favour of mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to support Spain .
We are today approving the mobilisation of an aid package totalling EUR 1 422 850 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in favour of Spain , a country that has been badly affected by the global economic crisis and , in particular , has seen unemployment rise above the European average .
In this specific case , the aid concerns 528 redundancies at 66 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 23 ( manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products ) .
I hope the Spanish economy will be able to respond adequately to the crisis , as the mobilisation of this aid is only part of that response .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , proper utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , supplying new qualified resources to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in such a context that this intervention plan for Spain has been designed , a plan implemented regarding 66 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 23 ( manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana .
I hope , therefore , that the European institutions will consolidate efforts to implement measures designed to accelerate and improve the level of utilisation of a resource of such importance as the EGF which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Spain because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 528 redundancies ( of which 300 have been targeted for assistance from the fund ) in 66 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 23 ( manufacture of non-metallic mineral products ) , amounting to a sum of EUR 1 422 850 financed by the EGF .
in writing . - This application refers to the mobilisation of a global amount of EUR 1 422 850 from the EGF for Spain .
It concerns 528 redundancies in 66 enterprises operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 23 , namely ' Manufacture of non-metallic mineral products ' , during the nine-month reference period from 31 March to 30 December 2009 .
The Commission 's assessment was based on : the evaluation of the link between the redundancies and major structural changes in world trade patterns or the financial crisis ; the unforeseen nature of the redundancies concerned ; demonstration of the number of redundancies and compliance with the criteria of Article 2 ( a ) ; the explanation of the unforeseen nature of those redundancies ; the identification of dismissing enterprises and workers targeted for assistance , the territory concerned and its authorities and stakeholders ; the impact of the redundancies as regards local , regional or national employment ; the coordinated package of personalised services to be funded , including its compatibility with actions funded by the Structural Funds ; dates on which the personalised services to affected workers were started or planned to start ; procedures for consulting the social partners , management and control systems .
In accordance with the Commission 's assessment , the application fulfils the eligibility criteria set up by the EGF Regulation and I therefore support it .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the Spanish workers of companies such as Levantina who have been sacrificed on the altar of globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could be inclined to vote against , given the pitiful amount of this handout .
However , the little that is being given may help to ease their pain .
This does not make the rationale of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses the rationale that has enabled the Charterhouse and Impala Funds to increase their capital at the expense of the Levantina workers in Comunidad Valenciana .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of this .
This aid is essential in helping the unemployed and victims of the relocations occurring in an era of globalisation .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries which respect workers ' rights .
The EGF aims to help workers who are victims of companies relocating and is crucial in facilitating access to new jobs .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is proper to provide aid to Spain which has presented a request for assistance relating to the 300 individuals who have lost their jobs in 66 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 23 ( manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana .
EUR 500 million is the annual ceiling for the funds that can be mobilised through the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
As there were a total of 528 redundancies in 66 enterprises in Spain between 31 March 2009 and 30 December 2009 , the mobilisation of funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund amounting to EUR 1 422 850 is not in the least surprising .
I am voting in favour of the report , as the full utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is extremely welcome .
I support this application , which seeks to cushion the effects of the numerous redundancies in this sector and to assist the reintegration into the labour market of workers who have been made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
Given that Spain has requested assistance in respect of 300 redundancies at 66 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 23 ( manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree that :
the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I welcome the European Commission 's proposal to establish a source of funds other than unused European Social Fund resources , in response to the repeated statements by the European Parliament that it is necessary to identify appropriate budgetary mechanisms for the transfer of funds , given that the EGF was set up to be a specific and separate instrument with its own aims and funding periods .
The request submitted by Spain to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in relation to 300 of the 528 redundancies at 66 companies operating in NACE 2 Division 23 ( manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products ) in the NUTS II region of Comunidad Valenciana fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
Under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily widened : intervention was envisaged in situations like this where , as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , and I hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will contribute to the successful reintegration of these workers into the labour market .
The crisis has led to a 28 % decline in vehicle registrations .
In Terres de l 'Ebre ( Catalonia ) , employment in the service sector is at 60 % .
The closure of Lear Automotive led to a 4 % increase in unemployment in the area , which , in 2009 , stood at 22.7 % .
This aid aims to provide a package of personalised services similar to other aid granted in the same region and to the same sector , in another case that covered 1 429 of the 2 330 people made redundant .
This case will apply to 508 of the 515 redundancies recorded over a period of four months in 2010 due to the closure of Lear Automotive .
I voted in favour of this initiative so that its application will enable those affected to re-enter the labour market and it will help to reduce unemployment .
Given that Spain has applied for assistance for 508 redundancies at Lear Automotive ( EEDS ) Spain , S.L. Sociedad Unipersonal , a company that operates in the automotive sector , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal as amended by Parliament .
I also agree that the Commission 's proposal , in its explanatory statement , should include clear and detailed information on the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons that led to its approval , in accordance with the requests made by Parliament .
Aid to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation should be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In view of the structural changes in world trade , it is vital that the European economy is able to promptly deploy the instruments designed to support workers affected in this way , and to provide them with new skills so that they can be quickly reintegrated into the labour market .
Financial assistance should therefore be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities normally incumbent upon companies , nor is it intended for the financing and restructuring of companies .
Given that Spain has applied for assistance for 508 redundancies at Lear Automotive ( EEDS ) , a company operating in the automotive sector in the region of Catalonia , I am voting overall in favour of this report or , in other words , in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for Spain .
We are here again today to adopt the mobilisation of a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) assistance package totalling EUR 382 000 to support the Spanish automotive industry .
In this particular case , the assistance relates to the 515 jobs which have been lost at Lear Automotive ( EEDS ) Spain , S.L. Sociedad Unipersonal , a company which operates in the automotive sector in Catalonia .
Before the crisis , the automotive sector was Spain 's most important source of exports .
However , the reduction in demand for such products in the European Union as a result of the crisis promises to threaten yet more job losses , not only in Spain but throughout the Union , and , as a consequence , it is important that utilisation of the EGF can effectively assist a sector which is so important to the European economy .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , proper utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , supplying new qualified resources to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in such a context that this intervention plan for Spain has been designed , a plan which will assist the 508 individuals who have lost their jobs at Lear Automotive ( EEDS ) Spain , S.L. Sociedad Unipersonal , a company which operates in the automotive sector .
I hope , therefore , that the European institutions will consolidate efforts to implement measures designed to accelerate and improve the level of utilisation of a resource of such importance as the EGF which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Spain because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
The report adopted today concerned a request for assistance for 515 redundancies ( of which 508 have been targeted for assistance from the fund ) in Lear Automotive ( EEDS ) Spain , an enterprise which operates in the automotive sector in Catalonia , amounting to a total of EUR 382 200 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - The economic downturn in the automotive sector has led to 515 redundancies in the enterprise Lear Automotive ( Spain ) .
I support the proposal to mobilise EUR 382 200 from the European Globalisation Fund to assist them .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the Spanish workers of Lear Automotive , who have been sacrificed on the altar of globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could be inclined to vote against , given the pitiful amount of this handout .
However , the little that is being given may help to ease their pain .
This does not make the rationale of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses the rationale that has led this US multinational and its main shareholders , Pezna Investment Management and the Californian teachers ' pension fund , to relocate without any consideration for those who made them wealthy .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This aid is essential in helping the unemployed and victims of the relocations occurring in an era of globalisation .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF aims to help workers who are victims of companies relocating and is crucial in facilitating access to new jobs .
The EGF has already been used in the past by other EU countries , so we should now grant this aid to Spain for assistance with respect to 508 redundancies at Lear Automotive ( EEDS ) Spain , S.L. Sociedad Unipersonal , a company which operates in the automotive sector in Catalonia .
In order to be able to apply for funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and for the application subsequently to be approved , there are clearly defined criteria that need to be met .
It is intended to benefit workers who have been made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis by establishing measures that will guarantee their rapid reintegration into the labour market .
The fund provides an annual amount of EUR 500 million for such cases .
However , an enterprise must have made at least 500 redundancies - like the Spanish enterprise Lear Automotive , which meets all the criteria - for Spain to be able to apply for funds .
I am voting in favour of the report , as this is precisely what the funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund are for .
Given that Spain has requested assistance in respect of 508 redundancies at Lear Automotive ( EEDS ) Spain , S.L. Sociedad Unipersonal , a company which operates in the automotive sector , I voted in favour of the resolution , because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree that :
the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I welcome the European Commission 's proposal to establish a source of funds other than unused European Social Fund resources , in response to the repeated statements by the European Parliament that it is necessary to identify appropriate budgetary mechanisms for the transfer of funds , given that the EGF was set up to be a specific and separate instrument with its own aims and funding periods .
The request submitted by Spain to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in relation to 508 redundancies at Lear Automotive ( EEDS ) Spain , S.L. Sociedad Unipersonal , a company which operates in the automotive sector , fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
Under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily widened : intervention was envisaged in situations like this where , as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of four months in an enterprise in a Member State ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , and I hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will contribute to the successful reintegration of these workers into the labour market .
Given that Poland has requested assistance in respect of 189 redundancies at H. Cegielski-Poznań and at four of its suppliers , all operating in the marine diesel engine sector , I voted in favour of the resolution , as I agree with the Commission 's proposal combined with the respective amendments introduced by Parliament .
I also agree that we should ensure that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors .
Aid to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation must be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In the light of structural changes to international trade , it is important for the European economy to quickly implement instruments to aid workers affected by such changes , whilst also giving them the skills required for their swift reintegration into the labour market .
Given this , financial assistance should be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for companies ' normal responsibilities , nor is it intended to finance companies or lead to their restructuring .
Given that Poland has requested assistance for 189 cases of redundancy at H. Cegielski-Poznań , a producer of diesel motors used in ships and electricity stations and four of its suppliers , overall , I am voting in favour of this report or , put another way , in favour of mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to support Poland .
We are here today to adopt a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) assistance package of EUR 114 250 for Poland to allow it to address the consequences of the 658 job losses at four productive facilities at H. Cegielski-Poznań , a company involved in the production of maritime diesel motors , and four of its suppliers in the cities and district of Poznań .
As I have always warned , whilst such assistance is very important in dealing with the present symptoms , it is not a final solution to the problems affecting European industries which relate not only to the economic crisis we are facing but also to the need for Europe to adapt to a changing world , one in which competitiveness is fundamental .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , proper utilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , supplying new qualified resources to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in this context that this intervention plan for Poland has been designed , a plan which relates to the 189 individuals who have lost their jobs at H. Cegielski-Poznań , a firm which produces maritime diesel motors , and four of its suppliers .
I hope , therefore , that the European institutions will consolidate efforts to implement measures designed to accelerate and improve the level of utilisation of a resource of such importance as the EGF which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
The global economic crisis has given rise to major structural changes in many businesses , resulting in a huge number of people losing their jobs .
The proposal under examination relates to assistance for a large group of workers laid off in the Polish region of Wielkopolskie .
A second proposal for financial assistance upon which we are voting today relates to several hundred more lay-offs in the same region .
There is therefore a huge amount of upheaval on the local market in this region of Poland .
I am delighted that the European Commission has confirmed that the application meets the conditions required for the granting of financial support .
As a result , the laid-off workers will be able either to get back their old jobs or find new ones , and the owners of the businesses will make use of the support to mitigate the negative effects of the global crisis and to maintain their place in the market .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Poland .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for assistance for 658 redundancies ( of which 189 have been targeted for assistance ) at H. Cegielski-Poznań and four of its suppliers , enterprises which operate in the sector concerned with the manufacture of marine diesel engines in the cities of Poznań and Poviat , amounting to a total of EUR 114 250 financed by the EGF .
Lastly , I would note that the adoption of today 's reports once again shows the importance of the EGF , which is a valuable resource to assist workers in difficulties due to the economic crisis and is also an effective tool for combating unemployment .
in writing . - I voted for this application for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to assist 658 redundancies in the enterprise H. Cegielski-Poznań and four of its suppliers , which operate in the manufacture of marine diesel engines in Poznań and the surrounding district .
The Commission proposed mobilising EUR 114 250 and I support the proposal .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the workers of the Polish car industry , who have been sacrificed on the altar of globalisation .
In the situation into which they are plunged as a result of the neoliberal policies advocated by the European Union , one could be inclined to vote against , given the pitiful amount of this handout .
However , the little that is being given may help to ease their pain .
This does not make the rationale of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund any less intolerable .
It endorses the rationale which leads to the privatisation of State-owned companies such as Ciegielski-Poznań .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This aid is essential in helping the unemployed and victims of the relocations occurring in an era of globalisation .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF aims to help workers who are victims of companies relocating and is crucial in facilitating access to new jobs .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is appropriate for providing aid to Poland , which has presented a request for assistance relating to the 189 redundancies at H. Cegielski-Poznań , a company which produces marine diesel engines , and at four of its suppliers .
In order for States in which workers have been made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis to be able to provide these workers with practical assistance , the EU has set up the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The mobilisation of funds is intended to facilitate the reintegration into the labour market of those affected .
I am voting in favour of the report , as Poland needs to support 658 workers who have been made redundant from the enterprise H. Cegielski-Poznán .
Given that Poland has requested assistance in respect of 189 redundancies at H. Cegielski-Poznań and at four of its suppliers , all operating in the marine diesel engine sector , I voted in favour of the resolution , as I agree with the Commission 's proposal combined with the respective amendments introduced by Parliament .
I also agree that :
the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should support the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would reiterate that assistance from the EGF is not a substitute for measures that are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor is it intended to finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I welcome the European Commission 's proposal to establish a source of funds other than unused European Social Fund resources , in response to the repeated statements by the European Parliament that it is necessary to identify appropriate budgetary mechanisms for the transfer of funds , given that the EGF was set up to be a specific and separate instrument with its own aims and funding periods .
The request submitted by Poland to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in relation to 189 of the 658 redundancies at H. Cegielski-Poznán , a company which produces marine diesel engines , and four of its suppliers , in the period from 1 September 2009 to 1 January 2010 , fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
Under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily widened : intervention was envisaged in situations like this where , as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of four months in an enterprise in a Member State , including workers made redundant within its suppliers or downstream producers ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , and I hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will contribute to the successful reintegration of these workers into the labour market .
in writing . - With the adoption of this text , the EP has requested the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF .
It also recalls the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have suffered redundancies as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis .
It emphasises the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market .
Finally , it stresses that , in accordance with Article 6 of the EGF Regulation , it should be ensured that the EGF supports the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and reiterates that assistance from the EGF must not replace actions which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor measures restructuring companies or sectors .
It is regrettable that this proposal , dating back to 2003 , and which aims to provide refugees with long-term resident status after five years of continuous legal residence , has not been implemented in the intervening period .
With the amendments proposed by the European Parliament in April 2008 , which provide for , amongst other measures , the calculation of the five years of residence preceding the application for residence status , and with the lack of unanimity in the Council , this new proposal will directly aid beneficiaries of international protection who have been residing within EU territory for more than five years but still do not have resident status .
I voted for this report which supports the application of the proposal to both Geneva Convention refugees and beneficiaries of subsidiary protection .
In its report , the European Parliament supports the European Commission 's proposal and takes into account the commitment to protect the interests of beneficiaries of international protection .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that currently , the situation for citizens of third countries who are beneficiaries of international protection is confusing and unclear because the conditions for granting this status are not harmonised .
According to the Commission 's proposal , the conditions and procedure for granting status will become simpler and clearer in the European Union .
Furthermore , this new directive will enable beneficiaries of international protection who become long-term residents to take up residence in a Member State other than the one in which they were recognised .
This initiative has been tabled to follow up on the 2007 proposal for a directive on the extension of long-term resident status to refugees and persons under subsidiary protection , which never achieved the unanimity in the Council that was necessary before the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force .
It aims to give beneficiaries of international protection who have been legally residing in a Member State for a period of five years legal certainty about their right of residence in a Member State , as well as a set of rights comparable to those of EU nationals .
The compromise reached is of the greatest importance , not only because it allows refugees within the EU to have a high level of protection and legal certainty , but also because the discriminatory treatment of all nationals of countries outside the EU has finally been abolished .
It is also an important political signal , because the adoption of this first initiative of a series of six pieces of legislation is not only a first step , but also a reflection of the constructive approach guiding the three institutions in the establishment of a Common European Asylum System by 2012 .
I voted in favour of adopting this directive .
The proposal for a directive amends another directive from 2003 so as to allow beneficiaries of international protection as well ( refugees in particular ) to be granted the right to be eligible for a long-term residence permit within the EU if the relevant person has already lived legally in the EU for at least five years .
Once they have this permit , they will enjoy similar rights to the rest of citizens and will be able , for example , to move around and settle in any EU state ( apart from the UK , Denmark and Ireland ) .
It is further stipulated that these beneficiaries of international protection may continue to be expelled from the EU , but only under very strict rules , bearing in mind the principle of refoulement and the rights granted primarily under the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This proposal aims to extend the scope of Council Directive 2003 / 109 / EC concerning the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents and beneficiaries of international protection who have been legally residing in a Member State for a period of more than five years .
By treating beneficiaries of international protection equally in all Member States , such a measure puts an end to the inequalities which have hitherto existed between Member States and will allow the individuals in question to reside in a Member State other than the one in which they gained legal recognition , something which did not happen previously .
These measures are important precisely because we are building a common area of freedom and security within Europe , creating an area in which those who are duly recognised as having the protection of international law must benefit from the same rights in the various Member States .
After a first failed attempt , it was about time that beneficiaries of international protection finally enjoyed equal treatment with other third-country nationals who are long-term residents .
Indeed , there is no reason why they should be treated so differently or why there should be such uncertainty over their status within the Union .
I therefore supported Claude Moraes 's report , which , among other things , has made it possible to further strengthen the guarantees against ' refoulement ' and , despite the reservations expressed , to arrive at the favourable figure of five years ' residence .
Another significant fact to be welcomed is that this is the only text of the ' asylum package ' to have ultimately been adopted under the Belgian Presidency of the Council of the European Union , and this in spite of the commitments made at the beginning of its mandate .
Therefore , we need to continue to work hard to ensure that the Common European Asylum System , founded , inter alia , on common procedures and reception conditions , finally becomes a reality within the Union .
Today , the issues at stake are clear to see : only by improving and harmonising national asylum systems , which differ so much at present , will we be able to have a common system .
I voted for the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2003 / 109 / EC to extend its scope to beneficiaries of international protection .
I did so because I believe that it is important to guarantee refugees the same rights as citizens from third countries who hold a long-term residence permit .
Through today 's vote , the European Parliament has plugged a gap in European Union law regulating the legal status of long-term legal residents , which did not apply to refugees and beneficiaries of international protection .
Thanks to the new rules , these people will be able to enjoy greater certainty with regard to their legal status in the European Union and will not be subject to inequality of treatment compared to citizens of third countries .
in writing . - I voted for this proposal which intends to give long-term resident status to beneficiaries of international protection who have been residing legally on the territory of the EU for more than 5 years .
This gives them an opportunity to integrate , which means being able to communicate in one of the official languages of their Member State of residence , and to increase their awareness of their rights and obligations , as well as of the core values of the Member State of residence .
To this end , language training should be provided by the Member State to long-term residents .
Member States should also be encouraged to develop training programmes about the fundamental laws and core values of the Member State of residence and principles of democracy , human rights and equality , as well as individual rights and obligations in that Member State .
I voted for this report because I am convinced that it would have positive effects for all beneficiaries of international protection who have been residing legally on the territory of the European Union for more than five years , but who currently have no entitlement to long-term resident status .
We are convinced of the need to ensure greater certainty regarding their legal situation in the EU , avoiding all possible differential treatment vis-à-vis other third-country nationals .
We share the serious concern of some Member States that they may host a disproportionate number of beneficiaries of international protection due to their particular geographical or demographic situation .
Therefore , it seems that further measures to deal with any unwanted consequences are more necessary than ever , including , for instance , the adoption of measures to make it easier for such people to move to and establish residence in a Member State other than the one that afforded them international protection .
We therefore support all possible proposed safeguards against refoulement ( only the Member State which granted international protection should be authorised to carry out expulsions ) , striving to uphold family unity where desirable .
The intention is that the adoption of this report will extend the scope of Council Directive 2003 / 109 / EC concerning the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents and beneficiaries of international protection who have been legally residing in a Member State for a period of more than five years .
From now on , this will allow equal treatment of beneficiaries of international protection in all Member States and will allow the individuals in question to reside within a Member State other than the one in which they gained legal recognition , something which did not happen previously .
The importance of these measures is directly related to the aim of creating a common area of freedom and security within Europe , creating an area in which those who are duly recognised as having the protection of international law must benefit from the same rights in the various Member States .
International law and moral principles give the European Union the opportunity of accelerating the granting of legal status to individuals whose life in their country of birth , outside the European Union , is impossible .
Every individual has the right to be treated humanely .
However , refugee status must be defined taking into account all the circumstances and prohibiting any kind of speculative dealings , be it of a financial nature or pertaining to migration policy .
Unfortunately , facts that have not been thoroughly verified are often accepted as true in both the European Union and the European Parliament .
Sometimes , the false statements made by defenders of rights and various assorted individuals are accepted as true .
It is important not to tolerate populism .
Otherwise , whole peoples may be able to settle in Europe under refugee status .
Whether , under what circumstances and after what period of legal residence refugees are granted a long-term residence permit is a matter for the Member States to decide and must not be dictated by the EU .
The fact that this proposal was adopted two years late and in a revised form is not without its problems , because a correct interpretation of the much cited Geneva Convention would result in only a fraction of the asylum applications being accepted .
The fact that after five years of legal residence , beneficiaries of international protection are to have rights comparable to those of EU nationals has raised problems and questions , particularly in those EU states with strong social systems , which will give rise to inestimable costs .
Extension of the area of application to include refugees and beneficiaries of subsidiary protection can only serve to burden the public purse even more .
We must , in particular , always take into account the enticement to refugees , in other words , the fact that the measures intended to provide protection and financial security are exactly those that represent an incentive for many economic migrants to immigrate illegally into Europe on the pretext of seeking asylum from inhumane and life-threatening conditions .
Equally questionable is the idea of taking into account the duration of the asylum procedure when calculating entitlement to a residence permit .
For these reasons , I voted against the report .
After residing in a Member State for five years , refugees are to be granted a long-term residence permit , which is then to apply throughout the whole of the EU .
Since the asylum systems in the different Member States have different levels of stringency , a well-advised refugee would settle initially in the Member State that has the most lenient asylum law with the most loopholes .
After five years , he can then leave his place of residence and move to any other Member State of the European Union of his choosing .
The result is secondary migration from countries with low standards to Member States with generous social systems .
People will first choose the Member States according to the stringency of the asylum law and then according to the level of social services .
That would , of course , put a particular burden on countries like Austria , Germany or the Netherlands .
The approach taken by this report is certainly not a sensible way to deal with asylum challenges in the EU and pursue appropriate integration policy .
I therefore voted against this report .
I voted in favour of the present report as I agree with the extension of the scope of Directive 2003 / 109 / EC to provide long-term resident status to individuals who benefit from protection under international law and who have already legally resided in the territory of a Member State for a period of five years .
In particular , I would emphasise the inclusive nature of the policy which would result from the present proposal .
Long-term resident status provides the opportunity to integrate these individuals , particularly through the language training which must be provided by Member States to long-term residents .
For the same reasons , I support the rapporteur 's proposal to encourage Member States to develop educational programmes on the fundamental values and legal principles of the Member State of residence , as well as on the general principles of democracy , human rights and the rights and duties of individuals .
I should like to thank Mr Moraes for his excellent work and I share with him the idea of adopting a constructive approach that includes most of the amendments proposed by the Commission , as well as numerous technical amendments agreed in the Council during negotiations on this instrument .
The draft report reflects the desire to take some of the Member States ' concerns into consideration , with the aim of reaching an agreement at first reading , as well as a commitment to protect the interests of beneficiaries of international protection before and after they obtain long-term residency status .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that the extension of long-term resident status to beneficiaries of international protection who have been legally residing in a Member State for a period of five years is quite clearly justifiable , since it guarantees equality of treatment to all nationals of third countries , and promotes the economic and social cohesion of the European Union .
in writing . - In 2001 , the Commission presented a proposal for a directive concerning the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents .
In this proposal , it was originally foreseen that refugees could qualify for long-term resident status after five years of legal and continuous residence in a Member State .
In the course of the negotiations , it was nevertheless decided by the Member States to exclude refugees from the scope of the directive .
Subsequently , in the Joint Statement from the Council and the Commission , made at the JHA Council of 8 May 2003 , it was agreed that the Commission would table a proposal for a directive on the extension of long-term resident status to refugees and persons under subsidiary protection .
This proposal was tabled by the Commission in June 2007 using the same legal base as the act it was supposed to amend , i.e. Articles 63 ( 3 ) ( a ) and 63 ( 4 ) of the EC Treaty .
The main objective of the proposal was to give beneficiaries of international protection who have been legally residing in a Member State for a period of 5 years legal certainty about their right of residence in a Member State , as well as a set of rights comparable to those of EU nationals .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution which approves the conclusion of an agreement with Georgia on the facilitation of the issuance of visas .
This agreement shows a clear desire for rapprochement between Georgia and the EU which has been expressed in recent years through a series of significant political acts , ranging from improved bilateral cooperation between the EU and Georgia to Georgia 's accession to the Council of Europe and the European Convention on Human Rights .
I supported the resolution as I strongly believe that the agreement on the facilitation of the issuance of visas will facilitate people-to-people contacts , which are a very important condition for the development of economic , social , humanitarian , cultural , scientific and other ties .
I believe that the elimination of the visa requirement for the citizens of Georgia will mark an important step on their path to European integration .
A visa facilitation regime is of great significance in people 's lives as it strengthens contacts between peoples and brings about the realisation of the idea of free movement , which is one of the fundamental rights in Europe .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this European Parliament recommendation on the facilitation of the issuance of visas for Georgia , because the enlargement of the European Union was an opportunity for the Union to create a new framework for cooperation with its neighbours to the east and the south .
In particular , the agreement on the facilitation of the issuance of visas will facilitate people-to-people contacts that form a major precondition for developing economic , humanitarian , cultural , scientific and other ties .
Furthermore , a visa facilitation regime is of great significance in people 's lives as it strengthens contacts between peoples and brings about the realisation of the idea of free movement , which is one of the fundamental rights in Europe .
The elimination of the visa requirement for citizens of Georgia will also mark an important stage on their path to European integration .
I agree with the European Parliament 's position that agreements concluded between the Union and Georgia , such as that on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation and on the facilitation of the issuance of visas , are , first of all , a very important stage , a step forward in relations between the European Union and Georgia .
Furthermore , these agreements are also relevant from a regional point of view and will support EU efforts to enhance cooperation with other countries in the region .
The European Union has speeded up the process of opening up to the states of the South Caucasus ever since its expansion towards Eastern Europe , at a time when this region has become extremely important from a strategic , stability and security perspective .
Europe now has a duty to the countries in this region .
Its commitment is clear , especially given the proximity of these countries to the EU 's eastern border .
Apart from the economic and commercial potential offered by these states , the agreement between the EU and Georgia on the facilitation of issuance of visas to citizens from this state is also a measure for encouraging democracy in this country .
It is important for the EU to export the principles of good governance , fair justice and total respect for human rights .
This action will also be boosted by the two agreements signed recently with Georgia .
One concerns the readmission of persons residing without authorisation and the other the facilitated issuance of visas .
Waiving the compulsory requirement for Georgian citizens to have visas will mark an important step on the road to bringing them closer to Europe .
A visa facilitation scheme is of paramount importance to people 's lives as it increases contacts between people and makes a reality of the idea of free movement , one of the European Union 's fundamental rights .
The actions of the European Union must be based upon the principles of good governance and respect for democracy and human rights .
In relations with the South Caucasus region , the EU must be a partner to it , assisting with economic and commercial development , with security , with stability , with the promotion of prosperity , and with conflict resolution .
The agreement to facilitate the visa process for Georgia will contribute to the EU 's enlarged neighbourhood policy by promoting cooperation and the exchange of individuals between the two parties .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution .
Without any doubt , this agreement constitutes significant progress in relations between the EU and Georgia .
Following on from the strengthening of bilateral cooperation with the EU , and from Georgia 's participation in the Council of Europe and the European Convention on Human Rights , this agreement represents another step towards improving the operation of justice and increased respect for basic freedoms by Georgia .
It is to be hoped that this agreement will provide Georgia with the incentive to carry out the necessary reforms in the areas of freedom , security and justice .
At the same time , the agreement should make it easier for citizens of the two contracting parties to move and maintain personal contacts , something which is essential to ensuring the development of economic , humanitarian , cultural and other relations .
I also hope that the necessary information campaigns will be implemented in Georgia , in order to inform the Georgian public both of the entry into force of this facilitated visa regime and of the new opportunities from which they can now benefit .
Two important agreements for relations between the European Union and Georgia have just been adopted : one on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation and one on visa facilitation .
These agreements represent a first step in the process of strengthening relations between the European Union and Georgia .
Thus , the EU wishes to encourage Georgia to implement the reforms required in the areas of freedom , security and justice .
These agreements are also beneficial at a regional level .
They will contribute to the efforts made by the Union to strengthen cooperation with other countries in the South Caucasus region , such as Armenia and Azerbaijan .
The growing relationship between Georgia and the European Union , evident in a range of recent actions , is to be welcomed .
The agreement on the facilitation of the issuance of visas is another important step towards Georgia 's integration into Europe .
The freedom of movement of individuals is one of the most important rights which the EU provides to its citizens and , for this reason , I view cooperation between the EU and Georgia favourably .
Combating illegal immigration and providing incentives for reform in the spheres of security , freedom and justice could bear ample fruit if there is a spirit of commitment from both sides .
in writing . - ( LV ) I have always emphasised that it is the European Union 's duty to lend a helping hand to those peoples who feel that they belong and wish to belong to the West and to accept our values .
In the Rose Revolution , the people of Georgia rejected stagnation , dishonest governance , the past and post-Communism , and chose development , the future and Western values .
By its actions , that country has confirmed that it wishes to be a partner of a modern international society , one that does not shirk taking responsibility .
Georgia has achieved much in a short time .
It has substantially improved its governing structures , attracted significant investment and significantly reduced corruption .
I consider the facilitated issuance of visas to be an essential step in opening up new opportunities for study to Georgian citizens , and in allowing Georgian entrepreneurs to make new contacts with entrepreneurs in European Union Member States .
In this way , we shall all be winners , but Georgia 's citizens most of all .
Just as we Europeans take pride in our achievements , our history and cultural values , so Georgians take pride in their country , its natural beauty and ancient culture .
I hope that a facilitated visa regime between the EU and Georgia will also encourage Europeans to become acquainted with Georgia .
in writing . - I supported this report on the EU-Georgia agreement on the facilitation of issuance of visas .
The process of deepening the relations between the EU and the countries of the South Caucasus , including Georgia , will undoubtedly contribute to improving the exercise of justice and the respect for freedoms .
The two agreements recently concluded with Georgia , one on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation and the other on the facilitation of the issuance of visas , will contribute fully to achieving these objectives
Georgia has made noteworthy efforts to develop closer relations with the European Union , as is evident in a range of recent actions .
The present agreement on the facilitation of the issuance of visas is thereby another important step towards Georgia 's integration into Europe .
The freedom of movement of individuals is one of the most important rights which the EU provides to its citizens and , for this reason , this cooperation between the EU and Georgia is very important .
It is , however , essential for the struggle against illegal immigration to continue and for there to continue to be incentives for reform in the spheres of security , freedom and justice in Georgia .
The South Caucasus is of strategic importance to the European Union .
The process of strengthening relations between the European Union and the countries of the South Caucasus , including Georgia , will help to improve the exercise of justice and the level of respect for freedoms .
This agreement represents an important stage in the relations between the European Union and Georgia and an encouraging step forward , given Georgia 's European aspirations .
Furthermore , the agreement is also beneficial at a regional level and will contribute to the efforts made by the Union to strengthen cooperation with other countries in the region .
For Georgia , this also represents a step forward and an encouragement to cooperate further with its neighbours and with the European Union .
Moreover , this type of agreement will encourage Georgia to implement the reforms required in the areas of freedom , security and justice , such as the fight against illegal immigration , the strengthening of democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
I abstained in the vote , because I am well informed about the situation in Georgia and about the Georgian President 's determination to increase his prestige with the signing of this agreement .
I consider Mr Saakashvili to be a war criminal .
His regime is responsible for the deaths of thousands of innocent civilians .
I saw it with my own eyes in August 2008 in the city of Tskhinvali .
Any kind of flirtation with a criminal will inspire him to commit further crimes .
An agreement with Georgia would bring a wave of bogus asylum seekers .
Thus , we first need to dispel our security concerns .
As the experience with the Balkans shows , visa-free travel is not just used for travel to the EU , but also sets a real stream of asylum shopping in motion .
It is to be feared that the same thing would also happen in the case of visa facilitation for Georgian citizens .
In general , the facilitation of the issuance of visas to citizens of non-EU states should not be granted too hastily .
Before doing so , it must be examined as carefully as possible whether appropriate readmission agreements for bogus asylum seekers and economic migrants could prevent the abuse of the system .
The problems with the Schengen Information System II must also be resolved beforehand .
Finally , it must not primarily be asylum seekers , or even criminals , that benefit from visa-free travel .
The preconditions mentioned have not been met and I therefore reject an extension of the visa-free area in the strongest possible terms .
According to the report , visa liberalisation for Georgia would provide an incentive for necessary reforms in the areas of freedom , security and justice .
Quite apart from the opportunities for abuse of the system that visa liberalisation would open up , this logic needs to be turned on its head : no visa negotiations until all of the necessary reforms have been implemented .
At the end of the day , this is about the security of EU citizens , who must be protected against visa tourists and organised crime .
I therefore voted against this report .
The process of strengthening relations between the European Union and the countries of the Southern Caucasus , including Georgia , is vital if we are to create a solid , coherent and effective foreign policy .
The conclusion of an agreement to simplify the visa process has clearly contributed to the realisation of this objective .
The draft decision regarding the conclusion of the agreement includes standard elements of the facilitation of the issuance of EU visas and establishes timescales for decisions to be made , along with the relevant costs and exemptions , the necessary documentation , and a joint declaration concerning cooperation and travel documents .
I support the proposal to include an EU declaration regarding facilitation of the process for family members , as this responds to specific requests made by Georgia and aims to improve the mobility of a significant number of individuals who have family ties with those Georgian citizens residing legally in the territories of the Member States .
Regarding the implementation of the two agreements recently concluded with Georgia , I fully support Mrs Griesbeck 's assertion that the people need to be informed of the new situation and benefit from the new possibilities that derive from it .
In addition , the changes in the visa policy should also appear as soon as possible on the European institutions ' websites .
I voted in favour of the signing of this agreement as I believe that , combined with the agreement on the re-admission of illegal residents , it constitutes very significant progress in relations between the EU and Georgia , signalling an important stage in its integration into Europe and , at the same time , providing an incentive for the country to promote the necessary reforms in the areas of freedom , security and justice .
in writing . - The enlargement of the European Union to 25 Member States in 2004 and then to 27 in 2007 was an opportunity for the Union to create a new framework for cooperation with its neighbours to the east and the south . The European Union thus engaged in an enlarged neighbourhood policy extending as far as the countries of the South Caucasus region and aimed at deepening its relations with the countries located at the EU 's external borders , promoting their security , stability and development and preventing new divisions on the European continent .
Europe thus signalled its growing interest in the States of the South Caucasus and it must today pursue its engagement with the countries of this region as an area to be protected near its new frontiers .
The process of deepening relations between the EU and the countries of the South Caucasus , including Georgia , will undoubtedly also help to improve the exercise of justice and respect for freedom .
The two agreements recently concluded with Georgia - one on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation and the other on facilitation of the issuance of visas - will contribute fully to achieving these objectives .
I voted in favour of the report on a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on setting up an EU rapid response capability to address the various major natural or man-made disasters which have occurred outside the EU in recent years .
This is because I believe that it is important to improve the efficiency of EU disaster response capabilities and that a preventive action plan has become increasingly necessary as a global , integrated EU response .
The disaster which occurred in Haiti demonstrated the need for the EU to implement fundamental reforms in terms of its rapid and efficient response to emergencies and catastrophes .
In order to have a quick and effective response , I believe that it will also be necessary for there to be more political will amongst the different parties involved .
It is also necessary to implement a restructuring of competences in order to provide greater coherence and coordination in responses to disasters by the EU .
I believe that it is essential to put into practice certain concrete proposals included in the 2006 Barnier report concerning the creation of a European civil protection force .
in writing . - I supported this resolution as it is obvious that the multiplication of major disasters outside the European Union in recent years has led to increased calls to improve the effectiveness of the existing EU disaster response capacity .
One of the major steps towards a more integrated response has been the inclusion of civil protection and humanitarian aid under the portfolio of one single Commissioner to create opportunities for enhanced coherence and coordination of the EU disaster response .
It is , however , regrettable that two years after the publication of the 2008 Commission Communication , many actions from the Action Plan still remain to be implemented , while the EU response to recent crises has revealed the limitations of the existing system .
If efforts have recently been made to reinforce coherence and coordination between the civil protection and humanitarian aid dimensions of the EU response , steps towards the creation of a European civil protection force have remained minimal .
Therefore , a strong political will is needed for a more efficient and rapid response to emergencies .
I support the need for the EU to provide a coordinated , coherent and high-profile response in the event of disasters .
This is why I consider it important to develop EU civil capabilities which will be permanently available and take action independently of the military structures .
I think that the EU civil protection force should enhance the instruments currently available , whether in terms of disaster response training or disaster management by developing initiatives taken during preparatory actions .
Given the numerous serious disasters in the world and their increasing frequency , caused mainly by climate change , I voted for the excellent report by my Italian colleague , Mrs Zanicchi , containing a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on setting up a rapid response capability .
The moment has come to improve the EU 's disaster response in terms of efficiency , coordination and visibility .
It is becoming more and more urgent to create a European rapid response capability , or ' European civil protection force ' , as Mr Barnier has suggested .
Clearly , the coordination of national civil protection forces seems to be a useful means of assisting a Member State which could not cope on its own with a large-scale disaster ( fire , flood , natural disaster , and so on ) .
This European civil protection force would also be very useful for intervening in external situations such as in Haiti .
At a time when we are going to celebrate , in 2011 , the European Year of Volunteering , an action such as this would trigger European interest and could help to consolidate European citizenship .
I voted for this report .
Disasters causing significant human , economic and environmental damage are on the increase worldwide and such crises are happening with greater frequency and scope in more parts of the world .
Although progress has been made in recent years towards a more coherent EU disaster response , efforts must continue to ensure effective , coherent and coordinated EU actions in this area .
It is necessary to develop an Action Plan with a number of concrete actions to build up a more integrated coordination between the various instruments for disaster response , and to assess possible responses by the EU and the Member States .
The recently established European External Action Service should be included in these activities in order to coordinate aid more effectively outside the EU .
Furthermore , it is necessary to ensure there are sufficient financial resources to fund the aid measures required .
I voted for this report because the multiplication of major natural or man-made disasters outside the European Union in recent years has led to increased calls to reform EU disaster response capacity and improve the effectiveness of the existing EU disaster response capacity .
For example , the lack of visibility of the EU response has also been highlighted as one of the main shortcomings of disaster response .
Clear agreements and procedures should therefore be established to ensure a dual visibility ( for both the Member States and the European Union ) for civil protection assets deployed by Member States through the EU civil protection mechanism .
Another problem with EU response concerns coordination and , therefore , the European Parliament trusts that in future , the European External Action Service will create a single crisis response , which will require a rationalisation of the existing crisis platforms .
Furthermore , clear mechanisms for coordination between the Commission and the Council should be ensured , also in relation to the coordination and the use of EU military assets in a disaster response .
A rapid response agency for dealing with emergencies would make the European Union 's interventions in the event of natural or accidental disasters much more coherent and effective .
The European Union clearly intervened rapidly and responded to real needs in the wake of the devastating earthquake in Haiti .
However , it is also just as obvious that we need to learn from real situations and improve the service we give every time .
The earthquake in Haiti was immediately followed by a period of confusion over who should take the lead for the coordination of the EU 's overall action .
In the future , it is expected that the EEAS will create a single crisis response , which will require streamlining of the existing crisis platforms .
Clear responsibilities need to be defined for each Member State in the event of a disaster , with the necessary logistical preparations so that capabilities can be mobilised as quickly as possible to the highest possible standards .
The intervention in Haiti highlighted that actions of this kind become effective when each state specialises in a particular service , as was the case with France , which provided a water purification unit , and Italy , an advanced medical unit .
I expect the recommendation on the creation of an EU rapid reaction instrument to result in greater pressure to improve the effectiveness of existing EU capabilities to respond to catastrophes , whether natural or man-made .
I consider the existing civil defence mechanism of the Community to be an important , but insufficient , step towards a genuinely operational civil defence mechanism that is as effective as possible .
The limits of the current civil defence mechanism were apparent , for example , in the reaction to this year 's crisis in Haiti , which was relatively flexible and extensive , but , on the other hand , suffered from a lack of efficiency , coordination and visibility .
It was also unclear who was supposed to lead coordination of the overall EU operation .
In view of the extent of the crisis , High Representative Ashton finally secured the coordination of EU assistance in close cooperation with Commissioner Georgieva , who is responsible for humanitarian assistance , civil defence and international cooperation .
I see scope for extending the operational ability of the EU to cope with catastrophes , particularly through the creation of a permanently available civilian capability which will operate independently of military structures , and in the creation of budgets and research and industrial potential ( for example , satellite imaging in the GMES programme ) .
In light of the increasing frequency and impact of natural disasters which have had serious consequences in human , economic , social and environmental terms , the European Parliament recommendation to the Council on setting up an EU rapid response capability is particularly important .
I voted in favour of the proposal , as I believe that it covers the fundamental issues which should be considered .
Amongst these issues , it reiterates that cooperation between Member States could provide operational and financial benefits , and it recognises that there must be an integrated approach to disaster management , which also includes prevention of , preparation for , and management of disasters , as well as post-disaster reconstruction .
Furthermore , I believe that it is important for the coordination and efficiency of the European response to be improved , not least through a European civil protection force .
I abstained on the report on setting up an EU rapid response capability to humanitarian disasters because , although it contains positive ideas and elements , it also attaches military means and a military presence to this capability .
It is a very good thing that the reports states that ' the use of civil protection resources , where deployed in any humanitarian crisis , should be needs driven and complementary to , and coherent with , humanitarian aid ... , with a view to ensuring compliance with the humanitarian principles of neutrality , humanity , impartiality and dependence ' .
However , there are also points in the report which go in a completely different direction , which is why I abstained .
For example , the facility to also respond to ' military crises ' or ' to use military assets and capabilities in disaster response ' , even if it is ' exceptional ' .
The recent natural disasters afflicting the world highlight the pressing need for rapid and effective response mechanisms to reduce their disastrous social , economic and cultural impact on affected regions .
Following previous European Parliament resolutions , particularly those on the Haitian earthquake and on preventing natural or man-made disasters , this House is once again wrestling with this topic .
In general , I support the report by my colleague , Mrs Zanicchi , and I emphasise that future EU capacity relating to disasters must be based on mechanisms available at European and international level , avoiding any duplication , making the best use of resources and enabling the European civil protection force to be based on the already existing Community Mechanism for Civil Protection .
I welcome the fact that , following the tragedy in Haiti , there has been greater political will and more efforts to strengthen coherence and coordination between the civil protection and humanitarian assistance sectors .
I also welcome the work done by the parties involved on achieving this objective .
However , it is regrettable that the previous proposals of the European Parliament still have not been fully implemented , notably , those relating to the Barnier report .
Whether in Haiti following January 's earthquake , or in Pakistan following this summer 's floods , whenever there is a disaster , Europe does a lot but in a disorganised manner .
Each Member State sends its own staff , its own rescue dogs , its own aeroplanes , and so on .
Taken together , however , the hastily organised individual responses will never beat a planned and organised European response .
The European Union , with the 27 Member States acting collectively , is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid and development aid .
We have at our disposal a vast array of civil and military resources to meet emergency and reconstruction needs .
However , as long as there are still national knee-jerk responses , we will unfortunately be unable to derive any real benefit from this virtual collective force .
What we need is a true ' rapid response capability ' .
Equally , increased efficiency and speed when dealing with an emergency requires a strong political will on the part of the various parties concerned .
Rapid response to catastrophes and natural disasters is essential , since it is in the first few hours following such an event that the greatest number of people can be saved .
Furthermore , in recent years , we have witnessed a significant increase in disasters , whether natural or man-made , and these require a high level of technical expertise and coordination of the different means of responding to disasters .
The creation of a Community Mechanism for Civil Protection may be a first step but I agree with the rapporteur that there is more to be done in this area .
EU coordination and cooperation on rapid and effective response to disasters can be very successful , as it was in the case of the Haitian earthquake in January 2010 .
It is essential that the response should be of this kind .
Natural disasters can and must be prevented .
Factors such as intensive soil use , poorly planned urban growth , rural flight and desertification , among others , are the causes of an increased risk of disasters .
The promotion of sensible land use , and of economic and social development in harmony with nature , is a vital factor in disaster prevention .
It is , above all , in this respect that the EU should intensify its efforts , implementing the recommendations made in a recent Parliamentary report and strengthening this aspect of its cooperation policy .
With regard to responses to those disasters which cannot be prevented , there is also clearly a place for strengthening cooperation , mutual assistance and intervention between the various Member States and third countries .
The best forms and means of achieving this must be the result of a debate involving the various national civil protection and other authorities , whilst respecting the sovereignty of each Member State .
This should be the path set out by the report , not the ' immediate establishment of an EU Civil Protection Force ' or the use of military means in response to humanitarian aid situations , which the report admits could act without being under the aegis and coordination of the UN .
This vote represents an important step towards the creation of a European civil protection force that could intervene quickly and effectively wherever there is a serious emergency .
As we will all remember , although the European response in providing aid to the people of Haiti was swift and on a large scale , it highlighted a number of critical problems in the management , coordination and visibility of the operation , which are down to the mechanics of the current system , which is based on voluntary and ad hoc contributions subject to different national decision-making processes .
The recent European Commission communication on the role of civil protection and humanitarian support aims precisely to lay the foundations for an effective and coherent synergy of the actions already taken at national , regional and local levels .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides the opportunity to develop a more thorough , coordinated and functional disaster response capacity .
The time has therefore come to speed up the process that will equip the EU with a modern and efficient civil protection capability .
I voted for the report with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on setting up a European Union rapid response capability because I believe that the European Union must make significant efforts to ensure coordinated and effective responses to the various major disasters that we have recently witnessed .
The need for such a commitment was emphasised in the latest Commission communication on ' Reinforcing the Union 's disaster response capacity ' , which included an Action Plan designed to establish integrated coordination between the various instruments for disaster response .
In addition , I agree with Mrs Zanicchi that it is high time we recognised the political importance of reinforcing the EU disaster response capability and that all means should be mobilised to achieve this objective .
in writing . - I welcome this report which :
recalls the pivotal role of the High Representative / Vice-President in coordinating EU operations in third countries and regions ;
underlines that the structure and working methods of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) should aim at ensuring the coherence and consistency of EU action in crisis situations ;
calls therefore on the Council to grant the HR / VP a permanent mandate allowing her to activate a crisis cell , gathering representatives from all the appropriate services of the Commission and the Council and from all EU planning capabilities ( MIC , CMPD , EUMS , CPCC ) to coordinate the EU response in the event of disaster , in order to be able to start work quickly without having to systematically go to the Council ;
suggests that this cell could be supported by a team , deployable within the first hours of the crisis , could be composed of civilian ( CRT , MIC ) , military and civ-mil ( EUMS , CPCC ) experts and could also benefit from SITCEN and SATCEN intelligence ;
emphasises the need for optimal coordination between an EU disaster response and other EU instruments - particularly common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) civil or military missions and instruments ( i.e. Battlegroups ) .
The creation of a means of responding rapidly to catastrophes and natural disasters is essential , since it is in the first few hours following such an event that the largest number of people can be saved .
Furthermore , in recent years , we have unfortunately witnessed a significant increase in disasters , whether natural or man-made , and these demand meaningful and swift intervention capability .
The creation of a Community Mechanism for Civil Protection is very important for these reasons , but much remains to be done in this area .
The number of major disasters in EU countries and third countries alike is increasing all the time , not least because of climate change and increased urbanisation .
Developing countries are the worst affected by disasters , with a particularly high death toll as a result .
The economic cost of such disasters is also much greater in these countries .
The creation of a rapid response force will enable the EU and the Member States to better coordinate their efforts and give better visibility to EU activity .
That is why I supported this recommendation .
Like its author , I call for the many excellent practical proposals made in the Barnier report to be taken into account .
The rapporteur , Mrs Zanicchi , has updated the question of the possibility of rapid response only after considerable delay , but its topicality has not been diminished thereby .
I am convinced that it is the European Union 's duty to increase significantly financing for the preparation , provisioning and expansion of rapid response forces .
Natural cataclysms will occur ever more frequently as a result of climate change .
We cannot get by here without a professional rescue team , whose professional preparedness will permit rapid localisation and effective control over fires and technogenic disasters .
I voted in favour .
A strong rapid reaction unit would be a good thing and would be able to help citizens of Europe and other states during their most difficult times .
Sadly , the rapporteur does not seem to be concerned with strengthening humanitarian aid or the EU 's civil protection programme , but rather with making the ' EU ' stamp as visible as possible .
It must not be the goal of this rapid reaction unit to promote the EU throughout the world .
As a result of the leadership of the United Nations and the involvement of the military in providing emergency aid , we also risk giving up our independence , which I do not wish to support .
It is for that reason that I voted against this report .
It has proved necessary to improve the effectiveness of the existing EU disaster response capacity in many situations which we have tackled during recent years .
I would just like to mention the disastrous floods or the forest fires which have affected a number of European states .
Another example is the recent large-scale environmental accident which occurred in Hungary .
Faced with such incidents , no state has the capacity to respond at a sufficiently high level on its own .
There is also a duty of solidarity between EU Member States .
The report spells out the criteria which need to be met by a rapid reaction force , as well as the conditions which would be required for it to carry out its activities .
It seems the report has less to do with increasing the efficiency of development aid or the protection of citizens than it has with promoting and drawing attention to the ' EU ' brand .
It is for that reason that I voted against this report .
The need for an effective European Union response capability to deal with the increasing number of major disasters over recent years is what drove me to vote for this report .
There have been numerous calls in the last few years for the EU to improve the effectiveness of its response and , as we stand , much more needs to be done to ensure more coherent and visible progress .
In my opinion , we need to mobilise all available resources to achieve this objective because , since 2008 and the last communication from the Commission on this matter , we have moved towards a comprehensive and integrated EU response .
We all expect that the implementation of this report will result in a concrete action plan to gradually build up more integrated coordination between the various instruments for disaster response .
I agree with the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on setting up an EU rapid response capability for natural disasters .
In fact , an analysis of the lessons learned in Haiti clearly shows the need for renewed reform of EU disaster response capability , as I had , as a matter of fact , already stated in my opinion ' on a Community approach on the prevention of natural and man-made disasters ' .
Rapid and effective response in emergency situations is absolutely essential if we are to ensure that the EU demonstrates solidarity , whether with Member States or with third countries , and this requires strong political will from the various decision-making bodies .
It is generally acknowledged that major efforts are currently under way to strengthen coherence and coordination between the civil protection forces and the various areas of humanitarian aid .
However , meaningful steps must be taken towards the creation of a European Civil Protection Force , as is also stated in my opinion ' on a Community approach on the prevention of natural and man-made disasters ' .
I agree with the rapporteur : it is time to make greater progress in this matter , particularly in terms of implementing the concrete proposals of the 2006 Barnier report .
I share the rapporteur Mrs Zanicchi 's belief that it is high time to recognise the political importance of strengthening the European Union 's disaster response capability and that all means should be mobilised to achieve this objective .
I also agree with Mrs Zanicchi 's view that the encouraging results of the 2008 Preparatory Action should be further assessed and that the idea of a voluntary pool of Member States ' assets on stand-by for immediate deployment in EU operations should be further developed .
In this regard , the rapporteur wished to remind the Council and the Commission of the recommendation in the report by Mr Barnier , according to which only preventive organisation and a pooling of existing resources can bring about the emergence of a European civil protection force .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree that it is essential that we endeavour to implement policies to strengthen the EU 's capacity to respond to disasters , promoting the efficiency , coordination and visibility of these activities .
in writing . - The multiplication of major disasters ( natural / man-made ) outside the European Union in recent years has led to increased calls to improve the effectiveness of the existing EU disaster-response capacity .
If the EU disaster-response capacity has constantly evolved since the establishment of the Community civil protection mechanism in 2001 , the rapporteur believes that much more needs to be done to ensure a coordinated , coherent and visible EU response .
This need for a more coherent response was also highlighted in the latest communication from the Commission on ' reinforcing the Union 's disaster response capacity ' , which dates back to March 2008 .
This communication was supposed to be a first step on the road to a comprehensive and integrated EU response .
It included an action plan with a number of practical actions to gradually build up more integrated coordination between the various instruments for disaster response .
Today , we have Parliament 's response to that problem .
Now that , because of climate change , the number of natural disasters across the world resulting in serious humanitarian , economic and environmental damage has increased , it is imperative that the European Union is able to act quickly .
The creation of a European civil protection force provides a clear structure for this kind of rapid response .
After the earthquake in Haiti , we have learned the lesson that we need to increase the efficiency , coordination and visibility of the Union .
I am therefore in favour of civil protection and humanitarian aid being brought together under the portfolio of a single Commissioner .
I also believe that , where possible , humanitarian relief operations should always be carried out under the coordinating umbrella of the UN .
In this report , the Commission has been invited to set up programmes in the affected areas , working together with national governments , local authorities and NGOs , in order to enable local communities to prevent and manage disasters .
Military and civil defence resources should only be used in disasters as a last resort .
The incidence of natural and man-made disasters has been increasing , not only in number but also in impact and scale and , as a result , in terms of human , socio-economic and environmental impact .
This obliges the EU to rethink its response strategy in terms of prevention , management and assistance , so that it becomes more concerted and efficient in operational terms .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which uses the recent disaster in Haiti as a case study and calls for the creation of a European Union Civil Protection Force capable of creating synergies between the Member States and European institutions in order to prevent disasters and assist third countries , especially any developing country that has been struck by a disaster .
The humanitarian nature of this initiative is representative of the increasingly concrete nature of the external dimensions of EU solidarity .
However , I believe that it is extremely important for this same initiative to be regarded as leading to the coordination and management of those disasters which occur inside the European Union .
I recall the disaster which devastated the island of Madeira last February and , on that basis , I consider it essential to create this Civil Protection Force whilst , at the same time , making best possible use of existing mechanisms .
Work is continuing in the field of financial regulation .
I voted for this own-initiative report by the European Parliament , which seeks to subject all financial products to supervision by the market authorities .
Lack of transparency is detrimental to market efficiency and has helped exacerbate the financial crisis .
The Markets in Financial Instruments Directive facilitated the transfer of market activities to better regulated and more transparent negotiating spaces .
Echoing the conclusions of the September 2009 G20 summit in Pittsburgh , this report aims to ensure that ' all standardised OTC derivative contracts [ are ] traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms ' .
Since the implementation of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive ( MiFID ) , the European financial markets have undergone unprecedented changes , both as a result of the directive and for other reasons linked to the crisis .
As a consequence , it has not been possible to achieve the desired regulatory aims .
The implementation of the MiFID has caused the fragmentation of the markets , which has encouraged the explosive growth of high-frequency trading strategies .
The market has adjusted to the use of dark pools for trading large orders in private broker crossings , and to exemptions established in the MiFID for such actions when they are conducted through organised trading venues , called ' dark transactions ' , where transactions were formerly undertaken in regulated markets .
It is essential to apply legislation , designed to ensure the effective regulation and transparency of these technological developments , in order to prevent the creation of any systemic risk to the overall functioning of the markets .
The European Parliament continues to adopt reports relating to certain elements of financial regulation , but without ever getting to the bottom of the matter .
Of course , it is better for there to be some regulation of financial transactions by private brokers and / or financial institutions .
However , this is not the fundamental issue .
The report does not go beyond arguments for greater regulation of trading platforms , referring to the need for ' increasing transparency and safety within the markets in financial instruments ' , and to the need for ' equitable treatment ' of multilateral trading facilities and regulated markets .
The fundamental question at issue here is the continued existence of the same old speculative system , yet the report only addresses the form of this speculation , and not the most important aspect : the content .
For our part , we continue to argue for an end to the derivatives market and to tax havens , as well as for effective control of financial powers by political powers , rather than vice versa .
Until this happens , any other policy will be merely cosmetic .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
It seems that a significant consequence of the competition brought about by implementation of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive ( MiFID ) has been market fragmentation which has , in itself , encouraged the explosive growth of HFT strategies .
Regulation must reflect the fact that these technological advances are in need of suitable provisions in the legislation , so that they do not fall through regulatory gaps and inadvertently cause systemic risk to the overall functioning of the markets .
With the recent implementation of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive ( MiFID ) , the European financial markets have undergone unprecedented changes , both as a result of the directive and for other reasons linked to the crisis .
As a consequence , it has not been possible to achieve the regulatory aims intended by the adoption of the MiFID .
The market has adjusted to the use of dark pools for trading large orders in private broker crossings , and to exemptions established in the MiFID for such actions when they are conducted through organised trading venues , called ' dark transactions ' , where transactions were formerly undertaken in regulated markets .
For these reasons , it is essential to start applying legislation designed to ensure the effective regulation and transparency of these technological developments , in order to prevent the systemic risks to the overall functioning of the markets from being created again in the future .
Data acquisition costs in Europe are much too high .
They are sometimes ten times higher than they are in the United States .
The report contains some good proposals for reducing these and other unnecessary costs .
However , I fear that the author is on the wrong track with her plans to achieve this goal of cost reduction by introducing numerous additional provisions .
There is a danger that doing so will merely replace one bureaucratic obstacle with another one .
It is for that reason that I abstained from voting .
My decision to vote for report is in line with the current situation on European capital markets , which are going through a period of unprecedented flux thanks to new technological advancements .
Thanks to the introduction of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive ( MiFID ) , which promotes competition between trading venues for execution services , the efficiency of the price formation process has increased , widening choice for investors .
Market fragmentation has , however , led to poor post-trade transparency in over-the-counter ( OTC ) trades and this situation means a more effective regulatory framework for consolidated post-trade information is required .
In my opinion , regulators need to ensure that they can , at any time , recreate every detail of the trade in order to understand the market dynamics and the participants ' involvement .
The impact of new technology and the advent of new market participants has led to faster trading speeds and to an increase in direct market access by clients of trading platform members .
Although the introduction of MiFID brought innovation , it seems that it also contributed to the fragmentation of the market .
I voted for the report because I believe that these technological advances need to be adequately regulated in order that they do not cause systemic risk to the overall functioning of the markets .
I support the call for the Commission to strengthen market infrastructures across all trading venues and clearing systems to enable them to cope with future risk through enhanced transparency , improved resilience and regulatory oversight of all aggregated trades .
I thus voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution , as it supports the idea that :
multilateral trading facilities should be subject to the same level of oversight and , therefore , regulated in a comparable manner ;
investment firms which provide a portfolio management service and act in a portfolio management capacity should benefit from the best possible terms from investment companies ;
the Commission should evaluate the effects of setting a minimum order size for all dark transactions ;
firms that pursue high-frequency trading strategies should be analysed to ensure that they have robust systems and controls with ongoing regulatory reviews of the algorithms they use .
I fully support the rapporteur , Mrs Swinburne , and her idea to promote competition between trading venues for execution services .
This has led to increased investor choice , lowered transaction costs and has helped increase the efficiency of the price formation process .
There are now 136 multilateral trading facilities ( MTF ) , as well as the primary exchanges , which collectively make up the organised trading venues .
These organised venues account for some 60 % of the trading volume , with the remainder being carried out by broker-dealers , collectively termed ' over the counter ' ( OTC ) .
Bilateral trades , where the client gives the broker an order and he finds a match , have migrated from mainly verbal orders to predominantly electronic orders .
Although , by definition , there is no pre-trade transparency for OTC trades , they are still required to be reported under the rules of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive ( MiFID ) .
I agree that the Commission should evaluate the impact of setting a minimum order size for all dark transactions , and whether it could be rigorously enforced so as to maintain adequate flow of trade through the lit venues in the interests of price discovery .
in writing . - It seems that a significant consequence of the competition brought about by the implementation of MiFID has been market fragmentation which has , in itself , encouraged the explosive growth of HFT strategies .
Regulation needs to recognise that these technological advances are in need of suitable provisions in the legislation so that they do not fall through regulatory gaps and inadvertently cause systemic risk to the overall functioning of the markets .
That is , in summary , the proposal in the text adopted today by the EP .
in writing . - This own-initiative report sets the framework for the discussion of MiFID , to which the OTC Directive , the rise of ESMA and , of course , EMIR are related .
Even the name of this report allows people to understand the nature of necessary , but often complicated , regulatory changes .
Unregulated markets have been allowed unfiltered access by means of sponsorship to formal trading venues .
This must change .
Similarly , I can agree with the rapporteur that pre-trade , post-trade transparency needs improvement , and particularly that post-trade data for non-equity products are provided in a form which is readily consolidated .
Understanding the market dynamics and equipping regulators with instruments plus information / data is vital .
Banks , stock exchanges and funds develop new financial products and trading practices so quickly that the directive on markets in financial instruments is already out of date .
The scope of the transparency rules must also be extended to include the internal trading systems of banks and the exceptions must be more narrowly worded so that financial institutes and financial products cannot escape effective supervision .
The disclosure of pre- and post-trade data , previously only stipulated for shares , is now to be extended to bonds , centrally cleared derivatives , structured products , funds and certificates , which will increase the efficiency and transparency of the price formation process .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that it is essential for the EU to be prepared for the chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) risks which have given a new dimension to terrorist attacks , to industrial accidents and to natural disasters , since such risks know no borders and could result in innumerable victims .
The response of the EU to this danger should not be limited to ex post facto intervention programmes but starts much earlier when dealing with the proper storage of , limiting of access to , and controls of such materials .
I consider it essential that intervention following an incident should be matched by significant cooperation between the different authorities of a Member State ( civil protection , military , police , etc . ) , as well as between the national authorities of the various Member States and European institutions .
In other words , I consider a coordinated and comprehensive approach to be essential .
In June 2009 , the Commission tabled a three-year EU CBRN Action Plan for 2010-2012 , with the following elements : prevention , detection , and preparedness and response .
In this regard , I believe that recognising the importance of each of these stages is crucial to ensure the proper implementation of risk assessment studies , response and counter measures .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this important resolution because it is high time to pay attention to Chemical , Biological , Radiological and Nuclear ( CBRN ) risks which present a new dimension of possible terrorist attacks , accidents , natural disasters and / or pandemics due to their transnational character and mass-scale victimisation .
It is necessary to start dealing with such materials , and their proper storage , limited access , controls , etc . , from the very beginning and not just create ex post facto intervention programmes .
At the same time , aftermath intervention demands large-scale cooperation between different national authorities inside a Member State .
Therefore , the CBRN Action Plan should ensure the efficient interaction of national and EU initiatives in addressing CBRN risks and preparing the necessary response .
Considering that CBRN accidents or attacks pose serious threats to the security of the people living in the European Union and can disrupt critical infrastructure and the normal functioning of societies in any or several EU Member States and are oblivious to borders , I support the European Parliament resolution which calls on the Council and the Commission to rapidly review and strengthen the Action Plan according to the recommendations in this report and to ensure its swift implementation .
Chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) risks present a new challenge to society , as well as a new basis for possible terrorist attacks , accidents , natural disasters or pandemics .
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome Mrs Gomes 's report as this report will enable us to establish the foundation for a suitable disaster response mechanism .
We must also take into consideration , while reassessing the EU CBRN Action Plan , the suggestions put forward by Parliament , aimed at improving the basic areas which improve security in the event of such risks .
I agree that it is vital to share best practices with countries which have developed a specialist mechanism in the field of CBRN risk assessment , prevention , detection , communication and response .
I think that it is important for us to stress the need to maintain well-managed stockpiles to ensure that disaster response resources , whether medical or any kind of other relevant equipment , are fully functional , current and up to date .
This is why I voted in favour of this report .
Chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear disasters , whether accidental or resulting from a terrorist attack , pose serious threats to the security and health of EU citizens and are the cause of environmental pollution and contamination .
Although the number of incidents in the EU involving CBRN material has so far been relatively small and have been due to industrial accidents or to the increase in , and worldwide spread of , dangerous pathogens , there remains a risk of CBRN disasters , whether accidental or intentional .
I voted for this report because I agree with the rapporteur 's position that the CBRN Action Plan proposed by the European Commission , the goal of which is to ensure the efficient interaction of national and EU initiatives in addressing CBRN risks and preparing the necessary response , underestimates the risks which are not confined by the EU 's borders .
I believe that international CBRN risks should also be properly assessed by and included in the CBRN Action Plan , and therefore preventive actions must ensure an international dimension , emphasising the implementation of international agreements in the areas of nuclear and chemical weapons .
It is essential that we adopt an effective Action Plan so that we can confront the existing and continuing risk of chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) disasters within EU territory .
Whether accidental or intentional , these represent a serious threat and have the potential to cause devastating and far-reaching effects on the security , welfare and health of the European public , as well as on the environment , our cultural heritage and basic infrastructure .
Fortunately , the number of incidents related to CBRN materials , including acts of terrorism , has been relatively low .
This Action Plan shows the need for a comprehensive and transnational response , since the effects of a CBRN disaster know no borders and such a plan should be based on the following elements : prevention , detection , and preparedness and response .
It should also ensure effective interaction between national and EU initiatives in order to tackle CBRN risks and prepare capabilities to respond to and limit the consequences .
Like the rapporteur , Mrs Gomes , I have no doubt that we need to adopt an EU Action Plan but I regret the fact that the Commission has not been more ambitious , because the proposed Action Plan shows a lack of strength and coherence on certain matters .
in writing . - Although I agreed with the majority of the Gomes report , I have voted against it as it focuses too much on the EU coordinating civil-military cooperation .
Military competences should remain with the Member States and not with the EU and the Commission .
I have no problem with Member States cooperating on an equal level in the case of a CBRN event - and in the case of an environmental disaster resulting from such an incident , it is crucial - but I do have a huge problem with this report potentially opening the door for militarisation of the EU .
I voted for this report as I think that it proposes effective measures for preventing , combating and managing chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) incidents .
It is of paramount importance that this report promotes the notion of a rapid response mechanism in the event of a CBRN disaster in one of the Member States .
In addition , this mechanism will be based on a response inspired by solidarity from all EU Member States .
Another point which is just as important is that the report adopted by Parliament proposes the creation of mixed European rapid intervention teams which will be made up of military personnel , police officers and medical staff who will provide an effective response in the event of chemical , biological , radiological or nuclear disasters .
As a result of the compromises obtained by the shadow rapporteur from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , my colleague , Mrs Hankiss , the text upon which we are voting today is much more detailed and balanced , giving many specialist matters relating to chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear safety significant priority , not only in terms of preventing accidents and responding appropriately to natural disasters , but also with reference to the clear and present danger presented by terrorism of this nature .
We are increasingly faced with diffuse and unconventional threats and , with this in mind , Europe must have an adequate strategy for prevention , detection and protection , so that the safety and health of Europeans can be guaranteed .
The Commission should continue along these lines and so I am voting in favour .
Chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) risks have given a new dimension to terrorist attacks , industrial accidents , natural disasters and pandemics , given that such threats know no borders and could result in innumerable victims .
In June 2009 , the Commission tabled the EU CBRN Action Plan , which was amended by the Council in November .
The plan will be implemented over the next three years - 2010-2012 - and is based on three principal elements : prevention , detection , and preparedness and response .
However , the amendments introduced by the Council have made the Action Plan less robust , and have rendered both the planned measures and the monitoring and inspection of their application less binding .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this report , which aims to entrust the Commission with a strengthened regulatory role , as I believe that is the only way it will be possible to fill in the existing gaps in the powers conferred in this area by the different Member States .
If there were genuine concern regarding chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) threats , there would be no insistence by certain EU countries on maintaining extremely powerful nuclear arsenals that could be used in military attacks .
Nor would US nuclear weapons still be stationed in various European countries , an action which blatantly contradicts one of the three pillars of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) , which is supposedly supported .
The report makes no reference to certain decisions such as that recently taken by the UK to sell nuclear technology to India , a country which is not a signatory to the NPT , nor to the decision by France and Germany to cooperate in the maintenance of their nuclear weapons , justifying this by a hypocritical ' cost rationalisation ' .
Nothing is said either about the assistance given by the main EU powers and by NATO to the project to install anti-missile systems in Europe , or on the decision by NATO to maintain its role as a ' nuclear alliance ' .
At a time when the crisis of capitalism has intensified , this report makes it clear that concrete actions are what matter , and not declarations of intent : such actions demonstrate that military might continues to be a resource used by capitalist economic globalisation .
in writing . - Explanation of Vote on the Gomes report ' Strengthening chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear security in the European Union - an EU CBRN Action Plan ' .
Although I agreed with the majority of the Gomes report , I have voted against it as it focuses too much on the EU coordinating civil-military cooperation .
Military competences should remain with the Member States and not with the EU and the Commission .
I have no problem with Member States cooperating on an equal level in the case of a CBRN event - and in the case of an environmental disaster resulting from such an incident , it is crucial - but I do have a huge problem with this report potentially opening the door for militarisation of the EU .
in writing . - Chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) risks present a new dimension of possible terrorist attacks , accidents , natural disasters and / or pandemics due to their transnational character and mass-scale victimisation .
An appropriate response against such a danger does not include only ex post facto intervention programmes but starts much earlier when dealing with such materials , their proper storage , limited access , controls , etc .
At the same time , an aftermath intervention demands large-scale cooperation between different national authorities inside a Member State ( civil protection , military , law enforcement , etc . ) as well as between national authorities of different Member States and EU instances .
Therefore , an all-hazard coordinated approach is needed .
I voted for this report which sets out such a coordinated approach .
There is no doubt that we need to protect ourselves from any malicious use of chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear products , material and organisms .
However , it is their everyday use that we should be most wary of .
The fact is , this text never once mentions the need to find an alternative to nuclear energy .
At present , the latter poses a serious threat to our fellow citizens .
As for terrorism , which is at the heart of this report , why call on NATO , the organisation that poses the biggest threat to world peace , to deal with it ?
These are all inconsistencies that prevent me from voting for this text .
I think that the EU should be prepared to face any attack or accident which jeopardises Europeans ' security and health .
For this reason , the chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear Action Plan is necessary , both to prevent and to respond to any type of threat or accident occurring in EU territory .
The current threats are varied , meaning that this issue is complex in nature , but we now have an appropriate and adequate mechanism to confront the most diverse of situations .
This is why I voted as I did .
Chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) risks present a new dimension of possible terrorist attacks , accidents , natural disasters and / or pandemics due to their transnational character and mass-scale victimisation .
An appropriate response against such a danger must start when dealing with these substances , their storage , limited access and controls .
Aftermath interventions demand large-scale cooperation between different national authorities inside a Member State as well as between national authorities of different Member States and European bodies .
The priority is to strengthen the non-proliferation regime and disarmament through the universal and full implementation of all relevant treaties and international agreements .
It is also important to address the risk of proliferation by terrorists .
The urgent establishment of a European crisis response mechanism is also necessary .
It should coordinate civilian and military means so as to ensure that the European Union has a rapid response capability to deal with a CBRN disaster .
Finally , European quality and security standards should also be adopted .
I voted in favour because , unfortunately , at the given moment , if there is going to be no improvement in chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear security , the European Union will not be fully aware of the possible consequences .
This report is a little note of explanation , not an action plan .
In order to draw up a comprehensive document on the subject of nuclear security , specialists with wide experience of nuclear energy and in the uses of nuclear technology need to be involved .
Such work can require several years , but it must be carried out .
The European Union , and the European Parliament in particular , cannot draw up such a document on its own .
I voted in favour , but I consider that this report is a mere epilogue for a book on EU nuclear security .
I hope that work on that book itself will begin in the immediate future .
The security of the civilian population in the event of possible incidents of a chemical , biological , radiological or nuclear nature is a very important matter and ambitions in this regard should essentially be supported .
Unfortunately , where this report is concerned , I have the feeling that the desire is to fight a terror spectre that , fortunately , does not exist in Europe in this highly organised form .
Thus , the intention is to create more panic in order then to be able to implement a particular policy .
Moreover , the report appears to deal predominantly with the subject of solidarity .
I believe there is a point at which we should say ' enough ' where terror prevention measures are concerned and the same goes for EU solidarity .
I therefore abstained from voting on this report .
I voted in favour of increasing chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear security in the European Union and I am delighted to have had the opportunity to be the shadow rapporteur on this issue .
Although prevention and protection from disasters caused by the substances mentioned is an issue for the Member States themselves , we need a common approach .
This European Commission communication is a step towards a common action plan aiming to protect the public in the EU from various disasters .
We are living in rather unstable times , and threats arise not only because of irresponsible human activity and accidents but also intentional acts .
This issue is particularly relevant in my country , Lithuania , which is surrounded by chemical and nuclear hazards .
Firstly , at the bottom of the Baltic Sea , there remain chemical weapons from the Second World War , and secondly , there are plans to construct two nuclear power plants near the Lithuanian border .
We must assess the situation , the security standards currently in force and their suitability as regards current needs .
Only by assessing the existing situation can we determine whether we need new security standards .
This assessment and standard-setting framework must be sufficiently flexible so that it can be adapted to changing technologies , which , as well as making our lives easier , can also become a deadly weapon when in the hands of terrorists .
On the other hand , providing security should not become a reason or a pretext to centralise civil protection .
Although the establishment and supervision of common security standards would help to provide security , we should not , in every case , create new institutions or unduly complicated procedures .
I voted in favour of the report on strengthening chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear security in the European Union - an EU CBRN Action Plan , for the same reasons as those being put forward by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
I would emphasise the need for an EU-level approach to prevent and detect attacks and / or accidents because the threat of CBRN attacks is ' global ' , and the focus given to the need to strengthen CBRN security if we are to prevent terrorist attacks .
I would also point out the importance of the compromise reached between the two largest political groups in terms of reducing the extent to which the entire chemical industry was to be obliged to replace high-risk materials regardless of the risks involved .
I can only support the rapporteur , Mrs Gomes , and I agree fully with the goal of the adopted chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) Action Plan .
It should ensure the efficient interaction of national and European Union initiatives in addressing CBRN risks and preparing the necessary response .
I agree , however , that the adopted EU CBRN Action Plan is weak and lacks coherence on several points .
It is of crucial importance to stress that a CBRN Action Plan offers a valuable opportunity to implement the solidarity clause enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Unfortunately , the Action Plan adopted by the Council does not even make reference to the solidarity clause .
Chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) risks present a new dimension of possible terrorist attacks , accidents , natural disasters and / or pandemics due to their transnational character and mass-scale victimisation .
An appropriate response against such a danger does not include only ex post facto intervention programmes but needs to start much earlier when dealing with such materials , their proper storage , limited access , controls , etc .
At the same time , an aftermath intervention demands large-scale cooperation between different national authorities inside a Member State ( civil protection , military , police etc . ) , as well as between national authorities in different Member States and EU instances .
Therefore , an all-hazard coordinated approach is needed .
I voted for this report because it calls on the Council and the Commission to rapidly review and strengthen the Action Plan according to the recommendations in this report and to ensure its swift implementation , given that CBRN accidents or attacks pose serious threats to the security of the people living in the European Union and can disrupt critical infrastructures and the normal functioning of societies in one or more EU Member States without any respect for borders .
Attacks using chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) materials constitute a grave threat to the European public .
This means that there must be recognition of the need to implement an effective Action Plan in order to ensure appropriate linkages between the approaches and initiatives of the different Member States and the EU regarding the prevention of , detection of , preparation for and response to CBRN incidents .
in writing . - Chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( CBRN ) risks present a new dimension of possible terrorist attacks , accidents , natural disasters and / or pandemics due to their transnational character and mass-scale victimisation .
An appropriate response against such a danger does not include only ex post facto intervention programmes but starts much earlier when dealing with such materials , their proper storage , limited access , controls , etc .
At the same time , an aftermath intervention demands large-scale cooperation between different national authorities inside a Member State ( civil protection , military , law enforcement , etc . ) as well as between national authorities of different Member States and EU bodies .
Therefore , an all-hazard coordinated approach is needed .
That is what we intend to do with the adoption of this report .
I voted in favour of the present report and I consider it to be of great importance during a period of economic and financial crisis , since it is necessary to ensure that all European Union regions develop harmoniously .
I agree with the general intention to create a tripartite agreement between the EU , Member States and the regions , since modernisation , interconnected infrastructure and assistance for investment plans and development projects respecting the specific characteristics of each region are fundamental .
I also believe that continued investment in infrastructure in many European regions , particularly in the south and east , is essential .
Given the different levels of decentralisation of the European regions , a balance must be found when designing a horizontal approach between the different levels of government and between all areas of activity .
Efforts towards the administrative modernisation and reform of the regions , combined with high quality technical assistance from the Commission , are essential prerequisites to improving the efficiency and effectiveness of EU investments .
The simplification of procedures and the allocation of resources from the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund in a manner which is accessible to all interested parties is essential .
This will guarantee , on the one hand , the participation of all actors in society and , on the other , better application of EU programmes , instruments and policies .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this important resolution as the implementation of the cohesion policy is predominantly decentralised and based on sub-national authorities assuming responsibility .
I agree that the multi-level approach should be applied not only vertically but also horizontally , among actors of the same level , in all shared-competence Union policies including the cohesion policy , which plays a forerunner role in the application of multi-level governance , as an instrument to improve the quality of decision-making processes through the active involvement of sub-national authorities from the pre-legislative phase of the debates .
Also , it is important to stress that funding application procedures are too complicated , and an excessive number of checks are likely to discourage potential beneficiaries of cohesion policy from the efficient absorption of funds and maximisation of their impact .
Therefore , there must be sufficient administrative capacity both at EU and at regional and local level in order to increase the added value of the cohesion policy and ensure the sustainability of actions .
I decided to vote for this report because we need to send out a strong signal of Europe 's desire to work with local , and particularly regional , administrations .
At a time of various degrees of decentralisation in the Member States , we need to show that the European Parliament is also fully engaged with making regional politics an instrument for better governance in Europe .
To my mind , regional policy is one of the EU 's most important policies .
The funds it distributes throughout Europe contribute to cohesion between the different regions and help them to become competitive .
However , certain things can be improved , particularly in the area of multi-level governance ; in other words , the coordinated action of the Union , of Member States and of regional and local entities .
Regional policy suffers from the complexity of its procedures , which often deter local players from having recourse to it .
Nevertheless , despite these procedures , the number of irregularities is still too high .
I voted for this European Parliament initiative , which emphasises the crucial role that local authorities play in implementing regional policy while , at the same time , calling for multi-level governance to be improved .
It also recommends better follow-up on the part of the Commission , with regard to both supporting regional players and making sure the funds are put to good use .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my Romanian fellow Member , Mrs Mănescu , on good governance with regard to the EU regional policy : procedures of assistance and control by the European Commission .
I welcome the demand for simplification , because this is a precondition for a better understanding and use of European funds by local officials .
Like the overwhelming majority of my fellow Members , I am in favour of a strong cohesion policy where financial resources are maintained after 2013 , while rejecting any attempts at renationalisation .
I would add , on a personal level , that the best way to prevent cohesion policy from being renationalised is to ' Europeanise ' it .
I find it regrettable that all too often , cohesion policy resources are used for projects with a regional or sometimes national dimension , but rarely with a European one .
European Union cohesion policy is the principle means of ensuring sustainable regional development .
Implementation of cohesion policy is predominantly decentralised and based on sub-national authorities assuming responsibility .
The Treaty of Lisbon has allowed territorial authorities to be more deeply involved in the decision-making process , to facilitate better and more effective implementation of cohesion policy measures , adapted to the needs of individual regions and their populations .
I voted in favour of this report .
I feel that it is necessary to maximise the potential for territorial cooperation , which , in some regions , has hitherto gone untapped , and to promote more active application of the principle of partnership , ensuring effective cooperation between the private and the public sectors .
Mrs Mănescu 's report seeks to bring the European Union closer to its citizens : it advocates better control by the Commission of local authorities ' involvement in the development of cohesion policy .
This document is part of a process to simplify very complex administrative procedures aimed at developing our regions and stepping up collaboration between local authorities in the various Member States .
The fact that it has been adopted by a large majority confirms the importance given to improving the use of European funds .
I voted in favour of this report because in cohesion policy , decision-making processes are improved through the application of multi-level governance and the involvement of sub-national authorities .
Supervision by the Commission , as currently foreseen , is considered insufficient and cannot compensate for ineffective control systems at national level persisting throughout the whole multiannual period .
Therefore , in order to improve the control system and increase assistance to sub-national authorities , it is necessary for the Commission to strengthen its supervisory role and procedures .
Higher investments , both in financial assistance and training , should be ensured for national and regional administrations to increase the capacities and knowledge of rules by authorities in charge of programme management .
It should also be noted that the current funding application procedures that are too complicated are likely to discourage potential beneficiaries of cohesion policy .
Therefore , in the future , we need to develop a more user-friendly policy with better coordinated Structural Fund rules .
in writing . - Conservative MEPs abstained on the final vote on the Mănescu report for the following reasons .
Firstly , the report promises to maintain a strongly-funded cohesion policy , whereas we believe that the cohesion and social funds should not be ring-fenced , and that the EU should rather concentrate spending on the new challenges it faces instead of old priorities such as cohesion policy .
It is also our contention that the content of this report fails to provide meaningful progress in terms of more stringent and greater control over the funding allocated under these programmes ; if anything , the proposals in this report only serve to further obfuscate delivery mechanisms and muddy the waters .
We would also have liked to see the report cogently address the issues raised by the European Court of Auditors related to such funding , which it singularly fails to do .
Consequently , Conservative MEPs have abstained on the final vote .
The decentralisation of Member States ' powers is based on sharing responsibilities between the different levels of government .
For this reason , the capacity of regional and local authorities to implement EU policy has been strengthened .
I agree with the adoption of this resolution , since it focuses on the specific nature of local and regional challenges , calling attention to the need to consider integrated approaches which emphasise the regions ' specific characteristics , such as their geographical and natural disadvantages , depopulation and the specific characteristics of the outermost regions , but which also recognises the different administrative processes existing in the various Member States .
These approaches must also allow the coordination of the interests of the various actors involved in order to facilitate governance at several levels .
The resolution also points to the fact that application procedures are too complicated and have an excessive number of checks which discourages potential beneficiaries of cohesion policy , as well as to the requirement to consult the general public in order to legitimise the decision-making process .
I also agree that a stronger role for the regional and local level must correspond to a strengthened supervisory role for the Commission , and to increased coordination between cohesion and structural policies .
I voted for this report which proposes to reinforce multi-level governance with a view to achieving greater involvement by sub-national authorities at the policy development stage .
I think that citizens ' interests will be much better represented if regional and local authorities are involved in the decision-making process right from the outset .
Furthermore , the European Commission 's role in monitoring the way in which the Structural Funds are managed is unarguable .
However , this audit role of the European Commission needs to be enhanced .
The Cohesion Fund accounts for more than one third of the total EU budget .
Its ultimate aim is to reduce disparities between levels of economic development in the various regions , targeting resources specifically towards growth and employment .
However , the Financial Times newspaper recently published an investigation over how Cohesion Fund resources are , in fact , spent and the scenario described is very worrying : the fund is used for purposes which are categorically not those intended .
For this same reason , I consider it crucial to strengthen the Commission 's control procedures relating to the application and usage of the Cohesion Fund , reinforcing the mechanisms of good governance .
We agree with the need to guarantee respect for criteria relating to effectiveness , efficiency , rigour and transparency ' in all the phases of Structural Fund programming and implementation ' .
We recognise that the ' ongoing simplification of the Financial Regulation and of the Structural Funds rules ' could be essential in terms of lifting certain existing barriers to accessing them , particularly by less developed regions .
Regarding the principle of cofinancing , whilst we recognise the importance of the assumption of responsibilities by national authorities when applying cohesion policy , we consider that , in view of the current profound crisis , something which has particularly affected certain Member States and their regions , the rules relating to cofinancing should be made more flexible .
This will allow a better absorption of the funds set aside for cohesion policy .
In particular , the maximum rate of cofinancing should be lowered to 10 % for all Structural Funds .
We still disagree with and oppose some aspects of the report .
One example is the ' good governance ' advocated for public services which , according to the rapporteur , can only be achieved through a partnership of ' public and private parties ' .
Another example is the patchwork of uncritical references to the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy : a strategy driven by liberalisation , privatisation and increased labour market flexibility which is an approach entirely at odds with the objectives of cohesion policy .
I approved of this report because the 2006 report of the European Court of Auditors showed that the control systems in place for the cohesion policy were not effective enough , and the error rate in the expenditure reimbursed was too great ( 12 % ) .
The 2008 report confirmed this data with 11 % of funds unduly reimbursed .
Overly complex rules governing the Structural Funds are partly responsible for these errors .
The shared management system characterising the cohesion policy implies a high degree of complexity in the interpretation and application of the rules given the numerous actors involved .
Therefore , rules should be simplified to ensure more user-friendly procedures and not discourage potential beneficiaries from participating in projects .
in writing . - Over the last decades , decentralisation of powers in several Member States has considerably reinforced regional and local authorities ' competences in the delivery of Community policies .
The incorporation by the Reform Treaty of sub-national subsidiarity into the Community law for the policies of shared competence allows today territorial authorities to be more deeply involved in the decision-making process , both for the design and the implementation of policies , as fully dignified partners , to participate in achieving the Community objectives .
This important step towards better multi-level governance answers repeated requests by the Parliament to reinforce the involvement of the sub-national authorities in the conception of policies , always respecting the different national constitutional assets .
An efficient implementation depends strongly on how policies are conceived ; involving local and regional authorities also in this phase - as those knowing best the needs of their territory and of its population - is an assurance of more effective results at a later stage .
It is crucial to place the emphasis on the pre-legislative phase of the decision-making process and on the added value offered by policies and best practices implemented at local and regional level to the development of territorial strategies in the EU .
This text acts as a foil to the creation of European macro-regions .
In order to further impose these competitive clusters to serve the interests of the sacrosanct common market , this House is proposing that they be overseen by the European Commission to the detriment of elected governments .
EU regional policy should be centred on reducing inequalities in the income and living conditions of those living in the European regions .
We are a far cry from that .
Given that some regions possess clear geographical and natural disadvantages such as depopulation , among other things , I believe that this measure is fundamental if we are to make cohesion policy more effective .
It is fundamental for there to be greater rigour in applying the Cohesion Fund so that asymmetries between the Member States and regions of the EU can be reduced .
In this way , we will create a process which is more transparent , less bureaucratic and more equitable in terms of funding distribution .
As a result , there will be fewer gaps between levels of competitiveness .
This is why I voted as I did .
At last !
At last , someone has given some thought to what is referred to as regional policy .
Taking the example of Latvia alone , I can honestly say that not even I have been able to extract information from the officials at the Latvian Ministry of Economics on plans for the application of EU Structural Funds .
This information is kept in great secrecy from the people of Latvia .
In return for what sort of ' appreciation ' , however , is it possible to find out about the European Commission 's plans in relation to Latvia and , possibly , receive funding ?
I voted in favour in the hope that the process will become accessible to everyone , and that no one will make a secret of the European Commission 's plans .
The report aims to strengthen the role of the Commission in supporting regional and local authorities .
This is an attempt to extend the overall power of the Commission and that is something to which I must most definitely express my opposition .
I therefore voted against this motion .
Over recent years , the European Union has seen local authorities become increasingly significant in the Member States .
Decentralisation of the management of the territory to smaller , local bodies has meant that , due to the principle of subsidiarity , these have assumed greater power and influence , mainly concerning specific competences delegated to them by the Member States .
Regional authorities have therefore found themselves in direct contact with the European institutions .
I voted for Mrs Mănescu 's report , precisely because in this situation , there is a need for greater control and support for regional policies from the European Commission .
The report also targets the adoption of a White Paper on territorial cohesion , which would be a real step forward for the EU towards a new multi-level governance that ingrates perfectly with European , national and regional competences .
The principle of sub-national subsidiarity , introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , puts into practice the aim of involving the regions in the European decision-making process .
The increase in dialogue with the European Commission involves the principles of good governance in relation to regional policy and the adoption of other procedures of assistance and control .
I voted in favour of the present report , which deals with the competences and role of regional and local authorities in the process of implementing cohesion policy .
Regional authorities can now participate more directly and more actively in the decision-making process . This includes drawing up and implementing policy , and being treated as true partners in realising EU objectives .
I welcome this important step for governance , which responds to the repeated calls by the European Parliament for an increase in sub-national entities ' participation in drawing up and implementing European policy .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Mănescu , on her excellent work and I agree with her that the potential of territorial cooperation can be better exploited through multi-level governance , thanks to the relationships developed between private and public actors across national borders .
I also agree on promoting the exchange of information between the European Groupings of Territorial Cooperation ( EGTC ) that have already been created , as well as those in the process of being set up within the framework of existing programmes .
Over recent decades , the decentralisation of powers in several Member States has reinforced regional and local authorities ' competences considerably in the development of Community policies .
Emphasising the prelegislative phase of the decision-making process and the added value offered by the policies and best practices implemented at local and regional level to the development of territorial strategies in the EU helps ensure their effectiveness and sustainability .
The following aspects need to be considered to see how the multi-level governance approach can be improved in the area of cohesion policy : the vertical and horizontal dimensions of governance , setting up real partnerships with local and regional authorities , territorial cohesion and cooperation , simplification of rules at EU and national level ( Member States should simplify their national provisions and develop a stronger culture of evaluation at all levels in order to ensure effective controls and avoid errors - in 2008 , 11 % of funds were mistakenly reimbursed ) .
The Commission 's role needs to be strengthened in supporting regional and local authorities , with serious reflection about the ways in which to improve governance and , consequently , the effectiveness of the delivery system of the Structural Funds for the period after 2013 .
I believe that it is necessary to improve governance in the area of regional policy with a view to making the management of the Structural Funds and of cohesion policy not only more effective , but also more balanced .
I agree with the rapporteur in seeking from the Commission a policy which will , in future , put more emphasis on results , based , above all , on the quality of intervention and the development of strategic projects .
I also believe that European networks for exchanging best practices should strengthen their initiatives , as this will contribute to our assurance with regard to the application of these procedures in practice .
in writing . - Over the last few decades , the decentralisation of powers in several Member States has considerably reinforced regional and local authorities ' competences in the delivery of Community policies .
The incorporation by the reform treaty of sub-national subsidiarity into Community law for policies of shared competence today allows territorial authorities to be more deeply involved in the decision-making process , both for the design and the implementation of policies , as fully dignified partners , to participate in achieving the Community objectives .
This important step towards better multi-level governance answers repeated requests by Parliament to reinforce the involvement of the sub-national authorities in the conception of policies always respecting the different national constitutional assets .
The decentralisation of government brings increased responsibility to regional and local authorities .
Indeed , it is authorities at local level which best understand the needs of their regions and the people who live there , thanks to which they can adapt general objectives to their own potential and possibilities .
We will achieve success if the Member States identify with the work they undertake and responsibility for it is devolved to authorities at the appropriate level .
We should support a grass-roots approach , which should be flexible and integrated .
It is important for cohesion policy to be user friendly .
There is a need to reduce administrative costs and simplify procedures , the complicated nature of which , in many cases , not only results in mistakes , but often discourages beneficiaries from using support which is available to them .
We talk about reducing the risk of error , but we should not forget the plans and objectives upon which we have decided .
I am thinking , here , of innovative measures .
We have given an important place to innovative methods , so we have to reckon with the risk and possibility of mistakes being made .
We should , therefore , ask ourselves if we want to undertake work of an experimental nature in the spirit of the priorities of the 2020 strategy , or if we would rather reduce the number of mistakes , which would mean discouraging our citizens from undertaking innovative but sometimes uncertain work .
Good governance in European regional policy is essential if such policy is to be successful .
Governance must be given a greater presence at several levels , with the aim of strengthening the participation of all institutions in the legislative process .
With this in mind , it is fundamental that there should be an increase in the involvement of regional and local authorities in both the pre-legislative and implementation phases of such policies .
I would emphasise the fact that the Treaty of Lisbon recognises sub-national subsidiarity , not only in the sphere of regional policy , but also horizontally , which is to say , in all European policies .
I believe that with more and better participation at the various levels of decision making , the aim of territorial cohesion , based on a vision of integration , will be realised .
However , a bottom-up perspective should be adopted , because it is local and regional institutions which can best understand the characteristics and problems of the regions .
The Territorial Pact of Local and Regional Authorities on Europe 2020 can add to the strengthening of this contribution to the goals of intelligent , sustainable and inclusive growth .
The principles of partnership and cofinancing will contribute to an increase in the responsibility of these institutions and the European Commission should see its supervisory role strengthened , particularly by improving the control and audit system .
in writing . - I voted for this report as it makes important calls on the Commission to strengthen its monitoring role in order to reduce the error rate highlighted in the recent report by the Court of Auditors .
The Commission should also consult local and regional authorities at all stages of legislation relating to the regions to make them more accountable in producing a more results-oriented policy .
This should also help to reduce the level of error , improve control systems and increase assistance to sub-national authorities and beneficiaries .
I feel this report goes a long way to promoting better cooperation between regions in different Member States , which will only have a positive effect in achieving the aims of cohesion policy across the EU and ensuring that all European Union regions develop harmoniously .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which aims to harness the know-how and experience of immigration liaison officers for the benefit of Frontex and vice-versa .
This was not a matter addressed in the original regulation adopted in 2004 .
There is a clear need for the amendments and for new issues to be included in order to improve the functioning of Frontex , such as exploitation of the information obtained through the liaison officer networks and exchange of this via ICONet ( secure Information and Coordination Network for Member States ' migration management services ) , accessing the External Borders Fund to promote the creation of liaison officer networks and facilitate their operation and , lastly , expediting the system for the presentation of half-yearly reports .
I am convinced that those amendments are very timely and necessary as the EU has to face and manage the increased flow of legal - and also illegal - immigration .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 377 / 2004 of 19 February 2004 established an immigration liaison officers network .
These officers are representatives of Member States posted in a third country and are responsible for facilitating the EU 's efforts to combat illegal immigration , in particular , by gathering information for the European Frontex agency .
However , coordination in the context of this policy , which is still in its infancy , can be improved .
Meetings between these liaison officers and Commission and Frontex representatives should be taking place .
Furthermore , better cooperation with other bodies , such as the European Asylum Support Office and the Office for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , should be encouraged .
That is why it was deemed necessary to amend Regulation ( EC ) No 377 / 2004 .
I gave my support to this text which , as well as reiterating the fundamental rights conditions to be fulfilled by this policy , provides the means by which to effectively control the management of the EU 's external borders .
I agree with the amendment of the regulation aiming to enhance cooperation between Frontex and immigration liaison officers .
More active cooperation would help Frontex carry out its principle functions in combating illegal immigration , i.e. preventing illegal immigration and returning illegal immigrants .
As the agency 's activities concern migration within EU territory , immigration liaison officers posted to third countries can make a decisive contribution to Frontex achieving its objectives outside the Union .
The agency would thus have an opportunity for a more effective exchange of information with the competent authorities of third countries or with international organisations on EU border control issues , through the training of border guards , operational information exchanges and joint operations .
It would be possible to exchange information via ICONet ( secure Information and Coordination Network for Member States ' migration management services ) .
I voted in favour of this European Parliament report because , with the increase in migration flows , it is important to create liaison officer networks .
Given that the current economic , financial and social crisis has encouraged even more people to migrate , the European Union must do all it can to ensure that immigration flows are properly managed .
The creation of networks would not only help to regulate legal , irregular and illegal immigration , but would also facilitate operational cooperation between the Member States and expedite the system for the presentation of the half-yearly reports .
Furthermore , closer cooperation between officers would guarantee a better exchange of technical knowledge and liaison with colleagues working in third countries .
I would like to underline that the European Union institutions should constantly strive to ensure a safe and swift immigration process and guarantee that EU citizens are protected from the possible dangers posed by irregular and illegal immigration .
This can only be achieved by using all possible effective instruments of international and internal cooperation .
I believe that Parliament 's position on amendments to Council Regulation ( EC ) No 377 / 2004 on the creation of an immigration liaison officers network contributes to the appropriate management of legal as well as illegal or clandestine flows of migrants .
In fact , it is necessary to strengthen the synergies and operational cooperation between the Member States and third countries , in particular , through the liaison officers .
I also believe that it is fundamental to analyse the activities of the immigration liaison officer networks in regions and / or countries of special interest to the European Union , particularly where the circumstances of these regions and / or countries have a bearing on illegal immigration or human rights issues .
For its part , the Commission should develop recommendations on developing immigration liaison officer networks .
I voted against the report on the creation of an immigration liaison officers network because it is designed to further reinforce Frontex , which does all it can to promote the idea of Fortress Europe .
In other words , the idea is to replace the progress needed in immigration and asylum policies with repressive policies , which not only conflict with basic principles and rights , but which are also ineffective and have a disastrous impact on host communities and communities of origin and on the lives of refugees and immigrants .
I voted for this report as I think that it makes significant improvements in the management of immigration flows in the European Union .
Enhancing the remit of immigration liaison offers located in third countries will help Frontex as a whole operate more efficiently , given that it will be based on information and assistance from these officers .
Another point which is also just as important is that these liaison officers will be obliged to respect fundamental rights during their mission .
Indeed , regular reports will be submitted to the European Parliament for scrutiny regarding the monitoring of respect for these rights .
Following the formal creation of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) , it has become necessary to make the best possible use of Union border resources .
In this regard , it has become imperative to institute closer cooperation between the immigration liaison officer networks and Frontex .
Using the skills of both immigration liaison officers and Frontex , based on an exchange of information obtained from the liaison officer networks through the Information and Coordination Network for Member States ' migration management services , will enable better risk analysis by Frontex , as well as more cooperation in relation to legal and illegal immigration .
As shadow rapporteur on this dossier , I supported Mr Diaz de Mera 's report , which has enabled us to go beyond the technical changes proposed by the Commission by gaining a better understanding of the complexity and lack of transparency of the work carried out by immigration liaison officers ( ILO ) .
In the context of ' mixed ' migratory flows , it is indeed crucial to include in their activities an approach that is more mindful and respectful of human rights .
The assignments carried out by ILOs also need to reflect greater transparency and greater democratic supervision ; this is now the case , with the exchange of information between the European Parliament , on the one hand , and organisations such as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( HCR ) and the European Asylum Support Office ( EASO ) , on the other , being strengthened .
Given the Council 's opposition , the compromise finally found to solve the terminological controversy ( ' illegal ' immigration versus ' irregular ' immigration ) seems satisfactory , but it can only be a first step .
The European institutions will have to make good their commitment .
The exchange of best practices between different countries ' police forces is sometimes necessary and its objectives commendable .
We should remember , however , that international police cooperation existed way back in the 19th century , long before European integration .
This report proposes , in the context of Frontex ( European Agency at the External Borders of the Member States ) , an improvement in the exchange of information on illegal migratory flows , illegal immigration and the deportation of persons residing without authorisation , including the introduction of immigration liaison officers networks .
One could welcome this new initiative , which the majority of Europeans want , were it really aimed at dramatically reducing immigration .
However , the reality is altogether different , and this agency 's work , like the measures taken by the national governments , has resulted in failure .
France and Europe are being swamped with immigrants .
Around 900 000 people enter Europe illegally each year , according to an ' official ' European Union figure .
Given that illegal immigrants , and even foreign criminals , are not sent back to their country of origin , one is entitled to wonder how yet more provisions could reverse migratory flows without real political courage backed up by action .
in writing . - The proposal amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 337 / 2004 aims to harness the know-how and experience of immigration liaison officers for the benefit of Frontex and vice-versa , which was not a matter addressed in the original regulation .
The amending proposal has the following objectives : harnessing of the know-how of liaison officers and of Frontex for their mutual benefit ; exploitation of the information obtained through the liaison officer networks and exchange of this via ICONet ( secure Information and Coordination Network for Member States ' migration management services ) ; accessing of the External Borders Fund to promote the creation of liaison officer networks and facilitate their operation and , lastly , to expedite the system for the presentation of the half-yearly reports .
I welcome this measure .
Following the formal creation of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) , it has become necessary to make the best possible use of Union border resources .
In this regard , it is necessary to institute closer cooperation between the various immigration liaison officer networks and Frontex .
Exchanging information and skills between immigration liaison officers and Frontex using the Information and Coordination Network for Member States ' migration management services will enable better risk analysis by Frontex , as well as better control over legal and illegal immigration .
I am in favour of this regulation , which seeks to amend the regulation of 19 February 2004 on the creation of an immigration liaison officers network .
These amendments are necessary as a result of the way in which European law in this area has developed and is practised .
The new regulation makes provision for , among other things : • a legal basis between Frontex and the liaison officers ; • better use of ICONet and ; • increased rationalisation of the reporting systems pertaining to the network 's activities .
With this new regulation , we hope that this immigration liaison officers network will become more effective .
The border protection agency Frontex plays an important role when it comes to combating illegal immigration .
This can only be effectively combated in the transit countries .
A dense network of immigration liaison officers and their close cooperation is therefore a sensible measure to enable us effectively to combat mass immigration into Europe with all its negative consequences for the peoples of Europe .
However , this will only be the case if the information and assessments provided by liaison officers are made available to Frontex and the national authorities as quickly as possible and without any red tape .
As regards cooperation in particular , there is still potential for improvement and this needs to be exploited with regard to the issue of immigration .
For example , the powers of Frontex should , with the consent of the Member States , be enhanced as quickly as possible in order to ensure that its work is uniform and effective , particularly at the external borders .
It would be important to have a comprehensive strategy for how the external borders of the EU can be better protected and the causes of emigration from the countries of origin better combated .
This is a task for the Commission .
Although the report does not deal adequately with these considerations , it represents an improvement on the current situation and , for that reason , I voted in favour of it .
The proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 377 / 2004 on the creation of an immigration liaison officers network introduces amendments which aim to use the knowledge and experience of immigration liaison officers for the benefit of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) and vice versa .
In fact , Frontex could not yet be fully operational without the creation of such a network of liaison officers .
I agree with the objectives of the proposed amendment , in particular : actions to make the most of the knowledge and experience of liaison officers and of Frontex ; making use of information obtained through networks of liaison agents via the Information and Coordination Network for Member States ' migration management services ; permission to use the External Borders Fund to promote the creation of networks of liaison officers and simplify their operations ; and , finally , improvements to the system of submitting biannual activity reports .
I agree with Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra in relation to the decisive contribution that immigration liaison officers posted to third countries could , by virtue of their remits , make to Frontex achieving its objectives , especially considering that the agency has no representation outside the European Union .
I also support the amending proposal , which will have the following objectives : to harness the know-how of liaison officers and of Frontex for their mutual benefit ; to exploit the information obtained through the liaison officer networks and exchange this via ICONet ( secure Information and Coordination Network for Member States ' migration management services ) ; to access the External Borders Fund to promote the creation of liaison officer networks and facilitate their operation ; and , lastly , to expedite the system for the presentation of the half-yearly reports .
I believe that amending the regulation is essential to providing a genuine platform for the exchange of information between immigration liaison officers and the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union .
The exchanging of information will definitely add value to the work of both parties .
in writing . - When the regulation now being amended was adopted on 19 February 2004 , Frontex was yet to be officially established .
It was eight months later , on 26 October 2004 , that the Council adopted the Regulation establishing a European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders .
By virtue of the remits set out in its rules of procedure , Frontex is responsible for carrying out risk analysis based on the information gathered by the competent authorities in the Member States , for facilitating operational cooperation between the Member States and third countries , and for cooperating with the competent authorities of third countries and with international organisations through , for example , exchanges of experience on border control issues , the training of border guards , operational information exchanges and joint operations .
The amendments proposed here are appropriate and necessary .
The troubled times that the European Union is experiencing demand appropriate management of immigration flows .
This should be seen as having two facets : management of legal immigration and management of illegal and clandestine immigration .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution as economic immigration is a growing challenge for the EU .
Therefore , the EU must develop balanced legal immigration channels which meet the needs of our labour markets while taking account of the demographic and economic challenges which the EU will face in the near future .
I am convinced that the adoption of this directive will simplify procedures for the admission of third-country nationals for employment purposes , will reduce administrative costs and will also make it easier to check on people admitted to the territory of a Member State and authorised to work there .
With reference to the simplified procedure , I have to stress that the implementation of legal requirements and transparency of decision making by national authorities must be ensured .
I agree with the rapporteur that these decisions on the admission of third-country nationals for employment purposes have a strong impact on the life of the persons concerned , and must therefore be taken in a way which is completely transparent .
The directive on a single residence and work permit in all the Member States of the EU and the European Parliament report on it view immigrants as cheap labour , at the mercy of the cruel exploitation of capital .
An immigrant will only have the right to stay in the territory of a Member State of the EU if he works to swell the coffers of the plutocracy .
Otherwise , he will be considered illegal and will be treated as an unwanted object , imprisoned for up to 18 months and thrown out .
Nothing sets immigrants apart from local workers in the Member States of the EU .
They are united by the common fate of the worker , the exploited , the producers of the wealth seized by capital .
The fight for the fair demands of immigrants , for their legalisation , for the abolition of black-market and uninsured work , for higher salaries and wages , for an equal day 's pay for an equal day 's work , for full protection of social and civil rights and for the repeal of the Dublin agreement is a joint fight .
Immigrants ' problems will only be resolved by integrating them into the working class movement and stepping up its fight against the anti-grassroots and chauvinist policy of the EU and its bourgeois governments , which are responsible for the poverty and misery of local and immigrant workers in the EU and throughout the world .
I am convinced that we will only be able to fight illegal immigration and undeclared work effectively through balanced legal immigration channels that are mindful of the needs of the labour market .
The advantages deriving from the adoption of this directive are obvious : the issuance of a single document authorising residence and access to the labour market constitutes a considerable simplification of the admission system , will reduce its costs and cut procedure times .
The adoption of this directive is needed in order to introduce additional measures regarding seasonal workers and workers posted within their undertaking and , hence , I hope that this takes place as soon as possible , with due regard to the competence of Member States to decide maximum entrance quotas for workers from third countries .
On Wednesday , we voted on the draft directive by my colleague , Véronique Mathieu , on the creation of a single residency and work permit for migrant workers .
I voted for this text . Unfortunately , it was not adopted .
This text allowed for the alignment of the system applicable to foreign workers and thus tackled social dumping .
By regulating illegal immigration more effectively , it enabled the Union to clamp down on undeclared work and on illegal sectors .
The socialists opposed this directive on the pretext that its scope excluded some categories .
However , the liberals ' position was totally unexpected and led to the text being rejected .
Having seen one of their positions on a rejected amendment , they voted against the whole text without having warned us beforehand about the importance they attached to that point .
That is how a year of precious work has been wasted .
People must realise that the European Parliament is not subordinate to the Council .
From now on , even with regard to immigration , Member States must take MEPs seriously .
The ordinary legislative procedure is a reality .
The draft directive on the single permit for third-country nationals was rejected in plenary : that is a strong signal on the part of Parliament because the issue was a crucial one .
For years , we have been talking about creating a single permit for third-country nationals who wish to live and work in a Member State .
It was a laudable initiative to start with , but the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , as they stand , deny the very essence of a single permit .
They also go against equal treatment for all and create different categories of workers , which is quite simply unacceptable .
Equal treatment cannot be compromised .
Thus , in response to these PPE amendments , we voted by a majority against the final proposal : with 350 votes to 306 , it has been rejected and will have to be sent back to the European Commission .
We need to do better : yes to a responsible common immigration policy but no to a restrictive and discriminatory one !
When it voted today on the directive on a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State , the European Parliament blocked the European Commission 's proposal and returned it to the competent parliamentary committees for the contents of the proposal for a directive to be further improved .
This vote is a victory for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and all workers in the European Union .
I would like to stress that because the framework of the directive we were promised was already deleted from the Commission 's proposal , as certain categories of workers , such as seasonal workers , intra-company transfers and refugees were deleted from its contents , the European Parliament could not approve such a directive .
This directive should be a general framework directive on rights for third-country workers and should serve as a framework for specific directives , because only then will the European Union goal of a common migration policy be achieved .
By voting in this way , we demonstrated that the European Union cannot be home to a double labour market with double standards , because this would undermine all the social standards we have gained previously .
in writing . - I have voted in favour of Amendments 30 , 34 , 65 , 103 , 109 and 114 because although I fully support the UN International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families , I believe that regulation of access to labour markets , social security schemes and public housing are matters to be regulated by the Member States which should not be regulated at Community level .
By ratifying the abovementioned UN Convention , Member States have pledged to implement it in their domestic systems without ceding any powers in that regard to the Union .
The report on the single permit to reside and work in the European Union has given us the chance to reflect upon and discuss the important role that immigrants can have in our societies .
Legal entry , effective integration and respect for the law are essential preconditions for this important role and allow for greater participation by immigrants in the shared development of their adopted communities .
In this regard , the single permit voted upon can provide a way to manage entries and safeguard the rights and duties of all the people who make up a community .
I supported the proposal for a directive , including the parts that are without prejudice to the more favourable provisions contained in EU legislation and international instruments .
I regret that this House has not adopted the proposal being discussed , which I believe could make a useful contribution to the creation of a European area of freedom and integration between people that wish to work together for the growth of the EU .
For years , we have been talking about creating a single permit for third-country nationals who wish to live and work in a Member State .
This is a commendable initiative , the initial objective of which is to simplify the administrative requirements for third-country nationals by enabling them to obtain a work permit and a residence permit via a ' one-stop shop ' procedure .
The initial legislative proposal stipulated that workers from third countries should enjoy the same treatment as nationals with respect to employment rights ( such as access to social security , education and training ) .
However , according to the text as amended by the rapporteur , Member States would have been authorised to restrict some of these rights .
This is contrary to equal treatment and is not acceptable .
We therefore voted by a majority against the final proposal , which was rejected .
Formulating a humane and reasonable immigration policy will be a fundamental challenge for society over the next few years , but it can only be done at European level so as to avoid electoral agendas and national knee-jerk reactions .
The issue in question in this proposal is the introduction of a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State and on a common set of rights for third-country workers legally residing in the EU .
This presupposes the existence of rules common to all Member States , which aims to put an end to the current differences in approach of the various EU countries and which would make the process of giving legal status to workers quicker , more uniform and more transparent throughout the Union .
On the one hand , the legal migration of labour and , above all , qualified labour , helps to fight clandestine working , and can improve the competitiveness of the economy and overcome existing scarcities .
On the other hand , however , we cannot forget that , during a period of economic crisis and vulnerability , when unemployment is growing , labour migration policy must be flexible , as argued by the Commission , but also sustainable and reasonable .
I am genuinely disappointed about the rejection of the report by Mrs Mathieu on the single application procedure for a residence and work permit .
It was balanced report that was much improved at the voting stage by the amendments of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which were accepted with the decisive contribution of liberals and conservatives .
I am saddened by the failure of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe to respect the agreement and the mistaken assessment by the European Conservatives and Reformists , which open the doors to a new proposal from the Commission , which is likely to be inferior to the current one .
The opportunity for legal immigrants to obtain the necessary residence and work documents by means of a single procedure for the entire territory of the European Union would have been a decisive step forward , and a right and proper corollary to the necessary reinforcement of the fight against illegal immigration through greater cooperation with the coastal Member States and the strengthening of Frontex .
Instead , as has been the case on a number of other occasions , it is some stubborn ideological remnants of the Left that prevail , who , in pursuing the indiscriminate opening of borders , end up denying the need to protect honest foreigners who come to Europe for work .
We consider it very significant that this proposal for a directive on a single application procedure for a single residency and work permit has been rejected by a majority of the European Parliament , as Parliament 's text , already negotiated with the Council , only served the interests of large firms and economic groups .
These groups were pressing for social dumping so that they could have a foreign workforce that they could exploit with low wages and few rights .
Although put forth under the pretext of a single regulation , such groups in practice wanted to legalise social dumping , strengthen job insecurity , increase inequality and open the way for different outcomes and laws to put the principles of equality and justice for all workers into jeopardy .
In some ways , they wished to resurrect the country of origin principle from the infamous Bolkestein Directive , which was rejected after concerted resistance by workers .
Now , the resistance and arguments of workers and unions in various Member States has had repercussions for the European Parliament , demonstrating that the struggle has been worthwhile .
Portuguese workers also contributed to this positive result , through the general strike of 24 November .
However , it is necessary to maintain our vigilance .
At a time when almost 25 million Europeans are registered as unemployed , a directive aimed at facilitating the immigration of job seekers has once again been tabled .
You have to admit that there is something obscene about that .
What is more , this text sought to guarantee certain economic and social rights to these immigrant workers , allegedly to avoid any social dumping or unfair competition with indigenous workers or workers who are already in Europe .
This is an implicit admission that immigration pushes down European wages and does not make up for any labour shortages , but , on the contrary , results in direct competition for our workers .
Some amendments , in wanting to promote equal rights - and equal costs - between residents and immigrants , were , in fact , tantamount to allowing every kind of immigrant , whether working or not , access to our social benefits .
This represents a choice between social dumping and automatic handouts which is no longer bearable , neither politically nor financially .
It is time to decide , at Member State level , to reverse migratory flows , which have become unbearable economic , social and even cultural burdens , and to practise national and Community preference in all areas .
The EU Member States face a constant struggle with the problem of illegal immigration and work carried out in what is known as the shadow economy by citizens of third countries .
Appropriate steps must be taken to counteract these problems effectively .
Simplifying and standardising procedures for issuing entry and residence permits for citizens of third countries in order for them to start working in a Member State will help limit illegal immigration .
At the same time , it will make it possible for the workforce requirements of European markets to be met .
The proposed regulations leave a certain margin of discretion to accepting countries , especially with regard to conditions for refusal of entry .
This ensures an appropriate level of legal security and that there will be no interference in Member States ' competences .
The directive under discussion will make it possible for all Member States to adopt a common position on economic immigration .
This will ensure transparent regulations , security and legal protection for workers who suffer discrimination , a continued fight against illegal immigration and , finally , measures to combat unfair competition .
For this reason , I agree with the rapporteur 's position .
in writing . - In 2001 , the Commission submitted a proposal for a directive on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purpose of paid employment and self-employed economic activities .
Despite a favourable opinion from the European Parliament , this ambitious proposal , which sought to establish the entry and residence conditions for third-country nationals wishing to undertake an economic activity within the Union , did not survive beyond its first reading within the Council , and the Commission officially withdrew it in 2006 .
I welcome the fact that the new legal basis provided by the Lisbon Treaty gives this proposal a good chance of being adopted .
I voted in favour of this report , together with my group , because I believe that it responds well to the considerable demographic challenges that the European Union will face in the coming years by establishing a single application procedure for third-country nationals who wish to be admitted to the territory of a Member State in order to work there , and by offering them a secure legal status .
Unfortunately , Parliament 's rejection will delay the analysis of this important directive , which would have simplified the often complex administrative procedures for receiving economic migrants .
It would thus have enabled the labour markets of our Member States to respond to current and future manpower needs and would have provided a way of combating exploitation and discrimination , to which these workers too often fall victim .
The directive seeks to reduce the differences that exist between national legislations : with this one-stop shop system , the administrative procedure would be simpler , less expensive and quicker .
Our proposal would not have defined the conditions for admission for third-country nationals : the Member States would always have been responsible for determining the conditions for admission and setting the number of migrants to allow into their territory for employment purposes .
This report and the draft directive that it amends are shameful .
They introduce selective immigration governed by market requirements .
They deprive of their rights all immigrants who are of no use , or no more use , to these markets .
Even when they do grant limited rights to those who work , they offer the option to restrict them still further in the future .
Immigrants are not second-class human beings !
This directive is quite simply inhumane .
I shall vote against it and I also condemn it .
This document , which has been rejected by the majority of Members , was a piece of legislation which would have enabled flows of migrants to be better managed .
It aimed to eliminate the differences between Member States in their labour and residency procedures , and give third-country nationals working legally in the EU access to certain rights .
It was thus a step forward , for two reasons .
Firstly , because we are creating a new instrument which aims to benefit third-country nationals wishing to immigrate to the territory of Member States by conferring upon them a set of rights .
Secondly , because of the political message which it sends overseas , disproving the idea that Europe is closed and only able to pass repressive measures , and strengthening security at a time when we are responding to the concerns expressed in the Stockholm Programme regarding the creation of flexible immigration policies in order to support the EU 's economic development .
This is why I voted as I did .
The circumstances under which third-country nationals are permitted to reside and work in an EU Member State are a matter for the state in question , not the EU .
The fact that , in certain areas , periodic immigration of well-educated skilled workers may perhaps be useful must not result in an open door policy because , first and foremost , it should be workers from our own population , in other words , EU citizens , who are recruited .
If we have a shortage of workers in many areas , we should investigate the causes of this and respond by adapting the training accordingly , but also by providing opportunities for reskilling .
The fact that labour migration can be a problem for workers because it suppresses wage levels and can also lead to dumping prices has been shown time and again in the past .
It was for this reason , for example , that the transitional periods for the free movement of workers were introduced at the insistence of the countries with well-developed social security safety nets .
In the debate , it must not be forgotten that the rules and regulations for the supply of labour can be exploited by clever enterprises .
I therefore voted against the report .
I voted for this report as the European Union has needed for many years now clear rules and procedures about the rights granted to legally resident third-country workers .
We need such a set of rules for at least two reasons .
Firstly , although we should provide a preferential scheme for EU workers , legally resident workers participate in Member States ' economic life and are entitled to protection and guarantees .
They should be considered as an asset to the EU economy and not as a threat to EU workers .
Secondly , such clear rules would help achieve better control over migration .
On the other hand , if we avoid such rules , we encourage illegal migration and employment and all the repercussions they entail .
I regret to say that I reject the report and call on the Commission to come back with a new proposal .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Mathieu because I hope that after years of work , the guidelines will be established to draw up a directive that provides a single package of European rules on permits and rights for workers from third countries .
We have been working on a European directive since 2001 without seeing any results .
Now let us hope that the Council approves it in codecision with Parliament and that a conclusion is reached , given the importance of the issue .
This is a crucial point for the development of Europe , as increasing demand for manpower is taking us ever closer to what is called ' economic immigration ' and , therefore , a common regulation on the issue is urgently needed .
Long-term economic development of the Union must be supported , so we need to simplify administrative practices regarding permits for third-country nationals who wish to be admitted to the territory of a Member State in order to work there , offering them a secure legal status .
The directive will enable us to meet current and future manpower needs and will provide a way of combating exploitation and discrimination , to which these workers too often fall victim .
I voted in favour of the present report , which was not adopted in the final vote .
I did so because I believe the monitoring of migration in the European Union is a fundamental part of a responsible hosting policy in the Member States .
The best way to combat illegal immigration and clandestine working is to develop a balanced policy towards legal migration , hosting immigrants on the basis of the needs of the labour market in the host state .
At a time without economic growth , it is important not to create false expectations of inclusion , or encourage policies which promote a scarcity of labour .
The proposal of filling out a single application to the authorities of the host country , requesting a work and residence visa , would cater for this concern .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Mathieu , and with the proposal for a directive , which is part of the European Union 's efforts to develop a global migration policy and is a framework proposal for citizens of third countries .
Its aim is twofold : a ) to create a single application procedure for a permit to reside and work in a Member State ; and b ) to establish a uniform set of minimum rights for third-country workers legally resident in the EU , on the basis of equality of treatment with EU nationals .
Legal immigration into EU Member States is important for economic development .
The immigration of workers can increase competition and vitality and , in light of the demographic challenges that the EU is facing with an ageing population , it is important to adopt a flexible immigration policy .
We therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal , which seeks to introduce a single application procedure for third-country nationals applying for work and residence permits .
This should simplify the complex administrative formalities involved in the reception of migrants .
It should also make it possible for the labour markets in our Member States to react to current and future labour requirements and provide a tool for combating the exploitation of , and discrimination against , these workers .
However , we are opposed to the amendments tabled concerning additional documents , which would make the proposal contradictory and pointless .
Having a single application procedure and one document becomes meaningless if all of the Member States can issue and demand additional documents .
The amendment stating that the Member States may issue a document to supplement the residence permit , which may be updated or withdrawn when the person 's labour market situation changes , was voted through .
As we were dissatisfied with the text and would have preferred the proposal to go to a second reading before it was adopted , we voted for the inclusion of correlation tables , against the wishes of the Council .
These were not voted through , either , and when we found ourselves in a situation where a positive vote for the report would mean adoption at first reading with a content that we believed undermined the whole proposal for a single document instead of several within the EU , we chose to vote against the proposal .
One of the best ways of combating illegal immigration and undeclared work is to develop balanced legal immigration channels which meet the needs of the labour markets in our countries .
Economic immigration is a reality on which we must impose order , but it is also a necessity in view of the demographic and economic challenges which the European Union will face in the near future .
Immigration policy must be devised as an instrument for regulating our labour needs , thereby helping to implement the Europe 2020 strategy .
EU law does not limit the power of Member States to organise their own social security schemes .
In the absence of harmonisation at Union level , it is for the legislation of each Member State to lay down the conditions under which social security benefits are granted , as well as the amount of these benefits and the period for which they are granted .
However , when exercising this power , Member States should comply with EU law .
Furthermore , working conditions must be respected , including for pay and dismissal , health and safety at the workplace , working time , leave and disciplinary procedures , taking into account any general collective agreements in force .
The European Union must prepare itself for future demographic challenges .
The issues relating to labour migration are relevant to the competitiveness and vitality of economies .
They demand both balanced treatment and deep consideration .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has rejected this proposal for a single permit .
Today 's vote paves the way for new negotiations and says ' no ' to allocating rights according to workers ' market value .
This directive , far from guaranteeing a common set of rights for all migrant workers , founded on equal treatment and non-discrimination , proposed a fragmented concept of legal migration , where the market value of a migrant worker would determine the extent of his or her rights .
On the eve of the 20th anniversary of the UN Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families , this hierarchical arrangement is totally unacceptable : the Union must at last incorporate the conclusions of the many studies which show that the benefits - both individual and collective , economic and societal - for host countries and countries of origin alike go hand in hand with the full and effective exercise of migrants ' rights .
The Greens will continue to pay extremely close attention to this matter in order to help equip the Union with an ambitious migration policy that is based on the principle of universality and indivisibility of fundamental rights .
This will be the issue at stake in the new talks prompted by the rejection of this dreadful agreement .
The objective of the draft directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Protection Order is crime prevention .
It is based on the fact that , although the Member States provide protection for the victims of crime when within national borders , it has become necessary to develop a European-level mechanism for early warning and prevention .
This takes into consideration the recommendations made by the Stockholm Programme and the procedures resulting from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , which allow reports to be provided for on a cross-cutting basis , as well as the first Council proposal for a European victim protection directive of 5 January 2010 .
I agree with a wide-ranging approach in order to include the victims of several types of crime , and with the amendments that provide for arrangements for revoking the protection order , for ensuring continuity of legal protection , for laying down a deadline for execution of an order and for clarifying the position as regards victims moving from one Member State to another .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution because it supports the Council 's proposal for a directive which provides clear measures concerning the prevention of crime and victim protection in particular .
It is important that victims of violence should not only be prevented in their country from being harmed by offenders , but should also have these kinds of preventive measures within the whole of the European Union .
The adoption and implementation of this directive would show that the EU is determined to put into practice the Stockholm Action Plan , the European Union initiative to maintain and develop an area of freedom , security and justice .
It is important to stress that a European Protection Order should be applicable to all victims of crime , including victims of human trafficking , forced marriages , honour killings , gender violence , witnesses , victims of terrorism and organised crime , regardless of the age or sex of the victim , where there is an identified aggressor .
Furthermore , protection of victims does not mean just physical protection , but also includes the dignity of victims .
Therefore , I strongly agree that it is imperative to include protection for victims that aims to restore their dignity and the respect due to them as human beings .
The vote in Parliament on the proposed directive on the European Protection Order for victims sends out an important signal for the protection of people who have suffered from violence .
Unfortunately , even though there was no qualified majority in the Council after the Netherlands took the side of the countries that are blocking the initiative , this has no effect on the importance of today 's vote .
The European legislative vacuum regarding the protection of victims of violence needs to be filled by a concrete response that is not only limited to the territory of the State in which the victim is present , but which applies across borders .
Through the cooperation of 12 Member States , including Italy , the aim is to activate an early-warning and victim protection mechanism within the territory of the European Union .
I am convinced of the importance of reaching an agreement on this instrument - including in political terms - because it will guarantee protection to victims of all kinds of crime and will provide for restraining and prohibiting actions against people who constitute a threat .
An equally significant aspect is the possibility for the victim to move to another Member State , receiving the information and assistance they need to start a new life , while continuing to benefit from protection measures .
I am in favour of the general idea of the protection order .
Victims of violence must be safeguarded from repeat attacks by their aggressors , and must receive the benefit of preventive measures throughout the European Union .
The draft directive is another step towards achieving the objectives of the Stockholm Action Plan and of the European Union initiative to maintain and develop an area of freedom , security and justice .
I am aware of the complexity of this initiative .
Judicial systems vary in the different Member States , as do criminal and civil proceedings .
Despite this , I believe that the rapporteurs have succeeded in strengthening the continuity of legal protection and guaranteeing maximum protection for victims , while ensuring legal certainty .
Victims of violence can benefit from protection measures against their aggressors in their respective Member States .
However , this protection stops at the borders of their Member States , and until now , there was no way of extending this protection beyond those borders .
I voted for this new directive , which allows the judicial authorities of a Member State that has implemented protection measures under its national law to issue a ' European Protection Order ' , which protects victims on the territory of the other Member States .
Obviously , the directive is intended primarily for female victims of violence , but it may be applied to anyone regardless of gender or age , potential victims and their relatives .
I voted in favour of the draft directive on the European Protection Order , which aims to protect victims of crime throughout the European Union .
This initiative aims to introduce a mechanism for judicial and police cooperation between the Member States so that victims of crime who benefit from a protection measure in one Member State will not need to repeat the entire judicial process to obtain protection measures , and so that they may also be protected should they decide to reside or remain in another EU country .
The European Protection Order will be issued at the request of the protected person and should be given not only to women who are the victims of domestic violence , the main group to receive protection , but also to all other victims , such as victims of human trafficking , female genital mutilation , forced marriages , honour killings , incest , gender violence , witnesses , and victims of terrorism and organised crime .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a directive on the European Protection Order because its fundamental goals are crime prevention and victim protection .
Currently , even when Member States have made provision for protection orders for victims , the resulting enforcement measures stop at the border of the issuing State .
The European Union must do all that it can to prevent crime and persecution at European level .
Only then will we be able to guarantee a safe environment for victims without restricting victims ' right to mobility .
Although the Member States ' criminal , civil and administrative proceedings are different , all countries must work together to prevent repeat offences .
I feel that it is very important to include the aspect of moral support in this proposal .
For most victims , crime has various psychological and moral repercussions that continue long after the crime has been committed .
The EU must concern itself not only with prevention and protection , but also with moral support for victims so that they can begin a new life in any EU Member State .
I have voted in favour of the report on the European Protection Order because it aims to improve the legal position of victims of violent crime .
Legal protection is needed , in particular , by people who are victims of repeated violence by close relatives , people who become victims of violence on the basis of gender , or people who become victims of other kinds of crime in a Member State where they have neither citizenship nor a place of abode .
I agreed with the amendment proposals , which limit the reasons for refusing to recognise or for rejecting a European Protection Order , setting a 20-day limit for implementing an order or clarifying the situation when a victim moves from one Member State to another .
I am pleased that the problem of the legal basis , which the Council and the Commission , in particular , raised against each other , has been clarified .
The specific conflict of views between the civil and criminal aspects of the European Protection Order has , in my view , been eliminated through adoption of the amendment proposal , which adds the recognition of court rulings to cooperation in criminal cases .
This will accommodate the Commission 's objection that the European Protection Order legislation will contravene its exclusive right of initiative in the area of civil law .
I support this resolution as I believe that it is fundamental that victims of violence should benefit from measures to prevent crime and from protection throughout the European Union .
In other words , this protection should not be restricted to a single Member State but should allow the individual to reside or remain in other EU countries .
This measure should be applied to victims of human trafficking , female genital mutilation , forced marriages , honour killings , incest , gender violence , witnesses and victims of terrorism and organised crime .
To achieve this , it will be necessary to overcome the fact that the legal systems of the Member States are different .
This draft directive aims to fill a gap in existing legislation regarding the victims of crime , which does not address the issue of preventing crime and the need for a rapid and effective , Europe-wide early warning and prevention mechanism to protect victims .
The creation of a European Protection Order should , for these reasons , become an important way of protecting victims , regardless of the type of violence to which they have been subjected .
It must work across the borders of Member States , so that victims will not have to start the entire judicial process required to obtain protection measures afresh if they move to another Member State .
Although , on the one hand , we have just adopted legislation regarding the civil and procedural rights of suspects in the EU , on the other hand , we cannot forget the civil and procedural rights of victims who are , without any doubt , vulnerable and lacking in protection to a greater extent .
The adoption of this directive is an important step towards assisting victims , but I hope that the Commission can go further and present a comprehensive and more complete legislative package regarding victims as soon as possible .
I voted in favour of the draft directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Protection Order .
Unlike , perhaps , some of the more resistant Member States ( the United Kingdom , the Netherlands since the last change of government , and so on ) , I am against limiting the scope to criminal procedures in the strictest sense ; I am in favour of including a broader range of procedures .
I hope that the strong signal sent by the European Parliament in plenary will ensure not only that the current deadlock caused by the blocking minority within the Council is broken , but also that the forthcoming Hungarian Presidency carries on looking into this matter .
Conferring legal protection upon the victims of crime is fundamental to the construction of an area of liberty , security and justice .
It is for this reason that I agree , despite some reservations , with the objectives of the present proposal which aims to improve the existing legal situation in the following respects : ( i ) improving the arrangements for revoking a European Protection Order ; ( ii ) continuity of legal protection ; ( iii ) limiting the reasons for refusal to recognise , or rejection of , a European Protection Order ; ( iv ) deadlines for execution of an order ; and ( v ) clarifying the position as regards victims moving .
This directive concerns the application of protection measures intended to assist victims of criminal acts whenever these endanger an individual 's life , or physical , psychological or sexual wellbeing .
Protection measures exist in all EU Member States , but cease to take effect when someone crosses the country 's borders .
The European Protection Order aims to ensure that the protection offered to an individual in one Member State will be maintained and continued in any other Member State to which the person relocates or has been relocated .
This is the position which the European Parliament adopted today , with 610 votes in favour , 13 against and 56 abstentions .
It is based on the compromise negotiated between Members of this House and representatives of the Belgian Presidency of the EU .
However , the text has yet to be confirmed by a qualified majority of Member States in the Council .
Although most of the protection measures are aimed at women who have been the victims of domestic violence , the new rules should apply to all victims : as the adopted report states , ' this directive applies to protection measures which aim at protecting all victims and not only the victims of gender violence , taking into account the specificities of each type of crime concerned ' .
The European Protection Order is the practical expression of the priority given by the Spanish Presidency to combating violence against women .
Victims covered by measures stipulating the distance to be observed by their aggressors will be protected beyond national borders , thus allowing them to start a new life wherever they see fit .
The European Protection Order issued will have the same legal force throughout the Union .
The scope of the text has been extended to include the protection ' of life , physical or psychological integrity , dignity , personal liberty or sexual integrity ' .
This broad definition includes the notions of forced marriage , paedophilia , human trafficking , genital mutilation , and so on .
This measure meets the primary objective of the area of freedom , security and justice , which is to build a protective Europe .
I therefore voted for this text .
in writing . - I welcome the European Protection Order .
It is an excellent initiative which will ensure that measures for victims ' protection will extend from one Member State to another .
At present , protection orders stop at our border , leaving the victim defenceless .
The EPO marks a huge step forward in victim rights .
It is a strong instrument which will provide a safer haven for victims of violence across Member States ' borders .
Over 100 000 women in the EU are covered by protective measures .
However , I am very concerned by the blocking minority at Council level of which Ireland is part .
I hope that the huge acceptance of this report at Parliament level will encourage the blocking minority to re-think their stance .
I do not accept their argument that the legal basis of the report is inaccurate .
Both the Council and the Parliament 's legal service found that the legal basis was adequate and , as unanimously supported by JURI , the protection order does not establish obligations to modify national systems for adopting protection measures , as the Member State to which a victim travels is asked to provide protection in accordance with its national law .
in writing . - The ECR Group fully supports the aims and objectives of the proposed European Protection Order and we are keen to see that victims of violence , terrorism , domestic abuse , stalking and / or harassment are protected if and when they move throughout the EU .
The ECR Group is sympathetic to the distress that physical , psychological and or sexual abuse can cause and the state of vulnerability in which it leaves its victims .
We were not able to vote in favour of the report today due to our concerns over the legal base and scope of the directive .
This proposal has a criminal law basis ; however , some of the offences that this proposal intends to cover are civil law matters , yet there is an absence of the use of Article 81 of the TFEU .
The ECR Group is concerned about how effectively this proposal would be implemented and what message this anomaly sends out to the EU public about how we make law here .
The ECR Group strongly believes that the legislation we produce at EU level must be legally sound and robust and should not compromise Member States ' legal systems .
For these reasons , the ECR Group abstained on this report .
in writing . - The proposal for a directive on the European Protection Order , submitted by 12 Member States , is an initiative aimed at preventing crime .
Even when Member States have provided for protection orders for victims , the resulting enforcement measures stop at the border of the issuing State .
Victims , however , may move from one Member State to another for many reasons , not least to escape crime .
Because they move in this way , they are defenceless when judicial and law enforcement cooperation fails to protect them by implementing a rapid , effective Europe-wide early warning and prevention mechanism .
Setting up a cooperation arrangement along these lines is the aim that has given rise to this initiative .
The action taken by Member States shows that crime can be prevented at European level when the aggressor or aggressors are identified .
Thanks to the contribution of the Council , and especially of the two rapporteurs and of the amendments we tabled in committee , the draft directive on the European Protection Order offers excellent protection for victims without any national legislative restrictions .
It should be seen as a symbol of regulatory progress in Europe , which is working step by step to ensure that rights and safeguards are the same in every Member State .
As it has been presented , the European Protection Order makes protection for victims wishing to move freely within the European Union a more decisive and faster process .
The difference between our legal systems , including their procedures , is clearly still a constraint .
However , the scope as defined allows our countries to adapt quickly to the new order , thereby strengthening our Union and giving more protection to European citizens , particularly the most vulnerable .
I therefore strongly support this proposal , which would give hope to the many people whose freedom and dignity is infringed on a daily basis , and who do not have all the means to react .
In the future , they might even be able to start a new life in another country .
It is a matter of the most elementary justice that the victim of a crime who has benefited from a protection order in a Member State should also be protected should they decide to reside or remain in another EU country .
It was with this intention that we adopted these new rules today .
All victims , and not only victims of domestic violence , should be able to benefit from the European Protection Order .
Protection measures exist in all EU Member States , but they cease to take effect when an individual crosses a country 's borders .
The European Protection Order aims to ensure that the protection offered to an individual in one Member State will be maintained and continued in any other Member State to which the person relocates or has been relocated , regardless of the crime they have suffered .
Any victim of a reprehensible act who receives protection in a Member State of the European Union should be able to enjoy the same protection when he or she travels to another Member State .
Despite the fact that most measures concern female victims of sexist violence , it should be specified that any other victim of violence , including children , can enjoy the benefits of this initiative .
Moreover , we can welcome the fact that a protection order can also be requested for the family of a protected person .
Protection should not , however , be limited to the victim 's physical protection .
His or her dignity as a human being must also be considered .
I am well aware of the complexity of the initiative and of the challenges it may face , not least because of the potential differences between the Member States ' judicial systems and criminal , civil and administrative procedures .
Nevertheless , the Member States must be encouraged to continue along these lines .
I am in favour , and I consider that this report is the best report of those subject to a vote on 14 December .
The basic criteria have been defined , all issues have been thoroughly worked through , and the rationale is clear .
Now , people who have become the victims of crime will be ensured the protection of the courts in every European Union country if they move from one EU Member State to another .
This will give the investigating authorities and the Public Prosecutor the opportunity to carry out their investigations effectively and the victims of crime will not keep important information from the investigation out of fear .
I am grateful to the rapporteur for his report .
Even though some measures have been taken in recent years to protect victims , the people affected are often left in the lurch .
Lawyers and judges learn a great deal in their training about the rights of defendants , but they hear nothing about the right way to deal with witnesses and victims who appear as witnesses .
If the scheduling is tailored to the defendant only and absolutely no consideration is given to a victim who is bringing a civil action against someone , that is like a slap in the face .
Greater awareness is important here , but it is also needed in medical training , too , so that the use of domestic violence can be better recognised .
The question of the statutory limitation of civil compensation claims is essential in the case of child abuse .
The protection of victims also includes only allowing people with an unblemished criminal record to work with our children .
If forced marriages are now being prosecuted in Liechtenstein , including without the consent of the victim , and it is possible to take legal action in the case of genital mutilation performed on a minor , this clearly shows the potential danger of the much lauded multicultural enrichment .
Since victim protection is still in its infancy and the people affected often do not know who they can turn to in their own country and what their rights are , it is important that victim protection is harmonised within the EU .
I have voted in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of the report on the draft directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Protection Order because the EU needs a system that increases protection of the lives , safety and physical , psychological and sexual integrity of citizens who are the victims of aggression .
The draft directive aims to strengthen the protection of victims of this type of crime within the EU , because protection measures are currently limited to domestic legislation within Member States .
This resolution aims to fill a gap in legislation to ensure that victims of aggression are protected outside their own countries too , thereby guaranteeing that every Member State offers victims adequate protection .
Member States will not be required to harmonise their national laws , but they may adapt them so that they are mutually recognised .
I voted today in favour of the proposal for a directive adopting a standard mechanism to facilitate and strengthen protection granted to victims of crimes who move between Member States in exercise of their right of freedom of movement .
The directive will now protect victims from crimes which may endanger their life , their physical , mental and sexual integrity or their personal liberty , the ultimate goal being to avoid such crimes in the future .
Following negotiations with the Council , the directive has been improved , especially on the following points :
legal protection has been extended , as the victim will no longer be required to restart the whole legal process of gaining protection when moving to another Member State ;
the conditions under which European Protection Orders are issued have been improved and simplified ;
the reasons for refusal to recognise or rejection of a European Protection Order have been limited ;
a clear deadline has been set for execution of an order ;
protection extends not only to the physical integrity , but also to the dignity of the victim .
This report goes against the already adopted Stockholm Action Plan , a European Union initiative to maintain and develop an area of freedom , security and justice .
Despite the problems regarding the legal basis of these amendments , I decided to vote in favour of the report , as I believe that protection measures for the victims or potential victims of crime are a positive thing .
The possibility of enlarging the scope of a legal protection order from one Member State ( ' the issuing state ' ) to another Member State to which the protected person wishes to move ( ' the executing state ' ) is a significant advance towards the creation in practice of an area of freedom , security and justice in the European Union , and this is an ideal which I share .
Domestic violence is a violation of fundamental human rights and can affect anyone , irrespective of religion , colour or social status .
Romania saw a 35 % rise in domestic violence in 2009 compared with 2008 .
Indeed , in 2010 , it is reported that the number of cases of domestic violence is increasing .
Domestic violence incidents are estimated to affect 1 200 000 people every year , yet only 1 % of the victims of violence are brave enough to report it to the authorities .
The European Protection Order must be a strong instrument capable of providing a safer haven for victims of violence across Member States ' borders .
This will also include protection against acts of violence committed by groups of people and will apply to all victims of crime , such as victims of human trafficking , female genital mutilation , forced marriages , honour crimes , incest , gender-based violence , as well as witnesses and victims of terrorism and organised crime .
Member States must continue to ensure legal protection , limit the reasons for refusing to recognise or for rejecting a European Protection Order , set a 20-day deadline for the execution of an order and clarify the position with regard to victims who move from one Member State to another .
I believe that the Council directive is very positive as it aims to create a true area of freedom , security and justice .
However , I share the concerns expressed by the rapporteurs , particularly regarding the technical omissions as well as the differences that they highlight between the Member States ' legal systems .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio and Mrs Romero López on their excellent work .
Victims of crime who have the right to protection in one Member State will be guaranteed the same level of protection throughout the Union , thanks to the new European Protection Order ( EPO ) approved today , which extends the scope of legislation to include all victims of crime , not just victims of gender violence as originally proposed .
Protection measures exist within all EU Member States , but they become ineffective when victims cross borders .
The European Protection Order should ensure that any protection granted to a person in one Member State will apply in all the other Member States to which he or she travels or has travelled .
The European Protection Order may be issued at the request of persons under protection if they decide to move to another Member State , or if they simply wish to spend time there .
The Member State that issued the protection measure will be responsible for issuing an EPO and sending it to the Member State to which the person intends to travel .
The text still needs to be confirmed by a qualified majority of Member States in the Council , and they will have three years to transpose it into national law .
in writing . - The proposal for a directive on the European Protection Order , submitted by 12 Member States , is an initiative aimed at preventing crime .
Even when Member States have provided for protection orders for victims , the resulting enforcement measures stop at the border of the issuing state .
Victims , however , may move from one Member State to another for many reasons , not least to escape crime .
Because they move in this way , they are defenceless when judicial and law enforcement cooperation fails to protect them by implementing a rapid , effective , Europe-wide early warning and prevention mechanism .
Setting up a cooperation arrangement along these lines is the aim behind this initiative .
The action taken by Member States shows that crime can be prevented at European level when the aggressor or aggressors are identified .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the draft directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Protection Order .
The directive is indispensable in order that victims of violence can feel comparatively safe throughout the European Union , regardless of where they are living .
After the directive has been adopted , it will be important to conduct regular training courses for judicial bodies and other competent bodies , to enable them to provide appropriate help to victims .
It will also be vital to conduct an information campaign aimed at making citizens aware of the possibility of issuing a European Protection Order .
As a result , the victims of violence will receive significantly more protection , and there will be a drop in such crimes .
The directive on the European Protection Order represents a key step towards a European directive on violence against women .
A joint , comprehensive EU strategy needs to be drafted and implemented as quickly as possible , with the aim of fighting violence against women in all EU Member States .
We urgently need European legislative standards to combat violence against women .
This is the only way we can support women and oppose society 's acceptance of domestic violence and the impunity of those who commit this crime .
I hope that the upcoming Polish Presidency will make a significant contribution to the drawing up and adoption of a draft directive on this matter .
I have already written a letter bringing this matter to the attention of the Prime Minister of Poland , Donald Tusk , but I have not yet received a response .
I welcome the adoption by a resounding majority of the report on the European Protection Order .
The measure adopted today will enable people who have been granted protection in a Member State to enjoy the same protection in any other Member State to which they may travel .
The directive applies not only to victims of domestic violence , but also to victims of forced marriages , human trafficking and female genital mutilation .
This represents a major step forward for the rights of victims and their mobility within the European Union .
I now call on the Council to follow the European Parliament 's position by giving its overwhelming support to the European Protection Order .
in writing . - UKIP condemns all forms of human trafficking as a modern day version of slavery and calls for the toughest penalties within the UK on such activity .
However , UKIP voted against this report as we cannot legitimise giving more power to the EU on matters such as criminal law and border protection .
This proposal was for the EU to decide minimum sentences in Member States for a crime , and that is simply not a matter for the EU .
It should be up to elected national governments to decide such penalties individually and to work with other countries to help stamp human trafficking out .
The EU also exacerbates the problem of people trafficking .
As there is freedom of movement within the EU and open borders , along with a single currency , organised crime is allowed to operate much more effectively unchecked .
If Member States had proper border controls and checks , this would go a long way to help disrupt the operation of such evil criminal organisations .
The EU is actually part of the problem , not the solution .
There is nothing more inhuman than exploiting the lives of other living beings for profit , infringing every fundamental right .
Trafficking in human beings is one of the basest activities in history ; it is a widespread and highly complex phenomenon .
I am pleased that Parliament has approved at first reading the proposal for a directive on trafficking in human beings .
This is a significant step forward in combating the phenomenon , which is the main activity of a large number of international criminal organisations .
The most important point is the recognition that organised crime is the main problem to tackle .
The EU is finally making a real , explicit distinction between crime and organised crime , because the latter is a truly separate issue .
There are many other positive elements such as a broader definition of exploitation , greater protection for victims and the rule stipulating that victims of trafficking shall not be charged for crimes they have been forced to commit as a result of violence or the threat of violence against them .
As Amnesty International points out , often women who are victims of trafficking are arrested for prostitution , or are not guaranteed full access to justice .
in writing . - I supported this resolution as trafficking in human beings is a modern form of slavery , a serious crime and a severe violation of fundamental human rights .
The Treaty of Lisbon has strengthened EU action in the field of judicial and police cooperation in criminal matters , including in combating trafficking in human beings , and the European Parliament , in becoming colegislator , has a full role to play .
I strongly support the EP proposal that penalties for traffickers need to be increased to the level of the 2009 proposal , the confiscation of assets should be applied , and assistance to victims and , in particular , to child victims , should be further developed .
I am convinced that the EP should clearly express the requirement for Member States to do more in order to discourage demand for the services of victims of human trafficking , through awareness-raising campaigns , education , training and so on , all of which should fully incorporate a gender perspective .
It is important to stress that criminal sanctions against employers who use trafficked labour have a strong preventive effect , so these must be developed further .
The continued existence of economic and cultural inequalities on a global level has resulted in the development of new forms of slavery , no longer necessarily linked to the realm of sexual exploitation , but also to that of economic exploitation .
These situations may not match the historical view we have of slavery , but they are equally offensive .
They deprive their victims of the values of freedom and equality on which modern society is based .
Victims are priced , sold or bartered , and stripped of their dignity .
Trafficking in human beings is an extremely profitable business for organised crime , and it now has a cross-border dimension .
One year after the Treaty of Lisbon came into force , there have been many initiatives in the field of judicial and police cooperation in criminal matters .
We now need to strengthen the work of the EU by providing incentives for anti-trafficking actions , collecting data in order to compile reliable statistics , and establishing closer cross-border cooperation , including the exchange of information and best practice , as well as closer collaboration with Eurojust and Europol .
We also need to take a victim-focused approach .
Victims need protection , including legal protection .
They need assistance and social rehabilitation programmes .
Above all , however , it is important to increase the penalties for traffickers and employers who take advantage of the vulnerability of their victims , who are sometimes minors .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the Commission proposal for a directive on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and the European Parliament report on it , because they impose uniform and harmonised criminal legislation and penalties on the Member States .
The EU has set its mind on exploiting the workers ' vulnerability and gradually getting them to believe that single , uniform rules of criminal law are needed in all sectors and in all the Member States .
The imposition of harmonised criminal law in the Member States of the EU , with the unashamed stated objective of strengthening the Euro-unifying and state mechanisms of repression in order to consolidate the power of the monopolies , is yet another heavy blow to grassroots freedoms .
At the same time , it is an unacceptable and dangerous restriction on grassroots sovereignty and the sovereign rights of the Member States .
The EU 's interest in combating trafficking in human beings is feigned , because it comes from a capitalist , transnational union which freely admits that it is founded on the capitalist system .
Converting the workforce to a capitalist commodity turns people into a commodity to serve the only value recognised by the rotten system of exploitation : capitalist profit .
I welcome the adoption of this proposal and of new penalties .
Trafficking in human beings is a serious crime and a severe violation of fundamental human rights .
I hope that this new directive will succeed in filling the gaps in the previous judicial framework and that the Anti-Trafficking Coordinator role is established within a clear legislative framework .
Although the Treaty of Lisbon strengthened the European Parliament 's role in judicial and police cooperation in criminal matters , the Member States are the ones that can play a key role in combating this crime .
If we want to achieve a strong preventive effect , the Member States must make it a criminal offence for anyone to knowingly use the services of victims of trafficking .
Trafficking in human beings is an abomination that the European Union unfortunately cannot ignore .
Whatever the motives , be it sexual exploitation or work , it is considered unacceptable by the Union 's authorities .
That is why Europe has already , for some time , had a broad range of legislation to combat this phenomenon .
This new directive , for which I voted , replaces the former framework decision , in accordance with the new powers in this regard .
By bringing together the acquis communautaire in this area and concentrating it within a single text , this directive is destined to play a major role in the fight against human trafficking .
It defines the principles on which the Member States ' legislation must be based , lays down the applicable penalties , establishes the responsibility of legal persons , protects victims against any prosecutions that their status may have brought about , introduces measures for assisting and protecting victims and contains some specific provisions for women and children .
Hundreds of thousands of people are trafficked in the EU each year for the purposes of , among other things , sexual exploitation , forced labour , the illegal trade in organs and begging .
This modern form of slavery is a terrible crime and a gross violation of fundamental human rights .
I welcome what the report says about putting more stringent measures in place to prevent trafficking , imposing stricter penalties on traffickers and providing better protection for victims .
This modern form of slavery must be combated ; provision must be made for support , protection and enhanced assistance to victims ; and prevention and monitoring must be strengthened .
International criminal organisations must be combated , and cooperation at EU and international levels must be established to do this properly .
I welcome what the report says about imposing stricter penalties on traffickers and about the seizure of assets .
Children are most at risk from human trafficking , and there must be help and protection available for all victims of trafficking , especially children .
I support this report .
Trafficking in human beings is a serious crime and a severe violation of fundamental human rights .
This crime is widespread across the world and may take many forms , relating to sexual exploitation , forced labour , the illegal trade in human organs , illegal adoptions , etc .
We therefore urgently need to take active measures to support a strategy on fighting trafficking in human beings , in which significant attention would be paid to combating and preventing trafficking in human beings .
Furthermore , it is necessary to ensure effective systems of assistance and support for victims , providing for the right to compensation , necessary medical treatment and free legal and psychological assistance , with special attention being paid to children .
The strategy on fighting trafficking in human beings should also include social dimensions and the dimensions of immigration , asylum and reintegration policies .
Moreover , in order to reduce the scale of offences , it is necessary to provide for effective and appropriate penalties for those who violate the provisions of the directive .
I supported the report because human trafficking is a serious problem which we need to tackle , and the measures set out in the Treaty of Lisbon are not forceful enough to overcome criminality in this area .
Human trafficking is a kind of slavery , and Europe must protect its women , its children , its citizens , against this threat using all available means .
It is a grave offence and a huge infringement of fundamental human rights which forces people into dependence through threats , violence and humiliation , and should be subject to a minimum sentence of 10 years .
In addition , in my opinion , we need to adopt a victim-based approach which incorporates the identification of all potential categories of victims and special measures aimed at protecting them , focusing , in particular , on children and other risk groups , as Edit Bauer mentioned in her report .
Today , the European Parliament adopted an historic and particularly important directive strengthening the fight against trafficking in human beings .
This directive is a very important step towards combating the scale of this terrible crime , laying down more severe penalties and sanctions , and further enhancing prevention and victim protection .
I voted for this report because there must be a stricter response to human traffickers and the terrible crimes they commit , and harsher penalties and sanctions must be adopted so that their levels reflect the gravity of the offence committed and that they would act as an effective deterrent to such acts .
The new directive contains a very important provision whereby , in addition to penalties , the Member States should include such sanctions as the seizure of property and take the necessary measures to seize and confiscate instrumentalities and proceeds from offences , as only then will these offences no longer be economically viable .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that with the increase in the scale of these offences in Europe , the EU 's approach must be more oriented towards human rights , with most attention being paid to preventive actions , victim protection , return and reintegration policy and social issues .
Creating an Anti-Trafficking Coordinator position at European Union level would enhance the coherence of the actions taken in the battle against this modern-day slavery .
Cooperation between states on this issue , especially at EU level , is good .
However , on many occasions , they lose sight of the action involved in reintegrating into society those who have fallen victim to human trafficking .
Education and prevention campaigns must obviously be focused in the less developed states in the European Union where broad sections of the population are vulnerable due to material shortages .
In order to have a better and more precise picture of this phenomenon , harmonised data must be collected which should include information on the number of people trafficked , including data on gender , age , the nationality of the victims , as well as the form of trafficking , the types of services for which the victims were used , the number of traffickers arrested , prosecuted and convicted and the mechanisms for referring these cases to the national asylum authorities .
The extent of human trafficking is huge at the moment , but we do not know the real scale of this phenomenon due to a lack of precise , centralised EU data .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Bauer and Mrs Hedh on tackling the difficult task of preparing a report on such a topical issue .
Trafficking in human beings is one of the greatest evils of our times , on a par with slavery ; it reduces its victims to a state of exploitation and dependency by ruthless criminal organisations .
Unfortunately , this is a phenomenon of vast proportions ; we do not know exactly how vast due to a lack of information .
We therefore need to carry out specific studies to discover its true extent .
At the same time , Europe needs to promote policies allowing for greater cooperation in the criminal and judicial fields .
These can be implemented under Article 79 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which identifies the legal basis within the framework of the common immigration policy .
To conclude , I agree with the rapporteur 's request , namely : to increase penalties for traffickers in human beings and confiscate their assets ; to make it a criminal offence for anyone to knowingly use the services of trafficking victims ; and to provide greater assistance for victims .
in writing . - UKIP condemns all forms of human trafficking as a modern-day version of slavery , and calls for the toughest penalties within the UK on such activity .
However , UKIP voted against this report as we cannot legitimise giving more power to the EU on matters such as criminal law and border protection .
This proposal was for the EU to decide minimum sentences in Member States for a crime , and that is simply not a matter for the EU .
It should be up to elected national governments to decide such penalties individually and to work with other countries to help stamp out human trafficking .
The EU also exacerbates the problem of people trafficking .
As there is freedom of movement within the EU and open borders , along with a single currency , organised crime is allowed to operate much more effectively unchecked .
If Member States had proper border controls and checks , this would go a long way to help disrupt the operation of such evil criminal organisations .
The EU is actually part of the problem , not the solution .
I voted in favour of this directive because increasing efforts to combat human trafficking is a fundamental element of it .
The EU 's response to this now covers prostitution and other forms of sexual exploitation , the exploitation of workers through forced labour and begging , organ trafficking , illegal adoption , forced marriage , drug trafficking and even the exploitation of an individual to commit petty theft or robberies .
In my view , the document strengthens crime prevention , particularly by creating legal offences , or by using penalties , the confiscation of goods , or the permanent closure of establishments used for criminal purposes , in the case of human trafficking .
I believe that there will also be better help and assistance to victims through provision of the required accommodation , legal advice , and material , psychological and medical assistance .
Human trafficking is the modern form of slavery and the second most lucrative activity for organised crime throughout the world .
This directive is the first legal instrument adopted on this subject , making use of the new possibilities opened up by the Treaty of Lisbon , and it has defined a common approach in the fight against human trafficking and in the protection of its victims , filling a significant gap in the previous legal framework .
It has been possible to reach a balanced compromise , creating an instrument capable of dealing more effectively with this type of criminal activity , and creating more rigorous policies and making penalties more severe , including prison terms of five to 10 years and the seizure of the proceeds of crime .
At the same time , it strengthens the areas of prevention and victim protection , paying particular attention to children and other vulnerable groups .
I also support the proposal to create a coordinator of the fight against trafficking in the EU , although any duplication of roles with the other already existing bodies , such as the European Police Office , should be avoided .
Trafficking in human beings affects many hundreds of people every day in Europe , most of them women and young girls .
There was an urgent need , therefore , to plug the legal gap that exists in some European countries , such as Spain , where , incidentally , the largest brothel has just opened a few kilometres from the French border .
Hence , the European Union has finally equipped itself with an instrument for creating an environment that deters traffickers , and for making sure that trafficking victims are given assistance and protection .
From now on , common rules will define the offences and penalties applicable to traffickers .
This marks a further step towards the protection of human dignity and an end to human beings being treated as commodities .
The trafficking of human beings today is , for its victims , an inhumane modern-day form of slavery .
For its perpetrators - criminal organisations involved in prostitution and sexual exploitation , illegal adoption , forced labour , illegal immigration and illegal organ trafficking - it is an extremely lucrative activity .
Since various European countries are the ' destination ' for such networks , I welcome this initiative to create a common framework for preventing and combating human trafficking at European level , an approach which stems from Parliament 's proposal for a resolution , on which we voted on 10 February 2010 .
Human trafficking is a serious violation of human rights and is very profitable for organised crime .
The importance of this form of modern slavery is huge , even whilst we do not know its true extent .
The Treaty of Lisbon has strengthened European Union policy in the area of cooperation between judicial authorities and the police on criminal matters , including the fight against human trafficking .
Having become colegislator in this area , the European Parliament will have an important role to play from now on .
I welcome the passing of the measures adopted in this report with regard to the need to gather data on the number of trafficked persons and the sex , age and nationality of the victims , the means by which trafficking takes place , the type of services which the victims ultimately end up providing , the number of traffickers arrested , tried and convicted and the national referral procedures for national asylum authorities .
We know that it is not enough to adopt legal instruments to combat human trafficking and protect its victims .
The fight to eradicate human trafficking must be seen as a priority in the struggle for the respect of human rights .
Political will is required for this to happen .
However , above all , it is also essential to act on prevention , something which requires other economic and social policies , and implies the end of capitalist exploitation and neoliberal policies .
Conditions must be created which release the individuals involved from poverty , by promoting policies for the fair redistribution of wealth , by guaranteeing access to essential public services , and by promoting the creation of jobs with rights and pay levels that afford a decent living .
For these reasons , the adoption of this document is only one step in the long , hard fight which must continue if we are to end human trafficking .
Last week , we adopted a report on the proposal for a directive on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings , and protecting victims , and I am very pleased with the result of this vote .
Firstly , the definition of ' trafficking in human beings ' will now be much broader and will include trafficking into the sex industry , labour exploitation , especially in the agricultural sector and domestic service , and forced begging .
Secondly , our text establishes sanctions and minimum penalties for traffickers .
Thirdly , our text provides for a whole range of assistance and support measures for victims , and we must not forget that there are reportedly several hundreds of thousands of victims in the European Union each year .
Time has proven that the existing framework was not effective enough .
The text we adopted last week demonstrates that the will is there to step up our action to protect citizens and to prosecute traffickers throughout Europe .
Trafficking in human beings is a modern form of slavery .
For criminal gangs , it is also an extremely profitable business which can take on may different forms , such as sexual exploitation , forced labour , trafficking in human organs , begging , illegal adoption and domestic servitude .
This text is the first binding European legislation on the subject .
It strengthens both protection for victims and sanctions against perpetrators .
The gender perspective that underpins the text is to be welcomed , as it is often women who are the victims of human trafficking .
Another important point is that victims will not be prosecuted for crimes committed as a result of trafficking , such as breaking immigration laws .
I supported this text .
in writing . - The ECR Group strongly believes that in the 21st century , it is simply abominable that slavery still exists on our Continent , and believes that people-trafficking will only be combated if all nations work together at the highest levels to prevent it .
Current EU legislation is out-dated and far from effective ; the ECR Group supports its revision .
The ECR Group today voted in support of this directive , which focuses on cross-border cooperation to prevent and combat this heinous crime of trafficking human beings .



The ECR Group did request split votes on Articles 4 ( 1 ) , 4 ( 2 ) and 15 ( 4 ) and voted against these specific articles , as it does not believe that the EU should set maximum criminal penalties ; nor does it believe in specifying a criminal offence , as is done in Article 15 ( 4 ) .
The ECR Group supported the resolution overall and the text amended by the LIBE and FEMM committees .
Trafficking in human beings is a modern form of slavery and a severe violation of fundamental human rights .
Trafficking in human beings is also one of the most profitable activities of criminal organisations .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon gave the EU greater powers in the field of judicial and police cooperation in criminal matters , and the report adopted today , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings , and protecting victims , represents the European legislator 's commitment in this area .
The text identifies minimum rules for defining criminal offences and imposing sanctions on traffickers , and introduces common rules to improve prevention and the protection of victims , who shall have to receive assistance , including legal representation .
Trafficking in human beings , a phenomenon closely linked to organised crime , in the same way as drug trafficking and money laundering , must be combated with strong and effective measures .
Experience gained over the last few years has shown that judicial and police cooperation and a high level of harmonisation of individual national laws are both essential for combating these types of crime .
in writing . - Trafficking in human beings is a modern form of slavery , a serious crime and a severe violation of fundamental human rights which reduces people to a state of dependency via threats , violence and humiliation .
Trafficking in human beings is also an extremely profitable business for organised crime , with high profit possibilities and limited risk-taking .
It may take many forms such as sexual exploitation , forced labour , illegal trade in human organs , begging ( including the use of a dependent person for begging ) , illegal adoptions and domestic work .
The scale of this phenomenon is impressive , but certainly not known in full .
The Treaty of Lisbon has strengthened EU action in the field of judicial and police cooperation in criminal matters , including in combating trafficking in human beings .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament has become colegislator in this area and has a full role to play .
I supported this report .
The recent findings of the International Labour Organisation revealed that , throughout the world , there are at least 2.45 million people subjected to forced labour as a result of human trafficking .
This phenomenon has been on the increase in recent years and now also occurs in European countries .
This is why I believe that this is a scourge which must be fought robustly in the EU , without neglecting the proper help and protection for victims .
This is why I voted as I did .
It is clear that trafficking in human beings is a serious crime and a serious infringement of fundamental rights .
It is clear that everyone will vote for a stricter law against trafficking in human beings .
It is clear that A. Mirsky will be in favour of a stricter law , together with other Members .
This is a win-win subject .
Everyone is in favour and , as a result , this will be a ' plus ' for the report 's authors .
Perhaps a more important topic could be found ?
In this way , another 100 reports could be written , about vice , about terrorism , about killing , about fanaticism , about fraud , about robbery , about rape , about insults .
About , about , about ...
Is this the job of a Member of the European Parliament ?
I am voting in favour .
Is there anyone who will be against ?
Officially , slavery no longer exists .
Unofficially , however , it is very much in existence in the form of human trafficking .
This form of crime in particular has , for many people , become a lucrative business with billions being made in profits .
When it comes to combating human trafficking , we are lagging far behind organised crime .
Only a combination of different measures can ultimately achieve the goal .
On the one hand , the security apparatus , which , in recent years , has been starved of funds , must be topped up again .
Within the EU , only the spin-offs of human trafficking can really be combated , but we need to remove what underpins this .
Subsidiary areas , such as begging , would be relatively easy to combat by imposing a general ban on begging throughout the EU .
On the other hand , cooperation with the countries of origin , for example , for forced labour and forced prostitution , is essential .
Therefore , information and awareness campaigns via the education systems in the countries of origin , transit and destination are an important tool for combating human trafficking .
Some of the fundamental considerations in the report are right , but in other areas , I cannot give my consent without reservations .
I therefore abstained from the vote .
Romanian children are being brought to central Europe and forced to steal and beg , and elderly and disabled people are also being forced to beg .
Meanwhile , the heads of the begging mafia are living in luxury villas .
Human trafficking is a lucrative and fast-growing business .
According to Europol , there are hundreds of thousands of victims in the EU alone .
Therefore , the stepping up by the EU of the fight against human trafficking is to be welcomed .
A particularly positive aspect is the fact that organised begging is also being addressed for the first time .
Left-wing romantics often shut their eyes and would have the public believe that these people are begging voluntarily and that there is no such thing as begging tourism or the begging mafia .
However , some of the proposed measures go too far .
Instead of placing the countries of origin under obligation with regard to the destruction of mafia structures and providing victims with local help and the opportunity for training and , therefore , a future in their own country , the EU is moving in the direction of residence permits and exemption from punishment for victims of human trafficking .
This is sending the wrong signal : these people are already being lured to Europe with false promises .
Residence permits in the context of victim protection and exemption from punishment if someone is caught stealing will be all the more of an incentive for someone to place themselves in the hands of the mafia .
I have therefore abstained from voting .
My decision to vote in favour of report is justified by the essence of the human being as such .
The protection of individual freedom is a fundamental right to be fought for , insofar as violations of human rights that reduce people to a state of dependency via threats , humiliation and violence are a heinous and very serious crime .
Unfortunately , in recent years , trafficking in human beings has become an extremely profitable business for organised crime , with excellent profit possibilities and limited risk-taking , which is why this phenomenon is growing at an uncontrollable rate .
As a result , the European Union is taking steps to prevent and combat the phenomenon by applying rules on the definition of criminal offences and sanctions in the area of organised crime .
I consent to the fight against this phenomenon because I hope to see the development of an action aimed at combating trafficking in human beings , the development of a victim-focused approach , with special attention given to women and children , and , lastly , the targeted organisation of information and awareness campaigns run through the education and school system in the countries of origin , transit and destination for trafficking .
A policy to prevent and combat human trafficking is a fundamental issue at the heart of the EU .
I share the objective of creating tougher rules in this area , an environment which is hostile to human traffickers , greater protection for victims and more rigorous prevention measures .
I thus agree with the European Parliament proposal to create an Anti-Trafficking Coordinator .
I also wish to emphasise the positive nature of the proposed penalties , particularly a prison term of up to 10 years and the possibility of ' seizing the assets ' of the criminal , as well as of the Council proposal which urges Member States to use the seized assets for the purpose of assisting and protecting the victims , including compensating them .
Human trafficking is a clandestine activity carried out on a global scale , as well as being a serious violation of human rights and a social phenomenon with repercussions for the whole of society .
Human trafficking involves strategic risks affecting stability and socio-economic development leading to : destabilisation of the labour market ; the growth and diversification of organised crime ; economic destabilisation resulting from the scale of money laundering ; demographic destabilisation ; a rise in public sector corruption ; and destabilisation of internal economic investment .
In Romania , approximately 780 victims were registered in 2009 .
At least 416 of these were victims of forced labour and at least 320 were victims of forced prostitution .
The victims identified last year also included 176 children trafficked for forced labour and prostitution .
Member States must provide funds for assisting and protecting victims , including for the provision of compensation to victims and the cross-border enforcement of EU anti-trafficking law .
In the case of child victims , primary consideration must be given to the interests of the child and harsher penalties must be imposed on traffickers .
The amendments made will help create a hostile environment for traffickers , protect victims and prevent this activity more effectively because fundamental rights must be respected .
I voted in favour of the resolution as I believe that it is essential for there to be a coordinated and consolidated European Union strategy against human trafficking .
Having become colegislator in this area , the European Parliament will have an important role to play from now on .
I believe that , in line with the resolution adopted on 10 February 2010 , the approach taken in combating human trafficking must prioritise a global view of the phenomenon and focus on the defence of human rights .
I congratulate Mrs Bauer and Mrs Hedh on their excellent work : the text adopted today will make the sanctions against traffickers tougher ; it will provide greater protection for victims and will strengthen prevention .
Prostitution , exploitation of children , forced labour : it is calculated that , each year in Europe , hundreds of thousands of people are sold as though they were objects .
The EU considers that the main victims of trafficking are women and children , exploited for the purposes of prostitution ( 43 % ) or of forced labour ( 32 % ) .
There are many other reasons , besides prostitution and forced labour , for the exploitation of human beings : forced begging , illegal adoptions , organ trafficking , and so on are all cases covered by the text of the directive .
Under the new rules , victims will have to be given assistance and , in particular : appropriate accommodation and material assistance , necessary medical treatment , including psychological assistance , counselling and information , and translation services where appropriate .
Legal representation must be provided free of charge , at least when the victim does not have sufficient financial resources .
Victims of human trafficking should also have access to witness protection programmes , if deemed necessary by the national authorities .
in writing . - This legislation represents an important step forward in combating this inhumane and degrading crime , and we welcome its adoption today .
However , the aim of the directive was to address prevention , prosecution and protection , and the Greens regret that the provisions on victim protection are not as strong as we believe is possible and necessary .
The position of victims and their legal status or their rights to legal assistance could , and should , have been much stronger .
Hopefully , the Commission will now come forward with a proposal to revise the directive on residence permits for victims of trafficking so that we get a truly holistic approach to tackling this hideous crime , as envisaged from the beginning .
I am also glad that there is no direct reference requiring Member States to take legal measures to penalise those who use services ( for example , dining in a restaurant in which victims of trafficking are working ) .
Besides the intricacy and legal uncertainty of differentiating the ' what , who and when ' in all of this , such measures actually risk bringing victims of trafficking further outside the reach of the authorities .
We have just adopted by an overwhelming majority the report on the proposal for a directive on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings , and protecting victims .
This is an historic vote for several reasons .
In the first instance , it is the first time in the European Union 's history that binding European legislation has been adopted to combat human trafficking .
In the second instance , the European Parliament and the Council reached an agreement at first reading , which means that the provisions of this directive will be implemented as quickly as possible .
Lastly , this directive introduces heavier penalties for traffickers ( five years minimum ) and strengthens protection and assistance for victims .
The new rules will apply to trafficking into the sex industry and to labour exploitation in sectors such as construction , agriculture and domestic service .
I am therefore delighted with the result of this historic vote .
The illegal trafficking in human beings really should be viewed as present day slavery .
It is the third fastest growing criminal industry , with a volume of around EUR 23 billion a year .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthens the actions of the EU in the area of judicial and police cooperation in criminal matters - including human trafficking .
We therefore need to increase the penalty for human traffickers and enhance our support for victims accordingly , particularly for children .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution which approves the conclusion of the agreement with Georgia on readmission of persons residing without authorisation , which will push out the frontiers of the area of liberty and security , extending it beyond the European Union and encompassing this neighbouring country .
I am convinced that this agreement is a step forward in the relations between the European Union and Georgia , it shows the European aspirations of Georgia , and will thus represent a strong signal on the part of the European Union .
It will promote friendly relations , stability , security and the wellbeing of citizens , which is so much needed in the region .
Moreover , it will encourage Georgia to implement the reforms needed in the area of freedom , security and justice .
I strongly support the EU-Georgia agreement on readmission of persons residing without authorisation as a sufficiently sound framework is in place in Georgia to ensure that the rights of those persons treated under the agreement will be respected .
EU enlargement in 2004 and 2009 encouraged the EU to create a new framework for a collaborative partnership system with its neighbours to the east and the south located at the EU 's external borders , promoting their security , stability and development and preventing new divisions on the European continent .
I voted in favour of this agreement .
The European Union must pursue its engagement with the countries of the South Caucasus and protect this area .
This region has strategic importance for the European Union , which can assist this region in its economic and commercial development .
Above all , the EU 's action must be marked by encouragement , based on principles of good governance and absolute respect for human rights and democracy .
I feel that this agreement with Georgia on readmission is relevant from a regional point of view and will also support EU efforts to enhance cooperation with other countries in the region .
The two issues of facilitating the issuance of visas for Georgian citizens and approving an agreement on readmission of persons residing without authorisation were voted on during the plenary sitting of the European Parliament on Tuesday , 14 December .
My colleague , Nathalie Griesbeck , was rapporteur on both of these agreements that concern the movement of persons between the EU and Georgia .
This agreement with Georgia is aimed at shortening the visa application process , simplifying the paperwork required , and even exempting some categories of individuals , such as students , journalists and retired persons , from the requirement to obtain a visa .
We voted at the same time on the agreement on readmission , in which the EU and Georgia have mutually undertaken to readmit their own respective nationals residing without authorisation .
Both these agreements are a sign of the will of the EU and Georgia to cooperate in the areas of freedom , security and justice .
The actions of the European Union must be based upon the principles of good governance and respect for democracy and human rights .
In relations with the region of South Caucasus , the EU must be a partner to it , assisting with economic and commercial development , with security , with stability , with the promotion of prosperity , and with conflict resolution .
On this basis , I voted in favour of the agreement with Georgia on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation , as I believe that it is a contribution towards the achievement of the above objectives .
The Prague Summit Joint Declaration of 7 May 2009 establishing the Eastern Partnership has underlined the importance of promoting the mobility of citizens in a secure environment , through visa facilitation and readmission agreements .
This readmission agreement is therefore a necessary complement to the adoption of the visa facilitation agreement reached with Georgia , which would necessarily have to be accompanied by an improvement in the security conditions necessary to combat cross-border crime and illegal immigration .
I hope that , based on this agreement and in the spirit of joint commitment , the EU and Georgia can effectively fight illegal immigration and contribute to the development of democracy , the rule of law , human rights and civil society in that country .
Bearing in mind the results of dialogue over human rights between the EU and Georgia , which took place this year , the fact that Georgia has ratified a number of relevant international conventions on the protection of fundamental rights , its Membership of the Council of Europe and its participation in the Eastern Partnership , which is based on commitments to the principles of international law and to fundamental values , I voted in favour of signing this agreement .
Georgia 's increasingly close relationship with the European Union , evident in a range of recent activities , is to be welcomed .
The agreement on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation is an important stimulus to the strengthening of relations between Georgia , its neighbouring countries and the European Union , as well as to the fight against illegal immigration .
The incentives for reforms in the spheres of security , freedom and justice could bear ample fruit if there is a spirit of commitment on both sides .
in writing . - I welcome this report which is the sister of the report on the issuance of visas between the EU and Georgia .
The package should ease travel and improve the EU 's relations in this part of the world .
Georgia has made significant efforts to develop closer relations with the European Union , as is evident in a range of recent activities .
This agreement on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation is essential as a stimulus to relations between Georgia , its neighbouring countries and the European Union , as well as to the fight against illegal immigration .
It is , however , essential that there continue to be incentives for reform in the spheres of security , freedom and justice in Georgia .
I am in favour , because I strongly hope that when Mr Saakashvili goes into hiding from the Georgian Public Prosecutor on the territory of the European Union without a residence permit , he will , in accordance with the agreement , be expeditiously extradited to the Georgian authorities without complications .
This agreement is truly very necessary .
I am in favour .
The facilitation of the issuance of visas to citizens of non-EU states should not be granted too hastily .
Before doing so , it must be examined as carefully as possible whether appropriate readmission agreements for bogus asylum seekers and economic migrants could prevent the abuse of the system . The problems with the Schengen Information System II must also finally be resolved .
Finally , it must not primarily be asylum seekers , or even criminals , that benefit from visa-free travel .
A great deal will de facto depend on whether , and to what extent , the agreement is actually implemented .
It will , in any case , increase Georgia 's cooperation with the European Union .
In my opinion , the readmission agreement is not restrictive enough and therefore , I abstained from the vote .
Over the last few years a series of highly significant political acts , such as Georgia 's accession to the Council of Europe and to the European Convention on Human Rights , have brought it closer than ever before to the European Union .
I voted in favour of the draft Council decision concerning the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and Georgia on the facilitation of the issuance of visas because I believe it is extremely important for Europe to implement a neighbourhood policy with its neighbouring countries , especially with regard to ' hot spots ' such as the Caucasus , where the interests of the EU itself are reflected in an important trade partnership .
Furthermore , reducing the bureaucracy and controls with regard to a neighbouring country can only improve relations with that country , creating the conditions for greater control of the area and , hence , for more security , development and stability .
The two agreements concluded - on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation and on the facilitation of the issuance of visas - will be absolutely instrumental in achieving these objectives .
The process of strengthening relations between the European Union and the countries of the Southern Caucasus , including Georgia , is vital if we are to create a solid , coherent and effective foreign policy .
I support the agreement between the European Union and Georgia on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation .
I would highlight the following positive measures : the readmission obligations defined within the agreement have been drawn up on a fully reciprocal basis , and cover its own nationals , third-country nationals and stateless persons .
The obligation to readmit its own nationals includes former nationals who have given up their nationality , who have lost their nationality or who have had their nationality taken away , without having acquired the nationality of another state .
The obligation to readmit nationals also covers family members - spouses and minors or unmarried children - who do not have the right of residency in the requesting state , irrespective of their nationality .
There is also what is called the fast-track process , agreed in relation to people intercepted in the ' border region ' , that is to say , within an area that extends up to 5 kilometres from ports , including customs zones , and international airports in Member States or in Georgia .
I fully agree with the rapporteur Mrs Griesbeck 's assertion that information campaigns are essential in Georgia in order to inform people of the new situation and to allow them to take advantage of the new possibilities .
In addition , the changes in the visa policy should also appear as soon as possible on the European institutions ' websites .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's recommendation that the European Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the European Commission , which is responsible for monitoring the application of these agreements , should , after they have been enacted , identify any obstacles or asymmetrical barriers to their proper application and to the reciprocity of procedures , both at consular service level and at the borders to be crossed .
I voted in favour of signing this agreement as I believe that , combined with the agreement on facilitating the issuing of visas , it constitutes very significant progress in relations between the EU and Georgia , signalling an important stage in its integration into Europe and , at the same time , providing an incentive for the country to promote the necessary reforms in the areas of freedom , security and justice .



in writing . - We voted against this agreement because : it aims to return people to a country where , according to the UNHCR Global Appeal 2010-2011 , around 212 000 people were internally displaced for more than 16 years , living in need of shelter and means to become self-sufficient , where sexual and gender-based violence is rife in all parts of society and police ill-treatment is tolerated ; it also applies to those former residents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia who do not have any de facto links to Georgia ; it does not include strict safeguards concerning the violation of fundamental rights and guaranteeing high standards of reception , which are poor in Georgia ; it contains numerous loopholes and ambiguities which might be clarified in the Joint Readmission Committee in which Parliament regrettably has no say , which would be entirely legitimate regarding its new competences ; it does not guarantee adequately the protection of personal data - data can be forwarded to ' other bodies ' without requiring the consent of the person involved .
I voted in favour of the principles espoused in this report , which reinforce the idea that the European Union can only be competitive globally if it mobilises the convergence of its regions and Member States .
I agree that , despite all progress , regional disparities need to be reduced in order to strengthen the internal market and the Europe 2020 strategy , which will only be able to have tangible results if the starting point in all regions is taken into consideration .
Although , on the one hand , I agree that many regions still need investment in infrastructure and accessibility , on the other , I would stress the importance of investment in research and innovation , with the participation of all levels of government and private operators being fundamental to this , so as to improve the absorption and application of funding .
In order for this idea to be implemented , a clear notion of partnership on the part of the Commission is required , and EU support for the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises needs to be reviewed and consolidated .
in writing . - I supported this resolution as it provides a very much needed framework highlighting the integrating role of cohesion policy and the contribution it makes to increasing the EU 's global competitiveness .
Cohesion policy is the EU 's key policy for enabling the regions to face growing challenges , such as climate change , population ageing , social migration , energy , or the economic and financial crisis , in the best possible way and , hence , to help increase the EU 's global economic competitiveness .
I support the rapporteur that this could be achieved by ensuring common living standards for all EU citizens and supporting development by harnessing local and regional specificities , thereby generating added value and economic productivity .
It is important to stress that once the objective has been met of ensuring a similar quality of life by enabling access to infrastructure and quality services , the regions can concentrate on measures aimed at developing local economic potential , with an important stage being the development of local research , development and innovation policies and the appropriate regional infrastructure .
The adoption of the territorial , social and economic cohesion package has a key role to play in the task of setting the European Union 's priorities and objectives , thereby guaranteeing personal and economic development and also promoting solidarity between Member States .
I support the importance of promoting economic , social and territorial cohesion through infrastructure development to help ensure the success of the EU 2020 strategy in circumstances where this new strategy will be addressing bottlenecks in economic development .
Furthermore , competitiveness can only be achieved through the promotion of research , innovation and technological development and the provision of correspondingly high quality vocational training for European citizens .
I voted for this report as I consider that the cohesion policy has proved to be an effective instrument providing a flexible solution to the socio-economic challenges presented by the economic and financial crisis .
I voted in favour of the fine own-initiative report on achieving real territorial , social and economic cohesion within the European Union by my excellent Romanian colleague , Petru Constantin Luhan .
I back the report fully in its assertion that ' the achievement of economic , social and territorial cohesion is a necessary condition but that it is not sufficient to guarantee economic competitiveness at world level , which requires significant investments in key areas such as energy , the environment , infrastructure , education , research and development , creative industries and services , logistics and transport ' .
This sums up in a nutshell the major plan for investing EUR 1 000 billion that I have been calling for since the beginning of the current term of office and which is an essential condition for our continent 's development through competitiveness and for equal opportunities for European citizens wherever they are in the Union .
The European Union can be competitive only insofar as internal policies bolster its capacity to respond to today 's challenges .
A sustainable regional and cohesion policy is essential to remove obstacles to economic development and increase competitiveness in the internal market and globally .
The importance of a coherent and coordinated regional policy in the European Union is clear .
The financial and economic crisis , as well as the gas crisis that had previously dominated Europe , proved that the lack of a suitable regional policy is affecting the whole of Europe .
I believe that cohesion policy is the EU 's key policy for enabling the regions to overcome the problems that have arisen .
I agree with the rapporteur that the development of territorial cohesion policy will have a direct impact on whether the goals set in the EU 2020 strategy are achieved and that it is necessary to analyse as soon as possible whether the support provided by the EU to specific regions builds on concrete results that will ensure the sustainability of regional policy .
At a time when the territorial disparities between the different regions of the European Union are becoming more marked , one of the most effective tools for fulfilling the ambitious objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy is a smarter EU cohesion policy that relies strongly on innovation , research and development , whilst catering for the specific situations in the regions .
Mr Luhan 's report confirms this approach and presents EU cohesion policy as one of the key factors in our regions ' economic vitality .
This policy brings us closer to a more ' sustainable ' European economy .
I voted for this report because we must debate the measures adopted at European and national level on social and territorial cohesion which aim to fulfil the objectives of EU policies , including that of increasing global economic competitiveness .
Actually , cohesion policy is the EU 's key policy for enabling the regions to face the challenges arising from the economic and financial crisis , climate change , ageing of the population , social migration or energy .
These goals can be achieved by supporting development at local and regional levels and , of course , by ensuring common living standards for all EU citizens .
I would like to stress that Europe is united and so it is very important to reduce disparities in the level of development of the European regions and to ensure economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Furthermore , cohesion policy should be more results-oriented and it is important to aim for even more effectiveness and usefulness , because only then will this policy become more convenient and useful for consumers .
In order to achieve the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , we must implement cohesion and regional policy and ensure that this policy is independent and covers all European regions .
I congratulate Mr Luhan on his work in drafting this report , which I endorsed .
I am convinced , in fact , that an effective cohesion policy that can reduce economic , social and territorial disparities can help to increase global economic competitiveness .
In this context , regions that can rise to future challenges in the best way possible , thereby increasing competitiveness and steering Europe towards a sound economic recovery , become increasingly important .
In the light of the financial crisis , which continues to affect the whole of Europe , and in view of the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy , I feel it is useful to strengthen the Cohesion Fund and the structural policies through the greater involvement of the regions .
Lastly , cohesion policy is essential for achieving the Lisbon Strategy objectives , but to consolidate these results , continued investment needs to be made in infrastructure , as a basis for increasing Europe 's economic competitiveness .
The main objective of the report on achieving real territorial , social and economic cohesion within the EU is to increase the global competitiveness of EU companies .
The whole premise of the report is wrong , because it considers , without further analysis , that competitiveness and cohesion are not contradictory and incompatible concepts .
In fact , competitiveness , as it operates today , including at European level , means lower wages and cuts to the workers ' rights and increasing privatisation for the benefit of big business ; at the same time , it is out of kilter with the concept of economic and political cohesion .
The report describes the problems faced by the regions in the EU , but is unable to propose convincing and viable solutions , remaining faithful instead to the Lisbon and EU 2020 strategies .
Finally , it considers that the economic crisis and the disastrous consequences of it , which are affecting most European regions , is yet another problem which the regions need to deal with , but avoids mentioning the causes of it .
In this way , it basically covers up the inadequacy and weakness of European cohesion policy before the crisis .
That is why I voted against the report .
The Union 's cohesion policy has shown itself to be essential to reducing development disparities between the various European regions .
There is a need to ensure horizontal and vertical coordination between the various levels of governance in order to achieve common standards of development , and economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Support for research , innovation and education is an essential measure for ensuring an inclusive labour market , and it needs to be accompanied by policies at regional level .
The active role of local and regional authorities is crucial for ensuring greater economic competitiveness within the global market .
The Treaty of Lisbon establishes as one of its founding values the promotion of economic , social and territorial cohesion within the EU , and solidarity between Member States ( Article 3 of the Treaty of Rome ) .
The main objective of cohesion policy is to promote balanced development between the 271 different regions of the EU , through the reduction of disparities between these regions ' levels of development .
Special attention is paid to the less favoured regions , such as rural areas , areas affected by industrial transition , areas with severe and permanent natural and demographic limitations , and island , cross-border and mountain regions .
With regard to this , I have been arguing for the need to align cohesion policy with the strategic objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , and to encourage transparency in the allocation of funding .
In my opinion , all information relating to the adoption and implementation of cohesion policy funding plans should be made available in real time on a website accessible to the general public , divided up by the most detailed NUTS classification possible : for example , implementation by NUTS level 3 should be presented wherever this designation exists .
That is what I advocate in my opinion annexed to the Cohesion policy : Strategic Report 2010 on the implementation of the programmes for 2007-2013 .
The reality experienced today in the European Union is the strongest and most straightforward rebuttal of the assertion made in the report , that cohesion policy has responded effectively to the socio-economic difficulties caused by the crisis .
Another idea runs through the report : the association of cohesion policy with the so-called ' Europe 2020 strategy ' .
It is well known that the Europe 2020 strategy , heir to the old Lisbon Strategy , follows the same political line of liberalisation , privatisations and flexibilisation of the labour laws .
These guidelines , which have to be followed , do not contribute to cohesion : on the contrary , they accentuate disparities between countries and regions , and within each country .
The redistributive function of the EU budget - essential for putting the principle of cohesion into practice - is seriously compromised by the smallness of its role .
To this must be added the costs , to the most vulnerable economies within the EU , of entry into the single market , of Economic and Monetary Union and of the deregulation of international trade , aspects ignored by the report .
The recovery of production in each country and region , the sustainable use of resources and the conservation of the environment constitute strategic channels for the economic development of each country , together with the creation of jobs with rights , and the strengthening of the network of public services and the social functions of the state .
I agreed with this report because , in accordance with the spirit of the treaties , a cohesion policy which aims at reducing disparities in levels of development and prepares the regions to meet long-term and short-term challenges ( globalisation , demographic change , the depopulation of rural areas , climate change and biodiversity protection ) , by taking into account their specific strengths and weaknesses , has proved to be essential in the process of European integration .
A strong and well-financed cohesion policy is a precondition for delivering the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy .
All regions should develop harmoniously .
I am pleased that there are calls for the Commission to examine and propose working methodologies that promote urban-rural partnerships , combat the depopulation of rural areas and , at the same time , stimulate sustainable urban development , since nearly 80 % of the EU population lives in urban areas .
Urban and rural areas play a dynamic role in regional economic development .
In the next programming period , there is a need for investment in urban as well as sub-urban projects and for better coordination with rural development programmes .
There is a need to promote entrepreneurship and support small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , recognising the key role they have played in fostering economic competitiveness and creating jobs , and we must facilitate access to funding , especially for SMEs , and ensure simplified access to risk capital and micro-finance .
The Commission shall continue to simplify the procedures for utilising both the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund in order to reduce the administrative burden on funding beneficiaries .
in writing . - An improved quality of life through the creation of secure and better quality jobs and ensuring access to infrastructure of all types - be this transport , social or educational , or relating to research , development and innovation - has been the main reason for the public supporting the process of European integration .
Cohesion policy can ensure the cohesive development of the EU through its specific objectives and instruments , hence satisfying the economic and social needs of the European public .
At the same time , the EU Member States are being directly confronted with the effects of globalisation .
This report , entitled ' Achieving real territorial , social and economic cohesion within the EU - a sine qua non for global competitiveness ? ' is intended to spur debate among the Members of the European Parliament on the interdependence and complementary nature of the measures adopted at European and national level to fulfil the objectives of EU policies , including that of increasing global economic competitiveness .
The report seeks to provide a framework highlighting the integrating role of cohesion policy and the contribution it makes to increasing the EU 's global competitiveness .
I welcome the report and the debate .
This report is primarily concerned with regional and European competitiveness and increased productivity .
It is completely in line with the Europe 2020 strategy .
This means that the impact of the only interesting point made in the report , on ' quality public services for all citizens wherever they live and work ' is cancelled out .
I voted against this text .
It has been through strong cohesion policy that the Union has succeeded in reducing development disparities between the various European regions .
It is essential that it continues to ensure coordination between all levels of governance , in order to achieve the objectives that the EU favours with regard to development , and economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Aid for research , innovation and education is an essential measure for ensuring a labour market for all .
They need to give everything in order to ensure greater economic competitiveness within the global market .
I voted in favour because I support cohesion , if only so that all Latvian bribers will be locked up in gaol and therefore no longer in a position to interfere with the proper application of the EU Structural Funds .
In this respect , we must put cohesion into practice at the level of the Public Prosecutor , the police and the courts , not only in Latvia , but also throughout the territory of the European Union .
In this way , the billions of euro will be applied , firstly , as intended ; secondly , in compliance with deadlines ; and , thirdly , in the interests of citizens , and not in the interests of individual civil servants and political groupings .
I am in favour of cohesion .
Cohesion policy is a key concern of the EU in order to balance out the relationship between the richer and poorer regions .
It is also intended to enable the results of uneven economic development to be levelled out .
Accordingly , it should also be possible to ensure that common standards of living can be achieved .
Particularly in a globalised world , a great deal of importance should be attached to the competitiveness of the regions .
I am voting against the report , as it is not clear to what extent the regions of the individual Member States already have the necessary expertise at their disposal .
The report on territorial , social and economic cohesion seeks to provide , in my view , a comprehensive framework highlighting the integrating role of cohesion policy and the contribution it makes to increasing the EU 's global competitiveness .
My vote in favour of the report is intended to spur debate in Europe on the interdependence and complementary nature of the measures adopted at European and national level to fulfil the objectives of EU policies , including that of increasing global economic competitiveness .
An improved quality of life through the creation of secure and better quality jobs is one of the main reasons for the public supporting the process of European integration .
Territoriality must be protected and developed via a social action to ensure the full integration - including the economic integration - of the public .
Cohesion policy can now ensure cohesive development through specific objectives and instruments that satisfy the economic and social needs of the public .
This particular own-initiative report , which I voted in favour of , follows on from a long hard debate on what is a very sensitive topic for Greece .
It is true that progress to date in political cohesion has helped to reduce the equality divide between the regions .
However , the economic times have changed and cohesion policy needs to adapt to them .
As the most important Community instrument of solidarity between the poorest and richest areas of the EU , the new role of cohesion policy should be to step up efforts to prevent the creation of nouveau pauvres economic islands or regions within the European structure .
We therefore face a clear and specific challenge .
There are two points to which Greece will need to pay particular attention : 1 .
The cohesion policy Objective 1 regions ; this point has to do with convergence in terms of gross national product , which needs serious strengthening .
2 .
Regions which are being phased out ( which include Attica ) ; these will need to be examined case-by-case on the basis of their most recent economic data , as the economic crisis may have reversed the data for previous years .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report results from an initiative by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) during the course of the debate on the future of cohesion and regional policy .
The strengthening of the territorial , social and economic cohesion of the European Union is one of the directions that needs to be taken to contribute to global competitiveness .
I agree entirely with the fundamental objective of this report , which is to emphasise the role that cohesion policy plays in reducing economic , social and territorial disparities , creating new jobs , increasing growth and building infrastructure .
Territorial and social cohesion should be the foundations of the architecture of a new policy that is able to ensure sustainable growth and increased competitiveness at global level .
I congratulate the rapporteur Mr Luhan on his excellent work and I agree with him that the need to improve quality of life through the creation of secure and better quality jobs and ensuring access to infrastructure of all types - be this transport , social or educational , or relating to research , development and innovation - has been the main reason for the public supporting the process of European integration .
I completely agree with the idea that cohesion policy is the EU 's key policy for enabling the regions to face these challenges in the best way possible and , hence , to help increase the EU 's global economic competitiveness , by ensuring common living standards for all EU citizens and supporting development by harnessing local and regional specificities , thereby generating added value and economic productivity .
We support our common cohesion policy and believe it is important for European integration .
At a time of considerable tensions within the EU , it is important to stick together .
However , we believe that regional policy should primarily be the responsibility of the regions and the Member States and that the EU 's support should focus on the poorest regions and on various programmes for territorial cooperation .
The report highlights the achievements of the cohesion policy , which is essential to the successful implementation of the EU 2020 strategy as an instrument for eliminating the disparities between regions .
Approximately EUR 86 billion has been allocated to research and innovation for the 2007-2013 period .
In the future programming period , it is necessary to promote and apply successful models in the ' knowledge triangle ' to ensure the sustainable development of regional strategic framework programmes for research and innovation
The rapporteur calls on the European Commission to submit concrete proposals for defining and implementing consistently the objective of territorial cohesion , emphasising the importance of the principle of decentralisation down to local authority level ( the ' bottom-up ' approach ) , with a view to improving the level of absorption of funds ( it is counterproductive that regions administer , on average , only 30.5 % of the overall budget allocated to the cohesion policy , with the remainder being administered by central governments ) .
Consequently , in future , the partnership principle must be significantly strengthened .
The report recommends that Member States and the European Commission pay greater attention to supporting major projects covering two or more operational programmes with a considerable impact at European level , which will generate added value , create high quality jobs and safeguard the regions ' sustainable development .
European Union cohesion policy is crucial to enabling the regions to face the challenges of the new international situation .
By supporting development , reinforcing local and regional specificities and ensuring that the gaps between Europeans ' living standards are narrowing , we are consolidating the European project .
However , there is a need , through policies and measures at regional level , to strengthen support for research , development and innovation , together with the development of education and the skills needed by Europeans to ensure an inclusive labour market .
This House has today adopted the own-initiative report highlighting the role that cohesion policy plays in reducing economic , social and territorial disparities , creating new jobs , increasing growth , building infrastructure and ensuring the cohesive development of the EU through its specific objectives and instruments , thereby satisfying the economic and social needs of the European public .
Cohesion policy was one of the first policies to embrace its regional dimension , representing its added value and helping to ensure its effectiveness and sustainability .
The manner in which each Member State harnesses the opportunities provided by belonging to the single European market depends on its maturity and level of development , which differ from one country to the next .
It follows that each Member State is responsible for pinpointing the most effective measures for enabling its economy to function within this global system .
The report proposes new guidelines for the future architecture of the policy , for enhancing its performance , and for guaranteeing strong , sustainable growth and increased global competitiveness .
Throughout the production of this report , our group often expressed fundamental disagreement with the line suggested by the author .
Ultimately , therefore , we had no option other than to vote against it .
In recent years , money from the Cohesion Fund and the Structural Funds has contributed to the dynamic development of many towns and a significant proportion of rural areas .
Cohesion policy is tangible evidence for EU citizens of the positive impact of actions taken at EU level on local communities and their regions .
We are slowly exiting the crisis which has given rise to additional inequalities within the EU .
Cohesion policy has turned out to be a flexible instrument which has managed to respond to the specific needs of individual regions and , to a certain extent , cushion the negative effects of the crisis .
Cohesion between regions is a unique kind of added value which has a positive impact on the EU 's economic competitiveness .
By bringing the level of development of the regions closer together and ensuring a similar quality of life and equal access to infrastructure , the EU can face up to global challenges .
It will be able to concentrate more on investments in innovation , research and development .
A sustainable , green , knowledge-based economy will mean we are more competitive , since competitiveness will increase if unemployment falls in the regions and if we support the creation of a well qualified and mobile workforce , both in urban and rural areas .
Support for small and medium-sized enterprises , which employ the majority of the EU 's citizens , is a key issue .
We need a strong cohesion policy , which , in turn , requires an appropriate budget , at least at its current level , in order to meet its ambitious targets .
Economic , social and territorial cohesion is a necessary condition of competitiveness at global level , but is not sufficient to ensure it .
European cohesion policy aims to reduce regional disparities , taking into account the impact of global challenges , such as climate change , demographic change , problems relating to energy and the protection of biodiversity , as well as the new challenges resulting from the economic and financial crisis .
I therefore support the text put forward by the rapporteur , my colleague in the Committee on Regional Development , which reiterates the idea that cohesion and competitiveness are not contradictory or incompatible , but possess complementary elements .
Competitiveness within the European Union may only be achieved through sustainable economic growth , which will see cohesion policy contributing to the successful implementation of the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , and to responses to societal and economic challenges .
The regional dimension should therefore not be forgotten , but rather encouraged , whether through greater participation by regional and local entities , or through an increase in the role of urban and rural areas , as it is only through the stimulation of regional competitiveness that we will have solid competitiveness at global level .
in writing . - This report sets out Parliament 's plans to better coordinate EU structural funding and European innovation spending as a way of tackling differences between levels of development in regions across the EU , and to sustain regional competitiveness .
I support these calls , along with further calls to simplify the procedures relating to this funding , in particular for SMEs , which we should be assisting in the current economic climate by reducing the administrative burden placed upon them .
This report also lays down important markers underlining the importance of the principle of decentralisation ( the ' bottom-up ' approach ) with a view to improving the ' partnership principle ' with local authorities who are often best placed to recognise the needs of citizens across the EU , and especially in Wales .
When we talk about cohesion in this Parliament , we talk about wish-lists .
Our voters and we ourselves would like to live in a Europe where everyone is successful , no one is poor and there is no shortage of jobs .
This report therefore rather resembles a list that a child might send to Father Christmas .
The undisputable benefit of the report is that it includes perhaps everything we would like to see under the Christmas tree - if not this year then perhaps in 2020 .
There is only one problem here .
All of these things cost money .
Just as in a family with young children , we must decide on our priorities here as well .
I cannot help thinking that this is the original role of this Parliament .
The submitted report bears rather sad witness to the fact that not even the crisis will help us to perform this role any better .
We always have too many priorities .
There is , however , only one budget in every family and gifts are purchased out of what remains once the family has been fed and clothed , and all of the housing and energy bills have been paid .
The support we so magnanimously demand for this or that represents money taken from the pockets of taxpayers ; mothers and fathers who decide every month what is their real priority and what will have to wait .
We must not forget this .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was opened at 15 : 05 )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is Question Time with the President of the Commission .
I would like to welcome President Barroso to our monthly Question Time .
We are ready to begin taking questions .
The rules are the same as ever : one minute for a question , one minute for an answer and , in the event that any of the political group chairs wish to ask an additional question , another question and answer lasting 30 seconds each .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - On behalf of Mr Daul , the chair of our group , I want to ask the following question .
The EPP Group would like to know your views pertaining to the current efforts to resume direct negotiations for the settlement of the Palestinian question .
The United States has abandoned efforts to convince Israel to extend the moratorium on settlements in East Jerusalem and the West Bank , probably because they are leading nowhere .
What efforts are to be undertaken by the EU separately , or in conjunction within the Quartet , to get the negotiations under way ?
In view of the present developments , how should one read the reiteration of the EU 's readiness to recognise an independent Palestinian state when appropriate ?
What is the assessment of the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip after the decision taken by Israel in June 2010 to ease the closure of the crossings and the efforts for the liberation of Gilad Shalit ?
President of the Commission . - As you know , the European Union strongly supports the resumption of direct talks .
Yesterday , the Foreign Affairs Council expressed the European position , regretting that Israel was not able to accept a new freeze of settlements as requested by the European Union , the United States and the Quartet .
I would add that the situation is disappointing , particularly because creating the necessary conditions for a two-state solution is not only in the interests of Palestine , the region and the international community at large , but also , I believe , in the interests of Israel itself .
Concerning negotiations , the Foreign Affairs Council also agreed yesterday on intensifying coordination with the Quartet and the United States .
Special envoy Senator Mitchell will shortly meet Catherine Ashton to debrief her on the current state of affairs .
The European Union will convey its full support for the peace process and its full engagement in the region .
I believe the Quartet could be revitalised , with the European Union working very closely with the US .
High Representative Ashton has been in touch with key players in the region , and we are also looking forward to the Arab League meeting this week .
We need to give negotiations a new chance , a new impetus , because stalemate should not be an option .
I am convinced that the way forward will be found with the United States .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - I would like to ask again about the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip following the opening of the closures , and what is happening with Corporal Gilad Shalit .
President of the Commission . - The situation in Gaza is not tenable .
Economic recovery is crucially needed but , unfortunately , we have not seen the fundamental change of policy in Gaza that the European Union has asked for over the last months .
That is why , last Monday , the European Union agreed on a three-pronged approach to support exports from Gaza , following a request from Prime Minister Fayyad .
I recently received Prime Minister Fayyad and we spoke about this .
Gaza should be viewed as a very important component of Palestinian state-building .
Mr President , Mr Barroso , the European Council is meeting on Thursday and Friday .
I would like to ask you the following questions :
Firstly , do you believe that the introduction of Eurobonds can help to stabilise the euro ?
Secondly , do you share the view of Chancellor Merkel that Eurobonds are not necessary ?
Thirdly , in the event that your opinion differs from that of Mrs Merkel and you are in favour of Eurobonds , what do you intend to do in the Council this coming Thursday ?
Fourthly , are you in contact with the Eurogroup President , the Prime Minister and finance minister , Mr Juncker , and , as President of the Commission , will you support him ?
Fifthly , in the event that Eurobonds do not get the go ahead , will you inform Parliament immediately afterwards of the way in which you , as the Commission , intend to respond to a possible negative decision ?
President of the Commission . - Eurobonds are an interesting idea .
In fact , the Commission considered them already in 2008 , in our document ' EMU @ 10 ' - the EMU 's 10th anniversary .
However , in the meantime , with a view to addressing this crisis , we have created the EFSF and the ESFS .
These instruments are far from exhaustive .
If need be , they can be improved and adapted much more quickly than any alternatives , interesting as they may be .
At present , I think we must ask ourselves a simple question : is the crisis best addressed with instruments that are consensual , or by opening yet another discussion on which there is no consensus ?
As your question suggests , there is indeed no consensus on the proposals made recently by Prime Minister Juncker .
I think the answer today is obvious .
We should concentrate on what can build consensus in the euro area , because not having this consensus will be detrimental for the markets ' perception of the euro area .
Let us not kill the very interesting idea of Eurobonds for the future , but let us concentrate , at this stage , on what we can do quickly and decisively .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , you have answered my questions with your inimitable diplomacy , but I do not want to let you get away with this . I will therefore ask you very specifically : in his role as President of the Eurogroup , Prime Minister Juncker has announced that he intends to take the initiative in the European Council with regard to the introduction of Eurobonds .
Will you support him in this ?
Furthermore , are you likely to try to convince Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy to join the majority of the euro states , or , when Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy say ' we do not want that ' , will you say ' okay , because two parties say ' no ' , we will dispense with the idea ' ?
President of the Commission . - I am going to give a very candid answer .
I do not believe at this stage that there is the slightest possibility of getting an agreement on Eurobonds .
There is reluctance on the part of several Member States regarding that proposal .
That is why I think we should work to reach the largest possible consensus with the current instruments .
I have said to you very frankly - and particularly to Martin Schulz - that I found the idea interesting and attractive .
In fact , the Commission has made several proposals before - in the time of one of my illustrious predecessors - but at this stage , the conditions are not right for getting an agreement .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - I have a specific question but I want to say , Mr Barroso , that you have the right of initiative with the Commission .
You can come forward with a proposal on Eurobonds , and that was what Mr Schulz was asking .
OK , so you do not use that right , and that is a problem for the moment on this issue .
I have a specific question on the 2009 discharge .
There is a declaration of assurance by a Director-General of Regional Policy , who says , and I quote him , that for 38 out of 79 programmes , the Directorate-General does not have reasonable assurance on the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions in relation to reimbursements in 2009 of expenditures declared .
This prompts the question as to who is in a position to provide this reasonable assurance .
The declaration continues that , for the 41 remaining programmes , significant deficiencies have been identified at an early stage , before any reimbursement in 2009 .
So my question to you is , assuming that you take political responsibility for this declaration with all its ramifications , what will be your line of action towards the Member States ?
President of the Commission . - In answer to your comment , Mr Verhofstadt , let me tell you first of all that the Commission has already used its right of initiative .
You will remember that , when we launched this mechanism , Olli Rehn and I introduced the possibility of collective guarantees , which was more or less going in the direction of Eurobonds .
It was flatly rejected by the Member States .
We could now put forward new proposals , but at this time , I do not think that it is responsible to put forward formal proposals again when we are in such a sensitive situation .
It will only divide the euro area and the European Union . But the Commission has already made proposals .
They were on the table and were rejected .
That is the reality .
Regarding the financial perspectives , I have already made a commitment to putting forward the proposal for a specific kind of Eurobond - euro project Eurobonds - and , even though I have already heard some negative comments from some capitals , I am still hopeful that this will come into being .
Regarding your question , I think we have to ask more of the Member States .
As you know , with the exception of four or five Member States , they are not ready to give their declaration of assurance .
It is true what our Director-General said - as you mentioned - that sometimes , the Commission does not have all the necessary instruments to engage with the Member States as early as possible with regard to the way in which European Union funding is spent at national level .
Mr President , Mr Barroso , a year ago , you told me that GMOs had polluted your first term of office and that you wanted to refer the issue back to the Member States .
A few days ago , 1 200 000 signatures were collected from European citizens asking for an independent expert report on GMOs .
A few days ago again , the Environment Council rejected Commissioner Dalli 's proposal by a very large majority .
The opinions of both Council 's and Parliament 's legal advisers have also been negative .
Lastly , you have witnessed the scandal at EFSA with the Banati affair and the questions raised by the panel .
What is more , EFSA itself has decided to issue new assessment guidelines .
What I would therefore like to know is are you willing to stay all new authorisations and all renewals of authorisations , such as that of MON810 , until the new EFSA rules have come into force ?
New assessments and authorisation renewals should be processed according to the new rules .
Finally , are you willing to relaunch the debate so that we can get an independent assessment ?
Mr President , as regards the initiative , you know that this new system has not come into force yet .
However , we are naturally following all citizens ' initiatives on this issue with great interest .
In fact , the commissioner responsible met with the sponsors of this initiative even though it has not yet been formally approved .
As regards the present question , we will be continuing to apply the legislation in its current form .
We do not have a better alternative to EFSA .
This is an independent agency which was set up to provide opinions .
The agency gathers expert information on this subject and , of course , we need to abide by the opinions it issues .
We are therefore going to continue abiding by Community law on this subject .
The Commission cannot decide to suspend the application of Community law .
I have already told you quite openly that I am not happy with the system governing GMOs in Europe .
I am not happy with it because I do not think it is clear enough .
However , this is the system that I am obliged to adhere to .
Thank you for your answer .
However , EFSA has already put in place new guidelines that are much stricter .
Are you willing to agree that all new authorisations that have been granted over this latest period and the issue of MON810 should be reviewed in the light of these new guidelines ?
We cannot accept assessments today that were carried out on the basis of old rules .
That is why I am asking you this question very precisely and I would like you to start this whole debate again from scratch , instead of waiting until 2012 .
Directive 2001 / 18 / EC is due to be updated in 2012 : the process needs to be brought forward .
As always , we take into consideration the proposals and suggestions of the independent agency , the Parma-based European Food Safety Agency .
Therefore , if the agency puts forward a new guideline , we will study it very attentively .
That is as much as I can tell you at this stage .
However , the legal framework governing the approval of GMOs has not yet been changed .
Therefore , I must stick to the present system until it is changed , but we will be ready to consider all new guidelines and study them extremely carefully .
Mr President , Gazprom and the Nord Stream consortium have been laying what is known as the Northern Pipeline since 9 April .
I do not wish to focus on the environmental aspects of this project , since this House has also already debated them .
I merely wish to draw your attention to one issue - the pipe which has been laid makes it significantly harder for large ships to reach the Polish port of Świnoujście .
This port is a major source of work for many Poles in western Poland , a region affected by a level of unemployment which is often fairly high .
Poland has raised this issue in bilateral talks , but I have the impression that we are also dealing here with problems relating to competitiveness .
The port of Rostock is right next door , over the border in Germany .
I hope it will enjoy rapid growth , but I would like all ports in Europe to be treated equally , so that they really can compete and so that the technical solutions adopted by one of the Member States do not obstruct the development of a port in another .
President of the Commission . - I am aware that there have been concerns at some point that access to the Polish ports concerned would be restricted .
According to the information available to the Commission , however , the German Stralsund mining authority included a requirement for the Nord Stream company in its permit to prepare a revised risk analysis for a section of the pipeline in German territory , as plans were presented at that stage by the Polish side to adapt both ports for ships that would need a deeper water depth to float .
As a result of the analysis , the pipeline will be laid in the seabed with a covering of half a metre for about 20 km .
In addition , the analysis of the planned route of the German EEZ led to the decision to opt for an alternative track over a length of 12 km .
The final permission was granted by the Federal Office for Shipping and Hydrography in February this year .
According to the information available from the German authorities and the developer , both of the above measures were taken in order to ensure unrestricted access to the Polish ports after construction of the pipeline .
I am sorry that this is very technical , but it is the best information we have .
Mr Barroso , you have proved many times that you treat Member States fairly .
I hope that in this matter , the European Commission will treat my country in a similarly fair manner .
I would merely like to draw your attention to the fact that you yourself admitted that you are relying predominantly on data presented by the German side .
I would appeal to the European Commission to take the advice of independent experts , too , on this matter , although I would continue to stress that I have great faith in your fair approach to all European Union Member States .
President of the Commission . - Thank you for your comments , Mr Kamiński .
The Commission is indeed following the issue of Nord Stream very closely .
We are aware of the sensitivity of the issue with regard to the environment and from other points of view , so we will be following it with great care .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , in response to Mr Schulz 's questions , you said that the Eurobonds proposal will probably not be successful .
Previously , we were told that nothing would come of the financial transaction tax , and other proposals have also come to nothing .
We are now in the third year following the financial crisis and I am now asking myself whether you would be able to agree to boosting the euro rescue package - that would , of course , be an additional measure - or whether we have to expect that , by the weekend , yet another set of proposals will be rejected by you and others .
My question is : how expensive is this delay , especially as it is clearly costing a lot of money ?
President of the Commission . - One thing we have to tell the European Heads of State and Government is the following : this week , when we meet - because the Commission President is also present as a member of the European Council - we will not just be addressing one another or addressing politics or the economy , we will be addressing the markets .
These are extremely sensitive issues , where I believe we have to show some kind of restraint in the comments made .
Because I have a duty to be transparent with all of you , I have already responded very honestly to the question put by Mr Schulz .
We have seen some interesting Eurobond proposals .
I think we should not kill the proposal , but it is obvious that there is no consensus at this stage .
I will not insist on what , for me , is obviously a divisive issue at this stage .
We have instruments now that were the object of a consensus , which we can work on to try and find a coherent , robust action to protect the euro area and the European Union .
Mr President , Mr Barroso , I just have a brief additional question : are there any other instruments that are still under discussion ?
I feel rather poorly informed in this regard .
Something needs to be done , and we are probably in agreement that the instruments that we have at our disposal should actually be used .
President of the Commission . - We are discussing many issues and many possible alternative instruments .
The last Euro Group considered different options and different ideas , and the Commission is in touch with all the parties involved .
I myself and Olli Rehn have not only been consulting Member States , but also the President of the European Central Bank , the Executive Director of the IMF and other very important players in this field , but I do not think it is wise , as sometimes happened in the past , to make very important announcements that are not followed by concrete consequences .
Next time , we have to do exactly the opposite and come up with real conclusions when we are ready .
That is why the Commission is working very actively with all Member States and with other institutions to give a comprehensive response as soon as possible .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr Barroso , the recent WikiLeaks storm has led to mixed feelings , with some people saying transparency is good and others saying perhaps the leaks will damage international diplomacy .
However , I was particularly amused by the references to you in WikiLeaks , where it mentioned your trip to Russia and the fact that you were ignored and excluded and the Russian view from upon high that you were nothing more than a glorified international civil servant .
Mr Barroso , remember : we have discussed this before here .
I have pointed out to you again and again that you have not been directly elected by the people and you therefore have no real legitimacy .
Is the fact that you are unelected the reason why you do not command more respect on the global stage , and why increasingly , the peoples of Europe are holding you and the entire Commission in contempt ?
President of the Commission . - I would not expect you , Mr Farage , to make common cause with the Russians - because that is what you are suggesting , that you agree with them !
Frankly , I was elected by this Parliament , by secret vote , so I think I deserve the respect of this Parliament , from all Members of the Parliament .
( Applause )
The European Union of 27 democracies has an original way of electing a President of the Commission precisely because we are not a state .
I am sure you would not be in favour of a European unified state .
Since we are not a unified state , there is no direct election of a President of the European Union .
We do not have one ; we have a President of the Commission .
You may like it or not - I like it more than you ! - but in fact , I have been elected by this Parliament and there is a President of the European Council who was designated by the Heads of State and Government .
This is the way we are , and I think it is a democratic way of handling the diversity of the European Union .
I would hope that Members of the European Parliament , at least , respect the institutions we have in the European Union , even if others do not .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Well , Mr Barroso , I enjoyed that enormously !
That you can stand up and boast about the fact that you were elected in secret and that somehow this gives you democratic legitimacy is the most bizarre concept I have come across in my entire life .
The fact is that the Commission has the sole right to propose the kind of legislation that is damaging Europe 's economies in the way that it is .
Are there any circumstances in which you think the peoples of Europe should have a referendum so that they can decide these issues ?
( Interjections from the floor from various Members )
Colleagues , I am sorry we are not taking comments from the floor .
We would like to go ahead with the proceedings .
President of the Commission . - The election in Parliament was an open election .
However , many people consider that the freest elections are elections where each person - or each Member of Parliament - can take decisions secretly .
In totalitarian systems , secret votes are usually not allowed , precisely because of the pressure on individual freedoms .
That is my first point .
Secondly , regarding referenda , constitutional and democratic theory allows for referenda as well as for representative democracy .
By the way , Britain is probably the country that has done most for representative democracy .
A perfectly legitimate way of making decisions in a democracy is by representative democracy .
The role of parliaments , be it national parliaments or the European Parliament , is immensely important in democracy .
Personally , I believe that some comments made against representative democracy do not reflect a true democratic mind when they are made so negatively .
China enjoys a large surplus on its balance of trade with the EU .
Europe 's surplus in services is too small to compensate for this .
China achieves its trade surplus by an artificially low value of its currency , by suppressed wage rates so that imports into China cannot be afforded and so that export prices are considerably lower than European prices , and thirdly , by ignoring international patent rights so that Chinese companies can benefit from research and development not carried out by themselves .
China is rapidly accumulating foreign currency reserves and control over scarce global resources .
European countries are becoming the willing victims of a relentless global competitor with the instrument to destruct our livelihoods .
European countries must individually - my preference - or collectively protect our industries .
Why does the Commission allow EU business and workers to suffer unfair competition from China ?
President of the Commission . - Let me tell you that we will be much more successful if we do it collectively rather than separately .
Frankly , I do not see that our individual Member States have enough leverage to impose some kind of measures on China .
The European Union collectively can engage with China , and that is what we have been doing .
We are in favour of free trade , as you know , but we are also in favour of fair trade .
When we have believed there is evidence of dumping for instance , we have launched anti-dumping measures regarding China .
It was not easy because some Member States opposed those measures , but we took them .
Every time we meet the Chinese leadership , we discuss intellectual property rights and the need for them to respect some basic principles so that we can keep open trade with them .
That is exactly our agenda : to engage the Chinese positively whilst also being firm in terms of our trade interests .
By the way , this was quite clearly expressed at the last summit .
You said that you believed in fair trade , but fair trade is not on offer .
What we have is biased trade in favour of China .
Will the Commission be successful in getting China to remove its subsidies , allow its currency to appreciate or , for that matter , to respect international property rights which apparently amount to something like 5 % of Chinese GDP ?
Will it not be necessary , in the end , to block imports of Chinese goods altogether ?
President of the Commission . - It is clear that the Commission will be successful if it has the full support of our Member States .
We are doing that and we are very committed to reciprocity above all .
The concept of reciprocity means that we want to keep markets open .
We believe it is in our interest .
The European Union is by far the biggest exporter in the world , bigger than China , and so it is important to keep markets open .
We also believe , however , that our partners have to respect some basic rules .
Regarding exchange rates , as you know , the European Union was in the front line at the last G20 attempting to ensure that this issue is addressed constructively and cooperatively , because we believe the matter should also be discussed when we address the problems of major imbalances in the world economy .
We now come to the second part of Question Hour , catch-the-eye .
The topic is WikiLeaks and cyber security .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , I am not going to ask you to address the problems of United States diplomacy , nor to comment on the virtues and failings of computer networks , on freedom of information , or on the shameful calls for the death of Julian Assange .
What I would like to say is that we do not have the right to ignore any information that comes into the public arena .
I asked the Chair of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Chair of the Subcommittee on Human Rights if we could revisit the investigation that Parliament carried out in 2007 into the activities of the United States Central Intelligence Agency in Europe , over which I had the honour of presiding .
I paid tribute to you at the time : the Barroso Commission was cooperative and helpful , and acted with great transparency , quite unlike the Council , which made omissions and lied in its dealings with Parliament .
The question I would like to put to you is very simple : is the Barroso Commission prepared to cooperate in a fully transparent manner with the European Parliament again ?
The European Commission , over which I have the honour of presiding , always cooperates with total transparency with the European Parliament , and will always do so in the future .
I have not the slightest doubt about this , and I thank you for your words about the Commission over which I preside .
I believe that it is important for us to observe the highest standards and principles of transparency and fair institutional cooperation in all relations between the Commission and Parliament .
I would like to ask the same question .
Europeans are digitally dependent nowadays , and we wish to be digitally dependent , but with the proviso that we feel safe and secure on the Internet .
It has to be a priority for the Commission to come up with proposals regarding the safety of the 500 million citizens of Europe .
What are its plans regarding keeping security and privacy together in order not to neutralise one or the other ?
President of the Commission . - Some of those matters fall within national spheres of responsibility , but in the areas that fall within our sphere of responsibility , we have recently proposed some improvements .
As regards legislation on access to documents , we have put forward some proposals from Commissioner Malmström and they are now being considered by you .
We have also been making proposals on cyber security because , as you said rightly said , we are becoming more and more digitally dependent .
It is very important that in digital space , we have freedom , but this must , of course , be responsible freedom , with important rights like the right to privacy being protected .
Data protection is therefore also a question of fundamental rights and we believe the Commission has put forward sensible proposals that strike the right balance between freedom - that is non-negotiable - and using the Internet in a responsible manner .
The President of the Commission has given fulsome answers on WikiLeaks .
Can I ask him about something on which his views have not yet been leaked by WikiLeaks ?
President , you answered questions on the issuance of Eurobonds to provide current spending for governments .
I understand and I share some of the concerns expressed about such a course of action .
However , do you not recognise the capacity for borrowing which exists as a result of the sound management of the euro ?


Since Mr Oettinger tells us he needs EUR 1 000 billion over 10 years for energy infrastructure investment - that is about EUR 100 billion a year to help tackle the twin challenge of climate change and energy security - and since that would be extremely ambitious for the European Investment Bank to take on , could you not bring forward proposals for the issuance of Eurobonds to finance investment in infrastructure rather than to finance current government spending ?
President of the Commission . - Mr Watson , I did not come here to ' WikiLeak ' with you !
You already know my position on this issue .
In my State of the Union address to you , I mentioned that I will make proposals for Eurobonds , taking the shape of project bonds specifically for infrastructure .
These would not be for Member States to have more debt or to cover excessive debt - because we have a problem with excessive debt in Europe - but specifically to fund some important infrastructure projects , mainly with the support of the European Investment Bank - as you correctly said .
This is very much on the agenda and in our financial perspective .
In June , we will make some concrete proposals on this issue .
Let us try to build the necessary consensus , because I think that this is one of the ways to address our current problem .
There are very important constraints on the budgets of our Member States and , at the same time , we need financing for some truly European projects .
( ES ) Mr Barroso , what I am concerned about is the content .
It seems to me that we are shooting the messenger rather than getting to the heart of the problem .
The major issue that is behind WikiLeaks is its content , which they are demonstrating is true .
For years , you and other colleagues of yours , such as Miguel Moratinos , have denied the majority of its content .
You have denied that there was European collusion with certain illegal practices by the United States .
We now know that this is true , that it did happen , and we are still waiting for an answer from many foreign ministries and , in particular , from you .
I believe that it is essential that you give an explanation regarding the content .
Following that , I have another question regarding the campaign against Julian Assange .
I think it is really important that we take into account the risks that this person is currently facing .
We cannot forget that he did something that was necessary , which was to bring the truth to the table .
That is what I hope you will also understand , and it is what we all hope for in Parliament : for you to give explanations , either here or in a committee that we should reactivate in order to ascertain the real truth .
Regarding the content , all the information that has come to light relates to the activities of Member States , and not of the European Commission .
The Member States need to provide all the clarifications , and I am confident that they will do so , like the democratic states that they are .
I know that initiatives have been taken in some Member States to inform the public about specific operations of which they have been accused .
With regard to the work of the Commission , as the honourable Member , Mr Coelho , reminded us a short time ago , the Commission has done everything in its power to provide the maximum possible information to Parliament and to the European public .
With regard to Julian Assange , I have no comment to make .
There are accusations against him of a criminal nature , which were made by a Member State - Sweden - which is a democracy and currently has a European Arrest Warrant out against him , which is being examined by the British judicial authorities .
The Commission clearly has nothing to say about this , apart from the obvious : any defendant is innocent until proven guilty .
( EL ) Mr President , a real war is being waged in cyberspace at the moment .
According to the press , over the last few days , thousands of hackers have launched cyber attacks on companies which have been trying to get WikiLeaks off the Internet or to undermine it financially and have its donations cut off .
Companies such as MasterCard , Visa and PayPal have been hit by DDOS-type cyber attacks , with thousands of computers trying to connect to the same website at the same time , thereby overloading it and making it crash .
We all realise that this causes problems for the public 's transactions in general .
The question is straightforward : do we consider - at European level - that we have a reliable safety net to protect the public 's online transactions if this happens ?
President of the Commission . - I believe we are not completely prepared for that , which is why the Commission recently put forward some proposals on fighting this kind of cyber attack .
It was Commissioner Malmström 's initiative , and now those proposals extend to all kinds of cyber attacks .
Regarding the cyber attacks that you have mentioned , let me tell you that the United States State Department denies having issued any direct instructions to PayPal , Visa or MasterCard , so I do not have any comment to make on decisions by companies to service - or not to service - WikiLeaks .
The Commission is against any kind of cyber attack made by one side or the other in that controversial case .
( PT ) Mr President , the publication of classified US diplomatic correspondence by WikiLeaks and by respected international media is only possible because of a colossal failure within the US security system , due to the excessive enlargement of the circles of distribution of the State Department and the Department of Defence .
What consequences do you believe this failure could have for the transatlantic relationship , specifically at the level of sharing diplomatic and intelligence information ?
Also , what lessons are being learned to strengthen the security of inter-European communications networks and the functioning of the European External Action Service , including the Correspondence Européenne network and security against cyber attacks ?
Firstly , we believe that what occurred in the United States could occur within practically any security system .
No security system is completely immune to the possibility of a person breaking the law .
It is true that within the US system , apparently , according to information received , hundreds of thousands of individuals have access to extremely confidential information , but the truth is that within systems that value freedom , which is also the case for European systems , 100 % security is impossible .
It is for this reason that we are determined to work with our partners and friends in the United States to strengthen security , but always with respect for fundamental freedoms too , and we believe that it is important to find a good balance between these two precautions , as I said a short while ago .
It is true that , in particular , because of terrorist activity , there is a need to exchange some extremely sensitive pieces of information .
At the same time , we should do this in line with standards of caution and , in general , while observing the principle of fair balance .
( IT ) As the statements by the government representatives of numerous States demonstrate , the extraordinary zeal with which Julian Assange is being investigated is clearly designed to punish him and WikiLeaks for having revealed certain top secrets to the world , such as the concerns of the US Secretary of State , Hillary Clinton , who asked the US embassies in Rome and Moscow for information on any personal investments of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Putin that might influence the foreign or economic policies of their respective countries .
Mr Berlusconi is described as Mr Putin 's spokesman in Europe .

Clearly , what is taking place here is the unprecedented punishment and persecution of a man and an organisation whose only crime is to have made the world aware of certain grey areas that put governments in an uncomfortable position .
Hence , it is our duty to protect the freedom of WikiLeaks and to guarantee fair treatment for Julian Assange , who should pay for his crimes , if proven , in a fair trial .
I therefore call on the Commission to state its position on the WikiLeaks affair and to explain how it intends to monitor the situation so that this affair is not used to clamp down on freedom of information and to impose restrictions on the Internet , which has once again proved to be an exceptionally powerful democratic instrument , and which must therefore be protected .
President of the Commission . - As I said earlier , I cannot comment on specific cases or criminal accusations .
Regarding Mr Assange , an accusation has been made by the Swedish judicial system and is now being considered by the British judicial system .
Both Sweden and the United Kingdom respect the rule of law .
We have to let the normal process of law go on .
I cannot comment - and I should not comment - precisely because I very much respect the presumption of innocence and everybody 's individual rights .
I cannot , therefore , comment on that .
Regarding the other comments you made about some of the things in WikiLeaks , I do not think it is right for me to comment .
The comments are attributed to United States diplomats and are therefore their responsibility .
I cannot comment on them .
I can only tell you our position , which is not the same as the United States ' position .
Our position - the European position - is clear on the matter that you have asked us about .
We do not have to comment on specific leaks , whether they come from WikiLeaks or elsewhere .
( EL ) Mr President , I think that we are still missing the point .
At least , I think , from your answers , that you are missing the point .
First of all , I am absolutely flabbergasted - and I would like to know if you are equally flabbergasted - at the unbelievable silence on the part of the European bodies about this suppression of freedom of speech .
Unfortunately , the defenders of freedom of speech are all absent from the House .
They have disappeared .
My question is this : do you think this is being used to suppress the facility to transfer data ?
We all shout about the right of the Chinese and the Cubans to access the Internet - and rightly so ; but what can and should we do now that this right is actually being suppressed ?
What can and should the Commission do ?
My question is very specific : what will you do to ensure that the European public can access the WikiLeaks website ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , the substantive issue that we have addressed is that freedom of expression , in all its forms , is not only a fundamental human right , but the cornerstone of all democratic societies .
It is not negotiable .
At the same time , it is also clear that there is information , be it private , commercial or legal , which , by its very nature , is sensitive and cannot be accessible to the wider public .
Data protection is also anchored in fundamental rights .
All our Member States have rules that protect data and some kinds of sensitive information for the sake of the public , and this is our position in terms of freedom of expression and data protection .
Regarding accusations against a specific person , I am not a tribunal .
Also , the Commission is not supposed to make comments on specific accusations against specific individuals because the Commission is not , and is not to supposed be , a tribunal and does not make presumptions as to the culpability of a specific individual .
The new NATO concept calls for coordinating national cyber defence capabilities to bring all NATO bodies under centralised cyber protection .
How do you see the European Commission 's role in better coordinating our national cyber defences , which are on various levels , and enhancing cooperation with NATO ?
Will , for example , Baroness Ashton take up some cyber security issues that are covered by defence policies ?
Do you need more joint EU research to define a comprehensive answer at European level to cyber challenges ?
President of the Commission . - This is , basically , not a Commission competence but Baroness Ashton 's competence as High Representative .
She is developing this kind of action with our main partners .
At the last summit with President Obama , we put our cooperation in terms of cyber security on the agenda .
This is an important issue , not only for NATO but also for our bilateral relations with the United States .
We are working on that .
We believe there are serious cyber-security threats .
Some Member States - I presume your country also - have already been subject to cyber attacks .
We believe this is an important concern .
We have to address it at European level also , but this is a matter where Member States have some responsibilities .
The High Representative is developing efforts to establish a coherent approach to cyber security problems .
I fully support those efforts .
There has been a lot of publicity on this particular issue all over Europe .
One of the things that concerns people is what this is going to mean for the future of cyber security right across the EU .
I do not believe that many people are too concerned about the individual involved here .
What they are concerned about is how this is going to play out across Europe .
I just think that it is important that the EU should have a policy on this .
I would urge the Commission to involve as many partners in these discussions as possible , not only at Member State level , but also at other levels of government right across the EU so that , for example , cyber security is an important issue for regional and local governments as well .
President of the Commission . - I fully agree with the concern that you have expressed .
This is exactly the line we are developing .
Not so long ago , the European Union witnessed cyber attacks against public and private organisations in Estonia and in Lithuania , in 2007 and 2008 respectively .
Thousands of cyber attacks are committed daily against European Union institutions and other public authorities .
The Commission recently responded to this alarming situation by proposing , on 30 September , a proposal for a directive on attacks against information systems , repealing the relevant framework decision from 2005 .
The overall goal of the directive is to combat large-scale attacks originating from and / or targeting the European Union .
We are very attentive to these concerns , and we believe that the proposal for a directive is a good one .
It penalises the users of tools such as botnets for committing the offences , and introduces a higher level of sanctions for committing the offences .
It introduces an obligation for Member States to respond to an urgent request from both the public and the private sector via the 24 / 7 network of contact points within eight hours of receiving the request , and introduces a monitoring obligation for Member States to facilitate the collection and provision of data about cyber attacks , including the number of prosecutions and criminal reports .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the responses concerning Mr Assange 's case and his imprisonment on account of his ideas of freedom are reminiscent of those of Pontius Pilate .
I would like us to consider three points :
1 .
This is a case of fumus persecutionis , because the accusations are very weak ; 2. the United States is putting pressure on a European country to extradite , even though it has not yet specified the legal grounds for this request ; 3. a citizen 's European bank accounts have been closed , meaning that he cannot receive any financial assistance in Europe from his supporters .


What is more , all the statistics confirm that the European public is in favour of these principles of freedom , that it wants Internet freedom , that it is in favour of freedom , despite the doubts and the problems that have emerged in the wake of this initiative , which I personally do not fully support .
Nevertheless , we would like President Barroso to state what the limits are and what the protection of human rights and of freedom of expression is really and truly founded on .
Are we looking at a virtual Guantánamo here ?
Are we facing the threat of an Orwellian total censorship of the Internet ?
That is the danger , and we need answers on this matter .
It is also important to keep a check on Mr Assange 's prison conditions , because in Italy , not even Mafia members are held in complete isolation .
President of the Commission . - I can give you some information on the legal aspects of this case , without prejudging the position , of course , because I am not a tribunal and cannot make a decision on that .
First of all , Mr Assange was taken into custody by the British authorities on the basis of a European Arrest Warrant .
The Swedish prosecutor issued an advertisement notice regarding Mr Assange in the Swedish system , the Schengen system and via Interpol , and that was the basis on which a European Arrest Warrant was issued .
Now , according to Article 28 of the framework decision on the European Arrest Warrant , a person who has been surrendered pursuant to a European Arrest Warrant shall not be extradited to a third state without the consent of the competent authority of the Member State which surrendered the person .
This means that , since Mr Assange was taken into custody in the UK , the British authority competent to decide whether or not to surrender him to Sweden would also have to give its prior consent to extradite him to a third country .
This is the best explanation I can give of the legal aspects , but I cannot make any sort of presumption about the culpability or not of the individual in question .

President Barroso , you have made various statements , including the statement this afternoon , about how the EU and its Member States respect fundamental rights and the rule of law , but the inquiry on extraordinary rendition , of which Mr Coelho was the chair and I was the vice-chair , reported prima facie evidence that around a dozen EU and other European countries had colluded in war on terror abuses , such as disappearance and torture .
Frankly , I am afraid you gave a rather waffly answer to Mr Coelho .
We believed that the Commission and the Council had not respected Article 6 of the Treaty and we urged them to ascertain the truth about what had happened and to take action if appropriate under Article 7 , which means sanctions of human rights abuses .
Frankly , there has been no result .
This leaves the EU open to the charge of hypocrisy .
What will you do now to get full political and legal accountability for European collusion in human rights abuses in the name of the so-called war on terror ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , the Commission has always respected fundamental rights and I absolutely reject any kind of criticism that the Commission has been involved in any kind of violation of fundamental rights .
That is not true .
The Commission has a completely clean record on that matter , and we are ready to work with the Parliament in full transparency on all those matters .
There are some matters that are the responsibility of the Member States and they have to do their duty .
The Commission cannot replace the Member States .
We have a Treaty , we have a responsibility , we have duties and we have rights .
The Commission has given this Parliament all the cooperation it has requested - and in full transparency - on the matters that you have just mentioned .
( DE ) Mr President , the Internet platform WikiLeaks is publishing - to put it simply - confidential information , and , naturally , that is always very unpleasant for the parties involved .
It should also be noted that as yet , no legal proceedings have been brought against WikiLeaks .
In the meantime , a proper cyber war is raging .
On the one hand , WikiLeaks servers are being attacked and , on the other , supporters of WikiLeaks are bombarding the web servers of Visa and MasterCard in order to bring them down .
My question , Mr President , is : will the Commission take action against such proxy wars ?
You have already mentioned the activities of Commissioner Malmström .
Is there already a timetable for this and do we already have any ideas of what we will do ?
Is the Commission planning - and , in this regard , I would like a clear answer please , not excuses with details and judicial arguments - to take specific action against WikiLeaks in order once again to act as a willing agent of the United States on the sensitive subject of data transfer and to behave as such ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , we are not planning any kind of action against WikiLeaks .
Secondly , regarding the directives we have put forward , they are now going to be discussed with Parliament .
We have put proposals on the table to enhance cyber security .
With regard to some of the issues that you want me to address in detail , I think it would be better to give you a briefing at expert level .
I am sorry , I cannot give you specific answers in one minute , but my departments are fully available to you , if you so wish , to give you all the details about the way we see this important issue . But this is basically not a Commission issue .
This is something that happened in the United States , and which had an impact upon the global community using the Internet , and it is a very serious and important issue .
I am not underestimating the importance of it , but we have to be clear about what our areas of responsibility are .
I am offering to provide , in an organised manner , those Members of Parliament who so wish with a complete briefing on the technical measures that we can take at European level .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to ask you a question about recent events involving attacks on Visa , MasterCard and PayPal by hackers , with the intention of sabotaging their financial operations and causing financial losses .
When these cyber attacks took place , causing fairly severe technical problems , was customers ' confidential data secure or vulnerable ?
This is my first question .
While these cyber attacks are going on , carried out on ideological grounds or for the fun of hacking , there is the chance that hackers who are only after financial gain will also get into these systems .
I would like to know whether this financial and personal information was affected and what methods and perpetrators are involved in this and whether you have the situation under control at the moment .
I would also like to know whether the US and international authorities are dealing with this problem as well .
President of the Commission . - I have no direct information on the leaks and how far confidential information or private data was leaked .
I am sorry I do not have that information myself - I have nothing to do with that case .
It is true that this issue has raised very important issues in terms of security .
We had been working on some of those problems before this WikiLeaks case and I have told you about some Commission initiatives .
I am sure that those on the other side of the Atlantic are concerned as well , so that is why I think we should work together on increasing cyber security , always respecting the fundamental freedoms - because freedom of expression is a sacred right for us in the European Union - while being clear that data protection and privacy are also fundamental rights .
We have to find the right balance and that is why , in all our initiatives , we have to take on board those two principles , which are sometimes difficult to harmonise but nevertheless very important .
Colleagues , we had 21 names on the list but only 14 of you could take the floor .
I am very sorry , but the names were taken in the order on the list .
That concludes Question Hour .
Parliament 's position on the new 2011 Draft Budget as modified by the Council ( debate )
The next item is the report by Sidonia Elżbieta Jędrzejewska and Helga Trüpel , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2011 , all sections , as modified by the Council ( 17635 / 2010 - C7-0411 / 2010 - .
Mr President , after many months of negotiations , discussions and tension , we will have finally managed - tomorrow I hope - to adopt the European Union 2011 budget here at the European Parliament plenary session .
I would like to start positively with what I believe to be the most interesting and effective of the achievements of the 2011 budget , and those that are of particular significance for European citizens .
First and foremost , I am very pleased that we managed to reach an agreement on time , that the difficult negotiations with the Member States and the European Commission were completed before the end of 2010 , and that we managed to avoid the hazard of a provisional 2011 budget , even though each of the parties , of course , had to compromise to a certain extent .
I would like to draw your attention to several valuable and interesting aspects regarding the specific details of what we managed to negotiate .
First and foremost , this relates to the joint position that we drew up , and the unanimous adoption of Parliament 's proposal of October 2010 regarding the European Parliament 's priorities in terms of budgetary obligations .
All our proposals regarding increased funding for the budget lines which are vital for youth , education , mobility , innovation , research programmes and for programmes relating to key issues in international affairs were accepted by the Council and the Commission .
I am pleased about this .
It should also be noted that Parliament was very realistic and disciplined in its October reading .
I am pleased that the Council and the Member States took note of this discipline and acknowledged the priorities we proposed , and to which we have been making clear reference since March .
In summary , I am pleased that this triangle - youth , education and mobility - was understood and properly appreciated by the Council .
I hope that the Commission will make every effort to ensure that these increased funds are used appropriately in 2011 .
I am pleased that we managed to understand our own fears to a large extent .
However , our satisfaction that we managed to reach an understanding is , in very many respects , marred by several important elements .
First and foremost , during the 2011 negotiations , we saw in practice how difficult it is to implement the Treaty of Lisbon , how many unknown areas remain ahead of us and how much joint work we have to put in to develop practical , pragmatic solutions arising from the new frameworks within which we are functioning .
This process has by no means finished .
It has also become painfully clear that the Member States are showing an ever-decreasing amount of solidarity when they have to contend with a crisis , and it is precisely European solidarity that is the first value to be lost when savings have to be made in national budgets .
I regret greatly that the Member States have suddenly become so very short-sighted and that they want to make savings specifically on European integration .
It is a sore subject .
We must return to this debate , as it is by no means over .
I would also like to ask Mr Wathelet two rather important questions on subjects that continue to puzzle me .
I would like to know whether the Council intends to adopt the joint declaration - the draft of which we have seen , although I am unclear as to its status - on the Multiannual Financial Framework .
Furthermore , the European Commission , in accordance with Parliament 's expectations , presented a whole series of single-page declarations clarifying Lisbonisation , European added value and own resources .
I would like to ask Mr Wathelet , who represents the Council here , whether the Council could explain its own position on these matters .
Once again , I would like to thank my fellow Members from the European Parliament for their contribution and everyone from the European Commission and the Council for their constructive approach , and I will be grateful for an answer to these questions .

Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for Parliament 's budget , I can definitely speak of a political success in respect of this part of the budget .
Parliament 's position following the vote on the budget in October has been accepted almost in its entirety by the Council .
My approach was to tackle this budget with a great deal of responsibility , with ambition commensurate with the Treaty of Lisbon , but also with self-restraint on our part , because , of course , we all understand the difficult situation we are in , but are nevertheless committed Europeans .
This was precisely the conflict of aims that we had with Parliament 's budget , as well as with the general part of the budget .
The different institutions , in other words , our own House , but also the other small institutions such as the European Data Protection Supervisor , the European Ombudsman and the Court of Auditors , have been given the posts that they desperately need - not as many as they originally asked for , but a number that recognises what they really need .
Parliament 's budget - and I think this is important - has been cut by EUR 25 million compared to what the Bureau originally asked for .
In other words , this is another clear sign of self-limitation and self-restraint , but not self-denial .
Something else that was particularly important to me was for us to use more resources to make our buildings energy efficient .
There should also be more bicycles here in Strasbourg so that we are not reliant on so many cars , and it should be possible to provide the staff of the institutions with cards for local public transport in Brussels .
Thus , here , too , it is a question of environmental responsibility .
The salaries adjustment in accordance with the court ruling has been properly budgeted for and will be financed by redistribution from other parts of the budget .
That means that we have reached a good compromise between Parliament and the Council , and we have cooperated well .
However , I will now , if I may , give you my political assessment of the general budget as budget coordinator for the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
The increase in payments - 2.91 % - is a very modest one , and it is a transitional budget at a time of necessary austerity in the Member States .
Parliament , however - and I still believe this is an appropriate request - wanted a clear agreement with the Council on how the Treaty of Lisbon , which the Council and Parliament adopted together , of course - after all , we are not opponents on this issue - can actually be implemented .
I would like to emphasise once again that Parliament is not going beyond the terms of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are merely demanding observance of the Treaty .
However , we are also calling for the Council not to hide behind the results of the Treaty of Lisbon .
There is a danger of this in my opinion , and it is something regarding which any self-respecting parliament must express its criticism .
We Greens are not satisfied with what we have achieved up to now .
There are a few weak statements , but that is not what we originally wanted .
I am of the opinion that if we adopt an ambitious strategy for which there are genuinely good grounds , then we must also stick with it and not give up ahead of time .
As Greens , we are pleased that we do not currently have the money for the ITER nuclear fusion reactor , because we do not consider this to be a real priority at this point in time and , from an environmental point of view , we believe that we should spend more money on renewable energies and environmental restructuring , rather than putting it into projects whose success is not assured .
However , what we can now undoubtedly see as regards the next year is that the negotiations will continue .
I very much hope that , in a pro-European spirit between the Council and Parliament , we will then be more successful together .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are now on the home straight for the adoption of the 2011 budget .
This has not been a walk in the park .
There have been a few pitfalls , but I hope that we are finally reaching our objective in this budgetary procedure and that , as the rapporteur said to you a moment ago , we will be able to approve a budget before the end of this year .
I think that that is really what drove us all on today , and here we have the proof that when all the budgetary areas said that they really wanted to reach an agreement , they were telling the truth .
However , we perhaps also need to say that we have carried out a new exercise and we have inaugurated a new procedure , and I think - as the rapporteur said just now - that everyone has had to make concessions , everyone has had to make some compromises .
On the one hand , the European Parliament has itself considerably amended the Council 's draft on commitment appropriations .
It has managed to get several projects and preparatory actions included , it has initiated debates and questioned the funding for a large number of policies , and it has truly played its role as a budgetary authority in full .
It has also accepted the restrictions that the Council imposed quite strictly , particularly with regard to payment appropriations .
However , there is also the joint statement to which the rapporteur referred , and which the Council clearly endorses , given that it is a joint statement .
You will also be aware that we have received a letter from the Prime Minister of Belgium , the current President of the Council , addressed to the President of the European Parliament , telling us that the representatives of the next four six-month Presidencies have confirmed that they wish to undertake the procedure for developing future financial perspectives in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty .
In a sense , then , this is the first implementation of the joint statement that we have adopted together regarding the development of future financial perspectives .
On the other hand , the European Parliament has also put forward a list of requirements concerning its own ambitions in the procedures relating to own resources , and you yourselves have also had the opportunity to become familiar with the European Commission 's statement , which demonstrated that , through exercising its power of initiative , it will , in fact , move forward on this agenda and , in this way , it will implement the new budgetary procedure , as well as the coming financial perspectives .
Concerning the 2011 budget itself , it is true that this is a strict budget , with an increase in payment appropriations of 2.9 % .
In spite of that , however , we have been able to make sure that the European External Action Service can see the light of day .
We have also managed to finance the three new financial surveillance agencies as part of this tight funding increase of 2.91 % .
By mobilising the flexibility instruments , we have also been able to take into account the political priorities that Parliament wanted to implement , providing EUR 105 million for new preparatory actions , youth projects and mobility projects .
As you have seen , Mrs Trüpel , when we talk about Parliament 's priorities , we use exactly the same words that you have been repeating time and again , both in the trialogues and in your last speech .
Conducting this new procedure in the context of the Lisbon provisions was a new experience for all of us and , as I humbly admit , for me above all .
It is true , however , that this has allowed us to have a number of meetings and discussions - sometimes heated ones - but once again , we can say today that we have reached an agreement .
I would say that I still have a sense that too little has been done , and I have a slightly bitter taste in my mouth , unfortunately , regarding the possibility of moving flexibility from unanimity to qualified majority .
I think that our efforts really brought us close to an agreement , and my fear is that this possibility will not arise .
I consider it a shame that we did not seize this opportunity , either on the issue of flexibility itself or on the financing of ITER .
This may not be a simple procedure , therefore , but if there is goodwill , and the will to succeed on both sides , we will get there .
At this point , I would also like to thank all those who have genuinely helped to make sure that tomorrow , hopefully , we can confirm this agreement : President Buzek himself , who , I would say , really rolled up his sleeves during this budgetary procedure , but also Mr Lamassoure , the rapporteurs , Mrs Jędrzejewska and Mrs Trüpel , and obviously Commissioner Lewandowski , who , in spite of the disagreements , came back each time with new proposals , making sure that this procedure finally reached a conclusion .
So here is the proof that we can reach agreements , and also the proof that this new Lisbon procedure can be a success .
Despite the pitfalls and the difficulties that we faced , we succeeded in reaching an agreement and we have this budget , which is much more than just a budget : it will also provide concrete results for the citizens with regard to mobility , youth , the Structural Funds that will be able to be released for those European regions that really need them , the External Action Service and the financial agencies .
Yes , thanks to this budget , we will be able to implement policies in the service of European citizens .
That is what must drive us on , and that is what has ensured that everyone has made the compromises necessary to reach an agreement .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome , on behalf of the Commission , the fact that Parliament is willing to vote on the 2011 budget , even if not all the elements of the original package - comprising a Multiannual Financial Framework regulation , a new interinstitutional agreement and also financing of ITER - have been finalised .
By voting , the two arms of the budgetary authority demonstrate a sense of responsibility in avoiding a budgetary crisis at a time when Europe is facing severe challenges and when we face financial instability in several Member States .
I have to stress the importance of Parliament voting in the same way as was voted in the Council , namely , to avoid further conciliation .
The Council has taken steps to include Parliament 's wishes in preparatory actions , pilots , reserves and budgetary remarks .
I think this - to vote in the same way and avoid further delays in time - is a test of the will we have to deliver the budget , to deliver the means to European citizens to implement projects and the programmes that could and should be conducive to growth in jobs .
In terms of commitments , the level to be voted is EUR 141.8 billion , corresponding to 1.13 % of GNI , with , I think , major priorities of Parliament taken on board relating to youth , small and medium-sized enterprises and research in headings 1a and 3b , and to Palestine in heading 4 .
To achieve these goals , we need to mobilise the Flexibility Instrument to the value of EUR 105 million .
The payments are set at the level of EUR 126.5 billion , corresponding to 1.01 % of GNI .
That is the understanding of the budgetary constraints that the Member States currently face .
The level of payments is set under the condition - which is very important for the Commission - that they agree on a joint statement submitted to act swiftly if needed to provide additional payment appropriations through transfers or amending budgets , in order to avoid any shortfall in payment appropriations .
Of course , in the case of reserves , probably to be voted , I have to reiterate the position of the Commission and we are , of course , striving to respond to the conditions set by Parliament as early as possible .
It is very important to have a budget in place , so that we can carry on the discussions in the other areas without the additional complication of working under provisional twelfths .
This is really very important .
What remains is the financing of ITER , and what is connected with the financing of ITER is the international credibility of a united Europe as a partner for global scientific and technological projects .
If we fail to agree - and this is the last moment to agree - we lose around EUR 570 million of the 2010 margins and therefore also lose the field of manoeuvre in the 2011 margin .
So I think voting and agreeing ITER should be a win-win situation for all of us .
What remains is also the adjustment , the transposition of the Lisbon Treaty in the form of the Multiannual Financial Framework and the new interinstitutional agreement .
I have to praise the efforts of the budgetary rapporteur , Reimer Böge , and Minister Wathelet to find agreement in this very area , involving also a degree of flexibility .
That is right .
I can hear in Parliament , in the discussion , that this is more limited than the current system , but this is a compromise that is really guaranteeing , in practice , the same level of flexibility that was applied until now .
Therefore , it seems to be acceptable in this time of fiscal consolidation in the Member States .
We have to pursue our efforts in the transposition of the Lisbon Treaty via the adoption of the Multiannual Financial Framework and the new interinstitutional agreement as otherwise , with stalemate and delay in these areas , we are in uncharted territory , not on solid ground when it relates to the legal conditions of our attempts for the future .
This was the Lisbon Treaty tested in practice .
This was not demonstrated as originally designed , as facilitating compromise and decision making , but I hope that we can draw conclusions from the experience and , anticipating the vote in Parliament , we have already started the preparations for the 2012 budget .
This is a sign of our optimism .
I thank all those involved in the compromise machinery over the 2011 annual budget , Alain Lamassoure , President Buzek , Minister Wathelet and the rapporteurs .
Mr President , we are now trying out the effects of the Treaty of Lisbon on ourselves .
We and , generally speaking , the European media have often said that the powers of Parliament have increased tremendously as a result of this Treaty .
Well , it is true that the two arms of the budgetary authority are about equally strong , but the strength of this arm cannot really be put to use , as the Treaty has condemned us to agreement .
The only case where the powers of Parliament would be more extensive , namely , if the Council were to vote itself down in the future , is completely unimaginable .
We must all face the fact that if we carry on with one twelfths , we can only stumble from one month to the next , and not make a European Union , and therefore , essentially in agreement with the other groups , the European People 's Party considers it necessary for the European Union to have a valid budget over the course of tomorrow .
The basis of this budget will be the budget submitted by the European Commission back in the summer and deemed by Parliament to be well-founded and sound .
The Council was more or less of the same opinion , as it did not modify it much , and only lowered the level of payments somewhat , on the grounds of the big crisis .
It is a funny crisis if , apparently , it can be solved with four billion compared to the income of the European Member States .
To be honest , this level of cut could be considered somewhat populist .
What pleased me in the final agreement , when Parliament adopted this four billion cut , was that we did not cut down numbers on a lawnmower principle , but instead retained the important areas that Parliament was particularly sensitive about as priority areas .
I for one consider it very important that there has been a significant , almost 15 % increase in the funds available for cohesion policy support .
It is also important that we achieve some measure of progress .
I understand the signal , Mr President , I will stop in a moment , but I still need to say that Parliament made a big mistake at the end of the negotiation process , and interests rooted in party politics made it bitterly difficult for us to achieve all of our goals .
Mr President , I would like to pick up on what Mr Surján said .
We are dealing with a new procedure in which the two parts of the budgetary legislator , the Council and Parliament , are operating on the same level .
I would like to address all those fellow Members from the Committee on Budgets who have complained that this debate has become politicised .
I would like to say to you that the logic of this new procedure dictates that we go beyond technical budgetary matters and discuss real budgetary policy .
With this budgetary policy , it has become clear that , in the other authorities and in the European Council , there is an intention to use budgetary policy to obtain a different European Union .
I will therefore start with the Presidency of the Council - with you , Mr Wathelet .
In my view , this Parliament is indebted to the Belgian Presidency , because I believe that it has helped to achieve something that I did not believe possible three weeks ago .
In the Council , the government of the United Kingdom and the government of the Netherlands - we must also mention them by name here - were not prepared to agree on a compromise in respect of the involvement of Parliament in the Financial Perspective .
The compromises that we wanted with the Council were rejected .
Right up to the last minute , they tried to reach a compromise , but these two governments said ' no ' .
A very intelligent solution - a Belgian solution perhaps - was found , namely to get the governments that will hold the Presidency in the next two years - Hungary , Poland , Denmark and Cyprus - to issue a statement to the effect that they will involve Parliament in the development of objectives .
I assume this will be as before , in other words , on the basis of the current interinstitutional agreement .
Thus , four governments in the European Council have declared that they are of a different opinion to the government of the Netherlands and the government of the United Kingdom .
That is a major success , because it has made it clear that the Council is not a homogeneous whole that can dictate a uniform objective , but that there are most definitely different opinions in the Council , for example , in the case of states like Hungary or Poland , who fear that , with the financing of the External Action Service , ITER and Galileo using the same budgetary resources that we have today , but with agricultural spending frozen until 2013 , cuts will have to be made somewhere at some point .
Moreover , the cuts would then be made in connection with cohesion policy .
Thus , we have allies in the Council , namely , those states that do not want these cuts , and these include , in particular , the next two states to hold the Presidency , Poland and Hungary .
In this respect , Parliament has achieved a major success .
I do not share the opinion of Mrs Trüpel that we have given way - quite the opposite !
With regard to the second core political demand that we made , flexibility , no agreement was reached .
The matter has been deferred .
Mr Wathelet , you say that there is now unanimity and that you could have had the qualified majority .
I will turn this on its head and say that those who want to have ITER must then also ensure that there is unanimity in the Council for cooperation with regard to flexibility , otherwise they will not get ITER .
We have negotiated hard and in a highly controversial manner .
At the end of the day , it was never about figures , but about political will .
Finally , my third point is that , in a fierce debate , the Commission has positioned itself between the Council and Parliament .
In the Council , there is not a single government that is prepared to discuss our own resources .
We want to discuss our own resources .
The Commission has taken its position .
On this issue , it has sided with Parliament .
Thus , the Community institutions are in agreement .
In the spring , I expect the President of the Commission and you , Mr Lewandowski , to put forward a corresponding proposal on the arrangements for own resources in the EU .
The Member States - the 27 governments - will then have to take a position on this .
I am a little surprised that I am the only group chair to speak here today .
I would also like to address my fellow Members in that regard .
There was , to some extent , a heated debate between us and the budget experts .
I believe that , in the end , this went in a positive direction .
I would like to thank the budget rapporteurs , Mrs Jędrzejewska and Mrs Trüpel .
Through my increased involvement with the budget at a political level , I have learnt how difficult this business is .
I would like to compliment you greatly on your work .
Finally , I would like to apologise to all those members of the Committee on Budgets who have , at times , felt that I have provoked them .
I have to say to you , however , that I considered this provocation necessary .
Mr President , I would also like to start by thanking Mrs Jędrzejewska and Mrs Trüpel for the sound and high quality work that they have done on the budget , and perhaps Mrs Jędrzejewska in particular , who has had an unbelievably difficult task under the new procedure .
I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency , which made a fantastic contribution , and I also think that our chair , Mr Lamassoure , has done some splendid work during these negotiations .
The Commission has , of course , also endeavoured to make a constructive contribution , particularly during the final phase here .
From the point of view of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , this is a good result for the 2011 budget .
We have secured the necessary appropriations for research , energy and education , and in the area of foreign affairs we have found the money for Palestine and the banana-producing countries without making cuts in other programmes .
This budget procedure has shown that the Multiannual Financial Framework is very strict and inflexible .
We have still not solved the problem of the financing of the ITER fusion energy project for the next few years - something that has been mentioned by several people .
The ALDE Group would like a solution to be found to this .
If we are to continue to fulfil the ambitions set out in the EU 's energy policy , we will face difficult budget negotiations over the next few years too , unless we have an agreement that ensures greater flexibility .
I hope this will happen soon and , in this regard , I would like to thank Mr Böge for his untiring efforts to ensure that a good solution is found .

Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , just a month ago , although we broadly had an agreement on the figures for the 2011 budget , the four large political groups intervened very loudly and forcefully , asking the Belgian Presidency to negotiate with the Council not only the 2011 figures , on which there was agreement , but also a genuine political agreement for the next stage , a political agreement which would allow us to work together , in the form of a convention or something else - it hardly matters - but also with the national parliaments and governments , on the future financial framework and on own resources .
Everyone was in agreement .
We asked for this at the time , just a month ago , because we thought that we had to guarantee the future of European finances , because we thought that we needed to come to the rescue of the budgets of the Member States , which are all facing difficulties , and because the European Union must have its own resources .
Everyone agreed , and I would say that it was said in a very forceful way .
One month later , where are we on this ?
We have gone back to square one .
The 2011 budget is about to be adopted .
It ignores flexibility and ITER .
I have no regrets about ITER , as you know , but on the other hand , the Belgian Presidency - even if it has gone to enormous effort , I admit - is sugaring the pill for us somewhat today by proposing that we make do with a Council statement , with the wisdom of the Commission - though I hope that it will always be on the side of Parliament ; that is its proper place - and with the letter from Mr Leterme , the Prime Minister , which actually proposes that we should respect the treaties .
It is a good thing that he is not proposing the opposite to us - that would be astonishing .
You must admit , therefore , that this is a pretty lightweight proposal , and you must realise that we are a little frustrated .
I am not even sure that the Belgian Presidency itself totally believes what it says , although , if the ' walk in the park ' had lasted a little longer , Mr Wathelet , we might have been able to reach a better agreement , a stronger agreement for the future , which would give us more chance of providing proper guarantees for the future .
You have the sense that there is too little here , and I do too .
Even so , we will act properly , and we will accordingly approve the resolution , with all its drawbacks , and as for everything else , we have missed an opportunity , but rest assured that we will be there at the next meeting , because the debate on the perspectives is not over .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I shall try to be briefer than the previous speaker .
My group proposes to adopt the budget as agreed by the Council .
It offers a small increase and that is a reasonable compromise .
Keep in mind that EU Member States and citizens have to cut their budgets .
Unfortunately , the debate on the budget had a false start .
The Parliament demanded an increase of 6 % , which was ludicrous and showed that this congregation was out of touch .
Here , the debate was even inflamed by hotheads who wanted to kidnap the budget to force access to own resources , in other words , EU taxation .
We have always opposed that .
Lisbon is clear on it .
The Parliament has a right to advise , not a right to codecide .
The Parliament lost this battle , as we predicted .
Now it is moving to the position which the European Conservatives defended all along - a budget of 1 % of GDP .
The hotheads here must cool down , particularly the Greens .
Just imagine that the EU had no budget next year while the euro was in a tailspin .
Is that the image you want to offer the financial markets ?
They would not be at all happy .
I would like to congratulate the governments of the United Kingdom and the Netherlands for their principled position .
I thank the Belgian Government for their role as honest broker and I thank the Commission for its knowledgeable and cool-headed work .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , with the adoption of the draft 2011 budget , we come to the end of a turbulent negotiating process .
First , a few words on the budget itself .
It is the result of the imposition of the governments ' increases , which were residual amounts .
The proposal tabled by the governments , and on which we are going to vote tomorrow , is well below the limits agreed when the Financial Perspectives for the period 2007-2013 were negotiated .
My group contested this point of view because we do not agree with continuity budgets in exceptional times , and we do not agree with budgets that are unable to address the social crisis into which austerity policies have plunged our countries .
This alone would be enough for us not to be able to vote for this budget .
However , the underfunding has another consequence : it will require successive corrections throughout 2011 , and the governments themselves are admitting it by signing a protocol that says exactly that .
Now , about the future : the majority of those who will vote for this budget were hoping , at least , that this budget would not be repeated in 2012 and in 2013 , but nothing could be less certain .
Despite our criticisms , my group supported Parliament 's positions throughout the impasse , in order to avoid this very real risk .
However , the final commitment is a weak one .
I guarantee you that , in 2012 , we will be having a revised and extended version of the discussion that we had this year , because a minority of governments , led by the United Kingdom , believe the current European budgets to be excessive : they want less , they do not want more .
Moreover , these same governments also want to reduce flexibility .
These are the governments that like sanctions and detest solidarity ; they are the governments that want hyper-austerity and not social progress .
It is for this reason that this Europe - a Europe that rejects European bond issues , a Europe that refuses to tax financial transactions - is a Europe that is set to destroy its own European project .
It is not a Europe that we can be at peace with , and so we cannot vote for this budget .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I will be brief to compensate for the time that Mr Portas took .
Many Members in this Chamber will congratulate themselves on having obtained a 2.9 % increase for the EU budget 2011 .
Others instead will complain that this is not enough .
I , for one , deplore the fact that this Parliament ignores the crisis that Europeans are going through and only looks to satisfy its own ambitions .
I , for one , regret that Mr Cameron approves such an increase while imposing severe cuts in the British budget , a situation that has started to generate civil unrest .
This money is not going to improve the economy of those Member States , nor is it going to provide jobs for those who are losing them , but if kept in Britain , it would avoid the need to increase the tuition fees , for example .
Of course we will not vote in favour of this budget as increased .
( NL ) Mr President , this morning , I received an email invitation to a cocktail party from the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets .
They wanted to celebrate the fact that the European Parliament was able to increase its budget for 2011 .
If it were up to this Parliament and the Commission , a lot more money would have been taken out of our citizens ' pockets .
European taxes : a reason for a celebratory cocktail !
Member States losing their right to veto the budget : another reason for a party !
Mr President , I call that dancing on the grave of citizens ' rights !
Fortunately , though , there is a cause for celebration .
The budget increase has been capped , after heavy pressure from Member States .
Unfortunately , this still means no reduction , which is what the Dutch Freedom Party ( PVV ) wanted , but the increase is not nearly as high as this House wanted .
We will not have any European taxes , to the anger of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , and Member States will retain their right of veto .
So , when I raise a glass today , then it will be to those courageous , stubborn Member States , like the Netherlands , that have refused to agree to this Parliament 's demands .
Long live Member States , long live citizens !



( ES ) Mr President , Mrs Jedrzejewska , Mrs Trüpel , Mr Lamassoure , Mr Lewandowski and Mr Böge are the names behind a 2011 budget that I believe has ultimately proved to be moderate and realistic .
The Committee on Budgets had already drawn up a draft which , in terms of commitment appropriations , was completely in line with the financial restrictions , and left payment appropriations open for negotiation , because as the European Commission said , there were , and continue to be , fears regarding changes in payment appropriations in the Structural Funds for next year .
Unfortunately , following the vote in plenary in October , we got involved in political negotiations involving the Council , and since then , everything has gone badly : the ' letter from the Twelve ' ; the 2.9 % increase in payment appropriations imposed by the Council ; the pressure on Parliament and its Members ; and the final failure expressed in the cancellation of the meeting of the Committee on Budgets that should have taken place yesterday in order to try to reach an agreement on the flexibility and future financing of the international thermonuclear experimental reactor ( ITER ) .
Should we draw conclusions from this ?
I think we should .
The Council should draw conclusions ; the subsequent presidencies should draw conclusions ; the European Commission should draw conclusions ; and so should we .
I will give you a conclusion now : leave the negotiations on the EU budget for other years and to the specialists , who are those who have taken the floor today .
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome my fellow Member , Mr Schulz , to the Committee on Budgets and remind him that the Committee meets in January .
I hope that then , you will come with an alternative proposal as to how to finance the ITER , having lost EUR 571 million in the 2010 budget .
( SV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that the Council and Parliament have been able to reach an agreement on the budget for 2011 in these difficult times .
The budget is a good compromise inasmuch as we have been able to maintain a low rate of increase but have nevertheless found reasonable resources for our priority areas .
I would like to say a big thank you to our rapporteurs , Mrs Jędrzejewska and Mrs Trüpel , and to the Belgian Presidency , which has made a very constructive contribution .
What concerns me is the long perspectives , because , in the long term , it will be unreasonable if the Member States assign new tasks to the EU but cannot agree on how they should be financed .
That will be a major problem in 2012 and 2013 and , of course , as we prepare for the forthcoming financial framework , because it is now clear that a minority of richer net contributor countries , some of which have eurosceptic governments , want to slim down the EU budget at any price , regardless of the consequences .
That is an unreasonable position , particularly as they are pushing hard themselves for increased expenditure in certain areas , the IT project for example , and are not able to point to where the savings should be made either .
Should we cut back on agricultural aid ?
Should we rein in the Structural Funds ?
Some people want this , but the majority says ' no ' .
The problems we are facing in relation to the future are actually internal political problems within the Council and between Member States with different attitudes towards the EU and its budget in the future .
The issue that is most controversial is the question of the flexibility mechanisms of the future .
For us Social Democrats , there are two issues here .
Firstly , it is a matter of principle that we should uphold an interinstitutional agreement that we have had since 1999 and that has worked extremely well .
No parliament in the world would accept a reduction in influence , particularly if there were no compelling practical reasons for it .
The Council has not been able to present any practical reasons for a reduction in flexibility .
The Treaty of Lisbon does not preclude a new agreement with the same content as the current one ; rather , it is a question of the political will of the Member States .
Secondly , when the margins diminish at the end of the budget period and , at the same time , new tasks are added , the need for flexibility will also increase .
This was pointed out by the Commission in its assessment of the current framework .
Despite the fact that all arguments speak in favour of increased flexibility and that it should be easier to apply flexibility , the Council has gone in the opposite direction .
That is unacceptable .
We know now that there are Member States that see the current dispute about reduced flexibility as preparation for the big battle , resulting in a drastic slashing of the EU budget .
If this turns out to be the Council 's line for the future , I am afraid that we will be facing a more permanent budgetary crisis , because we will not accept that .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) You have described the fact that a number of Member States are opposed to the increase in the 2011 budget , and that , as a result , fewer projects will be possible , as ' alarming ' .
Have you not considered the possibility that those Member States do not see that there is any need for those European projects ?
Mr President , of course , I understand that , but there is a difference between those who are net payer Member States and those who are net beneficiary Member States .
We must understand that .
You could easily say that the UK , the Netherlands , even my own Member State , Sweden , would gain from a cut in the EU budget .
But look at those Member States who are really having problems now .
Look at Greece , Portugal and Ireland .
They would lose if the EU budget were cut because it actually makes a contribution to their economies - not least via the Structural Funds and other parts of the budget as well - so I do not think that is a fair way to act .
( SV ) Mr President , at least we are now having a proper debate with the involvement of the Council 's representative .
This debate on next year 's budget has long been about who has done what and why .
In many people 's eyes , this has been a debate between the institutions , which , in a way , is a shame , but at the same time , we can perhaps learn something for the future .
A month ago , I was rather critical of how , in the Council , you are looking at the future and the possibility of financing the priorities that you yourselves have presented , and by this I am referring , in particular , to the Europe 2020 strategies , in other words , how we are to finance the ambitious targets that we have in Europe .
My criticism still stands and I therefore think it may be interesting to look at the budget we now have in the light of this in particular .
We have agreed on a budget with an increase of 2.91 % , which I personally think is an entirely reasonable solution .
If the Council had got its way , the research appropriations would have been cut by around half a billion euro compared with the amount originally proposed by the Commission , and in this regard , I have not yet fully understood what the Council was thinking .
Parliament later rectified this in its own version , which is a good thing .
This means that , in many ways , we went in a better direction , and even if the figures are the same as those the Council wanted , the content is significantly better than the Council 's 2.91 % .
I think it is worth noting that , even if we keep the same figures , there have been significant shifts in the budget .
Mr Färm took account of flexibility , and in this regard , the Council needs to consider how it intends , in specific terms , to find the money that is needed for the future investments that we have agreed on , because it will not be possible to find it in future years if it continues with the logic it is currently employing .
Mr President , I am obviously pleased that Parliament has finally come to its senses , accepted what , to many of us , was inevitable all along and settled for a 2.9 % increase , although I have to say for many of us that does not go far enough .
Many of us would have liked to have seen a freeze - or perhaps , in our wildest optimism , a reduction - in the EU budget because the less money that the EU spends , the less it interferes in the lives of ordinary citizens .
This is obviously a good result for David Cameron , for Mark Rutte , but it is also a victory for the hard-pressed taxpayers of Europe who have to pay all the bills of the EU institutions .
At a time of austerity , at a time of cutbacks in most Member States , it was frankly madness for this Parliament to be trying to increase EU spending by 6 % .
I am pleased that there has been at least some modicum of common sense .
To those who believe in the European project and who believe in European integration - and I am not particularly one of them - you did your cause more damage than anybody else could have done by trying to insist on this ridiculous increase in EU spending when everybody else , every other public institution in Europe , is seeing the pain of cutbacks .
You have damaged your cause immeasurably .
( NL ) During the final phase of the budget procedure , the Council and the Commission made political statements , especially with a view to involving the European Parliament in the financing of the European Union in the long term .
I have two questions about that .
My first question is : how are the Council and the Commission going to give concrete form to this cooperation ?
Will the European Parliament have a joint deciding role in this ?
I very much doubt this .
My second question concerns the European tax .
In June 2011 , the European Commission wants to put forward a proposal for the financing of the European Union for the 2014-2020 period .
My question about this is : is an EU tax part of that ?
If so , that means that the list of possible levies which the European Commission launched in October has been made even longer .
If this is about a levy for the financial sector , then any revenue should , in my view , certainly go to Member States , because it was ultimately they who had to save the banks .
Finally , Mr President , I fully support the position taken by the Dutch and British governments in this conflict .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mrs Jędrzejewska and Mrs Trüpel , who have carried out the budgetary procedure with a great deal of responsibility and a clear focus on the priorities .
With regard to the 2011 budget : when considering the EU budget , we must always remember that around 95 % of the money goes back to benefit citizens .
The best example of this is the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
At 6 % , the EU 's administrative costs are lower than quite a few of its Member States .
For many years , the EU budget amounted to plus / minus 1 % of GDP .
This financed the enlargement from 15 to 27 Member States without any additional budgetary resources .
As a result of the Treaty of Lisbon , we now have additional tasks .
Budget increases are always difficult .
However , with themes such as new projects and additional Lisbon tasks , the 2011 budget is also an investment in the future of the EU and in the functioning of its institutions .
( FR ) Mr President , given the exceptional constraints we face this year , the agreement that has been reached on the draft budget for 2011 is the best compromise possible .
For that , we must thank and congratulate our two rapporteurs , the European Commission and the remarkable Belgian Presidency , to which I would like to express particular gratitude .
Mr Wathelet is a little sad ; he has the impression that too little has been done .
He should see Parliament 's gesture of granting EUR 570 million to the Member States , rather than assigning this money to ITER , as an act of gratitude to the Belgian Presidency .
Since the start of these negotiations , Parliament has been anxious to show its awareness of its responsibilities .
Now , at the end of the year , when the cohesion of the Union is once again being called into question , the Committee on Budgets is categorically recommending that we end the uncertainty on the 2011 budget .
However , the basic problems remain intact .
In contrast to some of the national budgets , the Union 's budget is not threatened by bankruptcy .
In terms of the statutes , it is a balanced budget , but it stands on the brink of political failure .
Europe is financing its ambitions by indulging in words .
Yet verbal inflation , the inflation of grandiose and illusory objectives is just as pernicious as monetary inflation .
The Union no longer has the means to finance the decisions that it has already taken , nor the new competences given to it by the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Union has also failed to introduce the procedures that would allow it to ensure that , in the absence of Community financing , major joint objectives such as Europe 2020 are incorporated in the national budgets .
That is why Parliament attaches so much importance to the agreement achieved alongside the Commission and the future Presidencies for finding a way to secure the financing of future policies , via the Community budget , from new resources , which are no longer a drain on national budgets , and via the national budgets themselves , which are 20 times the size of the tiny European budget .
In 2010 , the Union has redefined its notion of financial solidarity .
2011 must be the year in which we reinvent budgetary solidarity .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to state again clearly today that the European Union needs a proper budget for next year .
There is no reason for us to have a provisional budget .
There is equally no reason for the European Parliament to make budget approval conditional on any additional demands .
All European countries are currently going through a difficult period economically and need certainty in the form of proper budgets , both at national and European level .
Households , businesses and local authorities also need this certainty .
I can therefore state here on behalf of my colleagues from the Civic Democratic Party from the Czech Republic and colleagues from the Group of European Conservatives and Reformists that we will support the compromise reached between the Commission , the Council and Parliament in the vote tomorrow .
( RO ) Mr President , tomorrow 's vote can bring to an end the first approval procedure for the annual budget , in keeping with the Treaty of Lisbon .
Negotiations have obviously been difficult .
Parliament has put forward extremely important political considerations , but the Council has refused to discuss them .
Parliament initially presented a very strongly united front in maintaining its position .
The Council was divided , but had the benefit of unanimity and blocked conciliation .
We are currently in the position of agreeing on figures .
The Council and Commission have accepted , through declarations , the large majority of the European Parliament 's requests .
It would have been much better to have an interinstitutional agreement , which would have provided greater security for the future .
Unfortunately , Parliament is no longer as united as it was at the start of the negotiations .
As a result , there is a lack of funding for ITER .
I believe that it is of paramount importance for us to give the Union the budget which it needs during this crisis period .
We have the time we need before the future financial outlooks are approved to reach an agreement on the topics which are still unresolved .
The Council needs to understand that it is not beneficial to the Union that the main European policies will be approved through codecision , while the financial resources required to implement these policies are decided on by only one of the parties involved in budgetary cooperation .
Parliament must be involved at the same level in both aspects : political and financial .
( NL ) Mr President , many Members here are taking a hypocritical approach in their statements on the budget .
Mr Schulz makes little effort to keep his irritation with the Council to himself .
Mr Verhofstadt seems to have limited his vocabulary to two phrases : European bonds and European taxes .
Mr Daul has even suggested that the Netherlands might as well leave the European Union .
That is tough language , but it supports only one side of the argument .
When I proposed that we should tackle Parliament 's own budget , however , these gentlemen and their groups did not appear to have heard me .
Moreover , I was given the cold shoulder when I proposed that Members should be transparent about the reimbursement they receive for their general expenses every month .
Nor did I get any support for my suggestion that we tackle Parliament 's luxury car fleet .
When I suggested that we should prune Parliament 's luxurious information offices , it seemed to give many Members a headache .
Voting against would therefore be a very appropriate thing to do , but my group and my country have managed to prevent the situation from being even worse and that is why I have abstained .
Voting in favour of a 2.9 % increase in the current climate would be totally inappropriate .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , by adopting this budget , the European Parliament is showing an enormous sense of responsibility .
The truth is , in the face of an economic , financial and social crisis that is slow to loosen its grip on us , it would be bad for the European Union and its citizens not to have a budget for 2011 .
No one would have understood if Union institutions had sought broad agreements for their budgets from Member States and not succeeded in reaching minimum consensuses for these budgets .
However , I believe that , although the 2011 budget is not bad , it could have been better .
The need for unanimity in the Council for some issues made negotiations more difficult .
This was a portent of the difficulties that the Council will face in reaching agreement on the next Multiannual Financial Framework and on new own resources , which , as we know , require unanimity in the Council .
At this point , I would like to highlight the excellent work by Mrs Jędrzejewska as rapporteur , and also by Mrs Trüpel , the efforts of the Belgian Presidency and the conduct of the Commission .
The priorities that we have set out are included in this budget : - I would highlight the strengthening of support for youth , education and innovation , and research .
I would also like to highlight the preparatory action ' Your First EURES Job ' , which will boost the mobility of young people within the EU , in the area of employment .
I worked on this proposal personally , and I hope that after acquiring legal basis , this preparatory action will give rise to a programme with a substantial budgetary allocation .
Another positive aspect was the agreement reached for the Commission to present , by the end of September 2011 at the latest , updated values relating to allocations for cohesion policy and for rural development , and , if necessary , increasing these allocations .
Mr President , I would like to thank Sidonia in particular , our rapporteur , for handling very difficult negotiations excellently on behalf of Parliament .
That work needs to be recognised , as does that of the Council .
I speak as the agriculture rapporteur , and I need the word agriculture to echo through this Chamber because we have concerns , not just about figures but also procedure .
From my perspective , this new procedure needs fine-tuning .
We could and should do our work better .
I say that to myself , but I say it also to the Council and the Commission , and I think we need to examine and review how we have worked in the past .
We have made some gains in agriculture .
They are very small , but my concerns are for the future .
I would like the Commission to talk about the massive cut of upwards of USD 800 million that there appears to be in rural development funding .
I hope that that will not actually come to pass .
I am concerned about the budget post-2013 and the possibility that agriculture could become a sector where people raid funds for other policies unless there is agreement on an adequate budget for all of the policies of the European Union .
( LT ) For the first time since the new Treaty of Lisbon came into force , the European Parliament has used the powers it was granted to participate fully in the composition of the European Union budget .
The unsuccessful first attempt to reach an agreement and include the European Parliament 's legitimate demands demonstrates a conflict that is still present among the institutions and that should not actually exist , as it is obstructing effective interinstitutional cooperation .
Presumably , it cannot be denied that the objective of all EU institutions is to ensure that agreements which are particularly important for the whole of the EU and its citizens are adopted as smoothly as possible .
In future , therefore , there must be fundamental changes in the operating principles of the institutions themselves and the inclusion of the European Parliament in all stages of negotiations , particularly in budget adoption , must be considered as particularly important for the implementation of the principle of representative democracy .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all , my thanks go to the rapporteurs for the hard work that achieving this comprised has entailed .
These negotiations have called for some particularly mighty efforts , in the shadow of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the stringent budgets imposed in the Member States .
For this reason , I would like to thank all our negotiators .
This is the first time that the European Union 's budget is being decided in one reading , and , if anything , I think that this process has further stressed the need for better dialogue between the two budget authorities , something that Parliament has been demanding for a long time .
There need to be continuing negotiations and a harmonised approach regarding conciliation on annual and multiannual budget frameworks , so that the institutions are able to speak one and the same language around the negotiating table .
Now , however , we can probably be satisfied that there is a budget in place for 2011 .
The uncertain elements need to be kept to a minimum in this economic maelstrom .
( FR ) Mr President , the 2011 budget as it has emerged from the numerous conciliation procedures between our Committee on Budgets , the Council and the Commission does not conform to the new institutional balances defined by the Treaty of Lisbon .
These balances have not been respected by the Council or , in particular , by the representatives of a number of governments .
In particular , it is unacceptable that Parliament 's request to obtain a dialogue on the EU 's future own resources has come to nothing .
Our Parliament now has a joint decision-making power in budgetary matters .
It must ensure that it is respected , and we have to realise something : genuinely balanced conciliation procedures will probably not be possible until this joint decision-making power is exercised in the form of a negative vote .
At some point , the European Parliament will have to choose to assert its institutional position firmly .
This issue of own resources will resurface in the coming months .
If we want to succeed , we will have to be able to see our responsibilities through to the end .
Mr President , I cannot vote for any increase in the Parliament 's budget , and I believe that many people in the United Kingdom will be watching the proceedings here in utter amazement .
In national economies across Europe , we have austerity measures and budget cuts .
These are the order of the day and this is what our people have to face .
The euro is in crisis , and I want the House to note that even though my constituency does not use the euro , we share a land border with the Republic of Ireland .
The Republic represents a huge export market for us , so this crisis hurts our people as well .
Beside all this crisis , we have a proposed 2.9 % increase , limited from the 6 % that Parliament already wanted , but on a budget that the Court of Auditors has not passed for many years .
Most worryingly of all , we have a promise from the Commission to bring forward proposals by June 2011 for an EU tax .
Is it any wonder that Euroscepticism is growing ?
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to join in the thanks and congratulations addressed to those who have managed to conclude these very difficult negotiations .
We are getting ready to approve a budget tomorrow which is a big step forward for the Europe of mobility and the Europe of young people .
Above all , this budget demonstrates Parliament 's determination not to abandon large-scale European investments during this crisis period .
However , I would like to share with you my concern and my displeasure about the choice made today by some political groups and , in particular , the Socialists , whose representatives were in government jobs at key moments , to jeopardise ITER , the only fundamental long-term research project in the European Union in which we play a leading role .
As you know , the European Union made a commitment last June to contribute an additional EUR 1.3 billion to this project , which is crucial for our security .
It is therefore Europe 's credibility in the world that is going to be called into question by our vote .
This attitude has meant that we have lost nearly EUR 600 million of unused money in 2010 , which could have been allocated to ITER .
This is ridiculous !
Mr President , as a Member of the European Parliament , I feel responsible that we have a budget .
As a Socialist , I am very sorry that we would not go for a financial transaction tax .
As a rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , I would like to underline that we support the ITER project , but we do not need a patchwork solution for one year : we need a sustainable financial solution for the next two decades .
As a Hungarian , I am very happy that the Hungarian Presidency will hopefully not have to deal with the budget , but only to find a solution for ITER and for flexibility during the negotiations .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I shall be brief as I have already used up my time slot .
In answer to Mr Belder , who may have already disappeared , the Commission 's proposal on how to cooperate between the institutions was in direct implementation of Articles 312 , 324 and , specifically , Article 311 of the Lisbon Treaty , for the specific procedure on the own resources decision in full respect of the fiscal sovereignty of the Member States .
As for the own resources , this was clearly and explicitly within the mandate given to the Commission in December 2005 , which was confirmed by Parliament , to start not only the expenditure but also the revenue side of the budget , including the British rebate .
We were delicate enough not to touch the issue of the British rebate in our budgetary review and our eventual choice for the future is not to increase the expenditure but to change the proportions between the national direct payment and own resources , in line with the vision of the treaty and the founding fathers of the European Union .
Finally , a more general remark : hopefully , if we vote tomorrow , our test of Lisbon , in budgetary terms , will be over and we will have to draw conclusions .
It sends a good message to European citizens to have a budget without any deficits or debt and to show that we are not to be taken as a scapegoat for the failed policies in some Member States .
Therefore , now having the budget in place , we should continue our discussion on the modalities of interinstitutional cooperation in much improved circumstances .
Mr President , like the Commissioner , I do not have much to add in relation to this discussion .
Quite simply , having heard some Members say that they preferred not to approve the budget in order to affirm Parliament 's joint decision-making powers , I think that all the European institutions have much more to gain and will increase their standing if they can actually take the European Union forward by finding compromises , instead of everyone blocking each other and not moving forward with European projects .
I think that this is a question of logic , and today I really want to thank all those who have chosen to build Europe and to move forward .
Does the Council have everything that it wanted ?
No .
Does Parliament have everything that it wanted ?
Of course not .
Are we moving forward ?
Yes .
This codecision procedure has functioned ; it has worked .
Everyone has made some compromises .
Everyone has made some concessions .
Is there still much to be done ?
Of course .
Clearly , that is what the debate on flexibility and ITER is all about .
I regret the fact that we were not able to reach an agreement , and I have heard it said that the proposal tabled was a step backwards .
No .
I repeat : we have this during every debate , and today it is unanimity .
If the aim is to move towards qualified majority , then I think that the Belgian Presidency 's proposal must be taken up .
I think that this is essential when it comes to drafting the 2012 and 2013 budgets .
I think that this mechanism really must be promoted , since it conforms to past practices , but it at least ensures that the 2012 and 2013 budgets can no longer be blocked by unanimity .
I believe that you really must seize this opportunity .
Concerning ITER , the way in which we have used this flexibility mechanism for ITER 2010 clearly shows that we will need this mechanism and that we must take up what is before us today .
I would like to sincerely thank all those speakers - and I will not mention them all - who have acknowledged the work that we have done together to move forward .
I would like to thank all those who preferred the logic of progress to the logic of blocking .
I think that we really must promote this logic .
Mr Lamassoure , you spoke of budgetary solidarity .
In the Council , we had almost total solidarity , as everyone accepted the increase of 2.91 % .
We have gone from having a qualified majority to having total unanimity within the Council .
Joking aside , I think that all of the statements annexed to this 2011 budget - because , yes , a budget in itself is also political , as Parliament showed with the political priorities that it included in the budget - whether on own resources , on European added value , on Lisbonisation - the Commission 's declaration - or in the context of this joint statement , which is important and which has already been followed by a letter from the Belgian Prime Minister , the current President of the European Union , I think that all these statements show that all the stages are going in the right direction .
We are certainly not moving as quickly as everyone would like , but we are moving quickly enough that we can say that the machine is in working order and that it is better to adhere to this logic of progress than to a logic of blocking .
Mr President , from what the previous speakers have said , it is clear that we are all pleased that it will be possible to implement the 2011 EU budget efficiently and without unnecessary delays as of 1 January next year .
However , all these speeches have also made it clear that there is still a lack of certain things .
There is a lack of discussion and a lack of understanding .
It is clear to me already that the Treaty of Lisbon opens up new , uncharted territory for us and that a very difficult debate awaits us regarding the new multiannual post-2013 European Union budget .
This debate relates to a fundamental issue , namely , how we can reconcile the ever-greater divergence between expectations of the European Union , or , in other words , what the European Union is supposed to do - and we can see that the Member States and all interested parties , including the European Parliament , expect more and more from the European Union , since the European Union is supposed to deal with an ever-increasing number of subject areas , and is opening itself up to new policies , new areas of activity and setting new tasks for itself - a divergence between the aforesaid expectations and an ever-diminishing willingness to finance these new undertakings .
We must hold joint debates on this increasingly dramatic divergence .
We cannot avoid such debates , all the more so since we are currently experiencing a financial and economic crisis , and so there is no place for taboo subjects as far as funding is concerned .
We should talk openly about all the issues : about the EU 's own revenues , about what the EU should do , about what it should perhaps not try to do , about what is really most important for us and to what extent these priorities should be financed .
In summary , I think that what happened during the adoption of the 2011 budget is both a basis for and a start of the debate , but by no means its end .
I thank you for your willingness to engage in a debate , and I hope that there will be even more of this willingness next year .
Mr President , I am pleased that I get to have the last word in this debate today .
I will start by gladly accepting Mr Schulz 's apology .
He said that he had sometimes behaved badly .
It is always good when he notices that he occasionally makes too much noise .
His comment that we previously only dealt with technical budgetary matters and have now realised that this is a question of budgetary policy is something that I wish to firmly reject .
I have been working in the Committee on Budgets for six years now and even before this , it was always a matter of budgetary policy and not just the technical aspect .
Mr Schulz said that he has learnt a great deal over the last few weeks .
I am pleased to hear that .
In that case , he will probably understand this now .
I will now turn to the anti-European tones that have just been heard in this House .
I would like to emphasise clearly once again that if - as stated in the Treaty of Lisbon - we have a goal to discuss new own resources for Europe , this would not only be an additional tax for European citizens , but would also mean that the payments from the gross domestic product were reduced by the same amount .
In other words , it would not simply put a greater burden on citizens , it would also provide a more transparent system for our own resources .
This needs to be debated .
I reject the attempt to manipulate opinion by implying that there will only be additional burdens .
Rather , the goal is to find an intelligent financing system .
The Council and Parliament should be prepared to do that .
My second comment , because it has simply been presented here as if European taxpayers are always having things taken away from them by the European Union , is that there are education programmes for European citizens , there is new infrastructure , there are new languages and there is help for dairy farmers .
In other words , what we are doing here is in the well-understood interests of European citizens , and that needs to be said loud and clear .
What is the global role of the European Union in the coming years ?
We have such successful countries as China , India , Brazil and others with which we compete at a global level .
If , as the European Union , we want to be strong and to have new products that will hopefully also be sustainable , new production methods that are environmentally responsible , energy generation that is genuinely based on renewable energy sources , which was once again established as a goal in Cancún , then for this we also need appropriate resources and we need the European budget , which reflects our common interests .
I hope that we will move in this direction in the next few years .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome the fact that we have finally come to an agreement on the 2011 budget .
This will ensure financial security for the vulnerable agriculture sector .
EU agricultural policy needs a stable budget framework , in particular , during difficult times .
A twelve-part budget would have caused serious financial difficulties for many Member States which have already passed on agricultural payments to farmers .
Agriculture is heavily dependent on EU subsidies .
Farming families need the security to plan ahead for the future of their businesses .
Throughout the EU , direct payments represent 40 % of farm incomes and provide financial security against a background of low producer prices , increasing production costs and fluctuating markets .
The measures which form part of the rural development programme bring direct benefits for rural areas and stimulate regional economies .
Farms in Austria , in particular , benefit from both the 1st and 2nd pillar measures .
A total of 58 percent of Austria 's annual agricultural budget comes from the EU .
Farmers in the European Union have a wide range of responsible jobs to do which are increasing in number .
They have to produce top quality food and comply with high standards of animal welfare while helping to prevent climate change , protect the environment and maintain biodiversity .
In order to be able to provide these essential services , farmers must have a reliable income based on sensible , stable EU financial policy .
As far as the negotiations on the financial framework for 2014-2020 are concerned , all aspects of agriculture must have the same level of budget funding .
in writing . - ( EL ) The impasse in the first stage of the 2011 EU budget caused by the intransigent stand taken by a limited minority of Member States almost took us into the fiasco of twelfths and all that such a system implies , both in terms of the budgets of the economically weak Member States and the possibility of serious delay in payments of European funds .
In order to avoid this fiasco , Parliament has demonstrated the necessary sense of responsibility and is prepared to accept a budget , despite the fact that it does not satisfy all its demands and is not up to par , as the European public might expect if we are to tackle the economic crisis .
However , the problem as to how budgetary needs are to be addressed in the immediate future for 2012 and 2013 persists and I call on this small minority of Member States to demonstrate a proper sense of responsibility and to work with Parliament to find a solution that will give the EU the necessary flexibility to address its needs and prevent a new budgetary crisis .
Credit rating agencies ( debate )

The next item is the report by Mr Gauzès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 on credit rating agencies - C7-0143 / 2010 - .

Mr President , Mr Chastel , Commissioner , here we are in the third act of the financial legislation for 2010 .
Following supervision , following the directive on alternative investment fund managers , we are once again looking at credit rating agencies .
I say ' once again ' because Europe has not been slow in bringing in a regulation in this area which was conceived in 2009 and which is now taking effect .
Credit rating agencies , in general , issue opinions , literally in the form of ratings , on the creditworthiness of businesses and states and on complex financial products .
The rating reflects an assessment of the risk of issuers of financial instruments not being able to honour their debts .
These agencies have gradually become very important in the financial world , for a variety of reasons .
First , ratings are taken into account in banking regulations in order to determine the amounts of own funds that will be used to back investments .
The second reason is that ratings have been a factor in the success of issues , since they have become a major indicator for investors .
Yet , although credit rating agencies were not the main cause of the recent financial crisis , they did have a harmful influence .
Indeed , they underestimated the probability that issuers of certain complex financial instruments would default .
Faced with the need to restore confidence in the markets and to strengthen protection for investors , in 2009 , the European Commission proposed a mechanism for monitoring and supervising credit rating agencies .
Thus , in the same year , Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 on credit rating agencies was adopted .
During the debates in the European Parliament preceding the adoption of this regulation , your rapporteur stressed the need for EU-wide joint oversight of credit rating agencies ' products and integrated supervision of them .
At the time , European supervision of this type was legally impossible .
However , the Commission undertook to draft a legislative proposal along these lines , and you , Commissioner , kept this promise .
The agreement reached between the Council and the European Parliament on the architecture of European supervision , which will enter into force on 1 January 2011 , now makes the effective implementation of rating agency supervision possible .
It is stressed in the Regulation establishing the European Securities and Markets Authority that this authority will exercise its own supervisory powers in relation , in particular , to credit rating agencies .
That was the objective of the additional amending regulation on which we reached an agreement and on which we will vote tomorrow .
What I wanted - and my colleagues supported this request - was for the other issues relating to credit rating agencies , allocation of sovereign debt , remuneration schemes and competition , to be postponed and dealt with in a study taking the form of an own-initiative report , which will precede the legislative proposal that you are due to make in the first half of 2011 and for which you have launched a consultation .
I believe that , by establishing European supervision of credit agencies , we are taking a big step along the same lines as the supervision arrangements that have been implemented .
I now want to thank the Belgian Presidency for its tireless efforts on the financial dossiers , you and your teams , Commissioner , and , obviously , my fellow Members in the European Parliament who participated in this study and who supported our positions .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after Mr Gauzès and a report of this kind , it is clearly a pleasure to be among you on behalf of the Belgian Finance Minister , Didier Reynders , on the day of the debate concerning the amendment of the regulation on credit rating agencies .
Once again , as you have just said , we are talking about a measure relating to financial services on which the three institutions have just reached an agreement in record time .
We are also very pleased that this agreement will be voted on in Parliament tomorrow , as agreed , between the three institutions .
The regulation will therefore be modified to allocate additional powers to the European Securities and Markets Authority .
This will allow the authority to exercise stricter supervision of the activities of credit rating agencies throughout the Union .
This is an important step which we also think will contribute to improving the stability of the financial markets , and which will support the development of a much more effective supervisory framework .
Once the regulation enters into force , therefore , the authority will have powers concerning the registration and direct supervision of credit rating agencies .
It will also have the power to determine that a credit rating agency has infringed the regulation in force and the power to impose appropriate penalties .
Of course , a framework will also be provided for cooperation between the competent authorities in the Member States and the European Securities and Markets Authority .
However , we are prepared to have a more in-depth debate on the issue of regulating the credit rating agency sector itself once the Commission has provided us with its proposal on the comprehensive review of this sector , which is set for next year .
While I am obviously hoping for a positive result from your vote tomorrow , I would particularly like to thank the Chair of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Mrs Bowles , Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Gauzès , and its shadow rapporteurs , of course , as well as Commissioner Barnier , who , alongside the Belgian Finance Minister , Mr Reynders , carried out important work for six months , securing swift agreements that have been transformed in this very Parliament into real decisions in the financial sector .
Anyway , thank you for your fruitful and effective collaboration in this area .
I am sure that you will continue this work during the Presidencies to come .


Mr President , good afternoon to you all .
You spoke very well , Mr Gauzès , as did Mr Chastel just now , on behalf of Mr Reynders , about the supervision and regulation of the large hedge fund and private equity sector , today , and about this second stage of credit rating agency regulation , tomorrow , which is clearly being undertaken with and thanks to you , ladies and gentlemen , and thanks to the Council and to the initial work of the Commission .
On the subject of regulation , Europe is making concrete and effective progress , and it is learning the lessons of the crisis , as all taxpayers , who are also European citizens , are demanding .
Ladies and gentlemen , the agreement on the supervision of credit rating agencies is an important step , and I , too , would like to thank you , Mr Gauzès , and , of course , those working alongside you , the Committee Chair , Mrs Bowles , as well as the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Klinz , Mr Giegold , Mr Pittella and Mr Fox .




In a few days ' time , this Presidency will come to an end , having had much success and having made a lot of progress , and I want to give my sincere thanks to Mr Reynders and to his whole team for the good relations we have maintained throughout the last six months .
This is a good agreement , even though I have to say that it would have been excellent if , in the final compromise , we had taken up the rules that the Commission initially proposed for reinforced transparency regarding structured financial instruments .
However , as was indicated in the recitals of the regulation , we will come back to this subject , if you wish , during the next revision of the regulation in 2011 .
As Mr Chastel said just now , from July 2011 , this amendment to the 2009 regulation will give ESMA , the new Securities and Markets Authority , the direct power to supervise credit rating agencies at European level .
Ladies and gentlemen , the importance of this decision that you are taking today really must be understood .
This is the first time that ESMA , this new European authority , will have the power to directly supervise financial institutions operating across Europe .
This amendment completes the new European supervision framework .
It strengthens ESMA 's powers considerably , as you explained very well , Mr Gauzès , and as Mr Giegold , who is here , was also anxious to point out during the debate on supervision .
This is therefore a very important subject for you , and it is also a very important subject for us .
ESMA will become the institution responsible for registering rating agencies and supervising them throughout the Union , and it will exercise strict control .
The legislation will grant it all the supervisory powers deemed necessary to force rating agencies to comply with the terms of the regulation .
ESMA will be able to exercise supervision - I am thinking here of requests for information and the power to carry out spot checks - and if it notices that a credit rating agency is committing a violation , it will have to take the measures necessary to force the agency to put a stop to that violation .
ESMA will also have the power , strictly regulated by clear rules , to impose fines and penalties on rating agencies which do not respect the regulation .
Clearly , this regulation also guarantees the rights of defence of rating agencies , in particular , the right to a hearing , access to documents and other procedural guarantees .
Finally , when exercising a supervisory power , ESMA will respect the rights enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the other principles and provisions of European Union law , including the proportionality principle .
The new regulation on rating agencies will also ensure a single point of contact for all rating agencies , a regulatory framework which is harmonised across the European Union , with equal treatment , and a more consistent application of the rules for agencies throughout the European Union .
I therefore think that this represents a considerable gain in efficiency , transparency and security within the general architecture that we are constructing week by week in order to achieve intelligent supervision and effective regulation .
Mr President , I do not want to speak at great length as I did just now , but I would perhaps like to expand on what Mr Chastel said and mention the next stage , since I myself said that we must go further to ensure the proper regulation of rating agencies , while noting that the agencies are not creating the problem and the turbulence on the financial markets .
The thermometer does not cause the fever , but it still needs to work properly , which was not the case in the past , and that is what we want to remedy , so to speak , with these successive regulations .
The Commission is already considering the next stage : a public consultation was launched on 5 November 2010 to broaden this debate and to collect the points of view of all the parties concerned , and , as you know , there is nothing artificial about the debates regarding all these regulations .
Ladies and gentlemen , I truly set great store by listening to every contribution , criticism or idea made in the context of these consultations .
We shall now consider , first , the consequences of the issuer-pays model , which is widespread among rating agencies ; second , the dependence of the banks and other institutional investors on credit ratings ; third , the rating of sovereign debt - which is not a straightforward matter ; fourth , increasing transparency in order to manage conflicts of interest better ; and fifth , creating more competition and diversity in this rating agencies market , which is currently concentrated in too few hands .
This consultation is open until next January and , on the basis of all the responses that we receive , and of Mr Klinz 's own-initiative report , we will take a decision at some point in 2011 , but not too late , regarding the measures that we want to implement in order to complete , through a third stage , these two regulations on rating agencies , which are now almost implemented .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Mr President , as a Vice-Chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I would like to present some important aspects that were the subject of the debates and amendments tabled in this committee .
Firstly , at the present time , payment for the structured instruments evaluated by the agencies is made by the issuing company .
There can be conflicts of interest because the rated companies are interested in having a good rating .
Alternatively , it might be the users of ratings who pay .
The users ' interests are more diverse and therefore , there is not a single interest that can lead to a conflict of interest .
There are users who prefer a good rating , for instance , when they want to sell shares , and those who prefer a bad rating , for instance when they want to buy shares .
Secondly , the regime for the rating agencies could profit from the rules that have been established for the auditors .
The rating agencies and auditors have a lot of responsibility for the good reputation of companies and the proper functioning of the market .
Auditors , however , seem to be subject to far stricter rules than the rating agencies .
Thirdly , the European Securities and Markets Authority , ESMA , should have supervisory competence over the credit rating agencies in order to verify possible material discrepancies between the ratings given by different agencies for the same structured financial instrument .
ESMA should also have greater power of enforcement .
Fourthly , the directive introduces a new principle , taken from the latest US legislation .
When an agency other than the one contracted to make the valuation can do its valuation for the same instrument , it is subject to the contracted valuation .
For this , the first agency must disclose certain information regarding the valuated instrument .
In such a way , two beneficial effects are obtained - firstly , there is a second opinion and , secondly , the liability that falls on the contracted agency is reduced .
Finally , I want to underline the fact that the provisions of this directive , which represents a new regulatory frame , should only apply to the structured financial instruments , credit rating agencies themselves being an important part of structured finance .
The remainder of the financial instruments , 150 year-old common shares or plain bonds which do not pose a systemic risk should not be part of this directive if you want to be tight but not to over-regulate , if you want to be competitive but not expensive in administrative costs , and if you want to hold capital in Europe and not drive it away to the emerging markets abroad .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to our now tried-and-tested cooperation , we have worked productively with Mr Gauzès on this regulation to ensure some important advances in the rules governing one of the most controversial areas for the stability of the financial markets .
One such improvement is undoubtedly the plan for the newly formed European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) to be able to directly penalise credit rating agencies for misconduct .
This was a point that I very much insisted on .
Parliament is showing in this way that it is fighting for the creation of a strong European supervisory body that is equipped with real powers .
We are also aware that this regulation still does not tackle all the problems in a sector which , in recent years , has been seen to have exacerbated the crisis .
The stumbling blocks to be overcome , which are the subject of a parliamentary report already being drafted by Mr Klinz , concern two issues in particular : the evaluation of Member States ' sovereign debt and the general structure of a market characterised by an obvious oligopoly .
The European Union must have a clear objective in relation to these issues , namely , to make finance less dependent on ratings .
The references currently contained in the laws and regulations on credit rating agencies must be superseded by alternative creditworthiness standards .
The United States and the G20 have already gone in that direction .
At international level we need to have the courage and the ambition to change the rules underpinning Basel II , by which I mean the obligation to use ratings - a mechanism that has actually led the banking sector , in the past and still today , to completely give up on supervision , the consequences of which are plain to see .
I shall conclude with a brief reference to the issue of sovereign debt rating : this should no longer be the responsibility of credit rating agencies , because too often they have exasperated market sentiment with their ratings , fuelling speculation .
We should give thought instead to the possibility of a European institution - perhaps an existing institution , such as the European Court of Auditors - playing a role in this area .
I really do hope that my suggestions will be endorsed by my fellow Members and will receive the full , authoritative support of Commissioner Barnier , for whom I wish to reiterate my high regard .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a few weeks ' time , we will have a new supervisory structure in Europe , which has been shaped to a considerable extent by the European Parliament .
Among these three new supervisory authorities will be one that is responsible for markets and securities : the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) .
ESMA will have the last word in connection with the registration and oversight of credit rating agencies and be responsible for ensuring that the credit rating agencies actually comply with the new regulations .
If it so wishes , ESMA can delegate this cross-border responsibility to national supervisory authorities if these supervisory authorities are small and only operate nationally .
This proposal is therefore nothing more than an adaptation of the regulation of April 2009 to the new circumstances , but it strengthens the role of ESMA .
It gives the new supervisory authority more powers and - something that is completely new - it gives ESMA the power to punish non-application of the regulation .
I very much welcome this , because I believe that strengthening the position of a new supervisory authority of European mould will genuinely increase its credibility on the market .
I just have one point of criticism .
When drawing up the regulation in April 2009 , we took a political decision with regard to how we should deal with ratings from third countries in Europe .
We said at that time that they can be used in Europe if they either comply with the equivalence procedure or are supported by a credit rating agency that is registered and approved in Europe , the so-called endorsement procedure .
The Commission has now changed this at level 2 and said that endorsement will no longer be possible .
Therefore , only the equivalence procedure actually applies .
I consider this - as it was undertaken unilaterally - to be an undemocratic way of going about things , and I believe that we should stick to the decision that we made at the time in April 2009 .
As the Commissioner also mentioned , there are still a lot of outstanding issues where credit rating agencies are concerned , namely , the lack of competition , insufficient transparency , the business model as to whether the issuer or the investor should pay , which need to be looked at critically .
There are questions with regard to the payment system and also with regard to excessive dependency , because in reality , it is the case that , as a result of regulatory provisions , many ratings agencies have become de facto regulatory certification authorities .
I am taking this up in the own-initiative report , and I am pleased that the Commission is going to table a legislative proposal on this matter in the next year .



Mr President , Mr Chastel , Mr Barnier , Mr Gauzès , ladies and gentlemen and shadow rapporteurs , I am indeed pleased that we have now taken this step and that for the first time , a sector of the European financial system will be placed under direct European supervision .
It is also a step towards a strong Europe in an internal market and the firm control of a sector that contributed to the crisis .
I would like to make one more comment on this .
Mr Barnier , the selection process is , of course , currently under way for the new authorities , and the new authorities are only as good as their staff .
I can only hope that the staff will genuinely be selected on the basis of expertise , independence from the financial industry that they are to control and the clear desire to serve in the public interest , and that we will not see national quotas again in the selection process that disregard these important criteria .
In addition , we still have a great deal to do in the area of credit rating agencies .
We still have no real transparency when it comes to the information with which the credit rating agencies work and there is far too great a use of regulatory ratings in the financial sector and in the regulations governing the financial industry .
We have serious conflicts of interest , we quite clearly have a market power of three major providers and there is no liability for negligently issued ratings .
Commissioner , it is good that the consultation is now under way and we await the results with interest .
Civil society , in particular , should be involved in this consultation , but then you need to put forward a courageous proposal .
I am already looking forward to your proposal .
Please be as courageous as you have been up to now , and let us produce legislation together during the next year that solves the problems that are still present on the credit rating market in a genuinely European way .
We owe this to our citizens .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Gauzès for his excellent work on this subject .
I am pleased that Articles 8a and 8b were removed during the trialogue .
Initially , the Commission 's draft proposed creating secure websites .
I was never convinced .
We can see how the situation unfolds in the United States , and if the sites turn out to be useful , we can always introduce them here in Europe afterwards .
Mr President , I am delighted to inform you that my group will vote in favour of this report tomorrow , and I thank Mr Gauzès once again .


Mr President , Mr Chastel , Mr Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , the last few months since the beginning of this year have shown the damage that credit rating agencies can do .
There is therefore an urgent need for action .
I , too , therefore welcome the directive , in particular , the fact that the supervision and registration of credit rating agencies will be transferred to ESMA .
That is an important and positive step in the right direction .
However , numerous good and progressive proposals fell by the wayside during the negotiations on the report .
I would like to mention this once again .
Thus , the appointment of ESMA remains the only real and positive change .
The proposals for a public database for the issuing of credit ratings have been dropped , as has any reference to the establishment of a public credit rating agency .
The consistent and continual examination of issued ratings by the supervisory authorities has also been forgotten about .
Moreover , the Commission had proposed the promotion of unsolicited credit ratings in order to deal with the disastrous issuer instructions for the evaluation of financial market products .
This , too , has come to nothing .
I hope that these aspects will be taken into consideration in the reports on this matter that are still to come and that were mentioned by Mr Gauzès and by you , Mr Barnier .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are nearing the time of fervent prayers in light of today 's news , once again concerning the euro , for which we are grateful .
I very much hope that , with your courageous approach , you will not be too far behind the times .
I would like to endorse what the previous speaker said and ask you urgently to ensure , in your sphere of influence , that selections will not only be made on the basis of national quotas , but also that party political preferences will be put aside so that we can finally break with a very awkward tradition in connection with officials , which is specific to Europe , and actually bring in the best people .
My second request is for much greater transparency with regard to the competitors on the international market outside the EU , which have constantly made a political issue out of their ratings and have suggested that they have an omniscience that in no way corresponds to what is actually happening on the market or even their importance .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Gauzès , ladies and gentlemen , it is truly a great pleasure for me to note that Mr Gauzès has created such an excellent report .
The topic is of extreme importance , and looking at the habits and operation of credit rating agencies , it always has relevance .
The rapporteur 's effort to ensure that credit rating agencies and their products are controlled in an integrated way , on the basis of uniform EU standards , deserves support .
However , it is important to know what exactly is being rated and how .
We must ask these questions , as it is common knowledge that prior to the crisis , these credit rating agencies gave excellent ratings to several thousand billion dollars worth of doubtful or bad securities , thereby unfortunately providing unlimited ground for speculation .
First of all , we must examine the issue of independence , because if it is true that banks and certain investor groups are financing the fees of the evaluations , we might ask the question whether the decisions of credit rating agencies are indeed free of external interests .
The second issue is the methodology of ratings .
The third issue is that with concerted downgrades and negative rumours , any country can be made insolvent , and in this way , it can be forced to take out new loans and thus remain an increasingly vulnerable client in the debtors ' market .
Small , open economies and Member States outside the euro area are particularly vulnerable .
I am therefore convinced that it is incorrect to accept that credit rating agencies are not responsible for the ratings they give .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us put ratings in their appropriate place , and rely on them only to the extent of their credibility , and consider them as guidelines when establishing the regulatory framework .
The report is more than worthy of support .
The global economic crisis has shown that the regulation and EU level supervision of the operations of these institutions are necessary .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Chastel , Commissioner , credit rating agencies played , and are still playing , a dishonourable role in the financial crisis .
There are too few of them , they are too powerful and too lacking in transparency , and their structure and importance is an example of how badly things have gone awry with our global financial system .
Confidence in credit rating agencies can only be restored by establishing new , sound rules for them .
Tomorrow , we will vote on one step in this development , the necessary adaptation of credit rating agencies to the new European financial market supervisory structure and adaptation to the new comitology procedure , the delegated acts .
ESMA will be brought into being .
It is authorised to permanently revise ratings , carry out a thorough inspection of credit rating agencies and also to impose penalties that are higher than the profit gained from breaking the law .
All of these are new developments that are , as a minimum , absolutely necessary .
However , I would like to point out that the European Securities and Markets Authority should be staffed in such a way as to enable it to actually carry out its tasks efficiently and not by a relatively small staff of ESMA employees who are expected to perform almost superhuman tasks .
We should be completely open with regard to the forthcoming major reform of the credit rating agencies and today , we should discuss what seems to be almost impossible or hard to imagine .
After all , special purpose entities in which banks deposited their junk bonds received the highest credit rating from the credit rating agencies .
Thus , in the major revision , we should consider creating a European public rating agency and changing and examining the payment model .
Finally , we should , of course , consider whether there is a need for a second rating .
We need a serious , robust form of regulation so that it cannot happen again that three large agencies can bear so much of the responsibility for this current sorry financial situation .
Mr President , this reminds me of a phrase in Latin that goes quis custodiet custodes , who will guard the guards ?
The same is true here .
Who is going to rate the credit agencies ?
Thankfully , we now have an instrument that will do that and , certainly , the credit rating agencies have brought no credit on themselves ; rather ; they have discredited themselves by their behaviour over the last couple of years and they have exacerbated the financial situation rather than alleviate it .
So I am delighted that the European Parliament and our authorities are taking control of the situation and I compliment Mr Gauzès , Mr Barnier and the Council for putting in place an instrument that will deal with this .
I am certainly looking forward to tomorrow 's vote on this and , if I am given the opportunity , I will vote three or four times to bring these vultures under control .
( LT ) Firstly , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the preparation of this very important document .
To date , much has been done as regards the creation of a system for financial control and its operation in the European Union .
Credit rating agencies play a very important role as they have a direct impact on the operation of the financial system , its soundness and stability .
I feel that one major problem is the fact that the EU financial supervisory authorities being set up do not yet have real powers which would enable them to have a direct impact and to take binding decisions .
I therefore support the proposals giving one of the European supervisory authorities , in this case , the European Securities and Markets Authority , greater powers to ensure and monitor the transparency of the work of credit rating agencies certified by the EU in order to avoid distortions of the principles of the financial market and the single internal market .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , if we wish to be honest , we must unfortunately declare that credit rating agencies are essentially subsidiaries of the international plutocracy .
Through the agencies , they put pressure on countries in an attempt to influence their decisions .
The greatest problem with ratings is that they are almost entirely subjective and do not offer an accurate picture of the economic condition of the countries concerned at a given moment in time .
These ratings , which are a far cry from reality , clearly hinder countries in recovering from the crisis .
Meanwhile , there are , of course , objective indicators , such as the general government deficit or external and internal indebtedness .
On the other hand , the establishment of an organisation , a supervisory body , which essentially provides quality control for these institutions , and thereby prevents them from giving often erroneous ratings , is a big step towards a solution .
However , I would , at any rate , like to address a question to Mr Barnier regarding the ESMA : we have talked much about how it would impose various sanctions , but when will we know what these sanctions will be , what their extent will be and when they can be introduced ?
I thank you in advance for your reply .

( RO ) Mr President , the aim of the amendments suggested by Mr Gauzès 's report is to provide additional details concerning ESMA 's new powers in relation to national agencies .
My view is that the remit should be defined very clearly .
In addition , financial market participants should be able to identify the competent authority in the rating agencies sector .
I think that the new authority should have sole responsibility for registering and supervising existing rating agencies .
They should have the opportunity to access information about the financial instruments being evaluated by competitors .
At the same time , access to websites should only be given if the confidentiality of the information requested can be guaranteed .
Finally , I wish to stress the importance of a credit rating agency being registered by a competent authority and its validity throughout the whole EU .
Mr President , I am pleased that this is before us here this evening .
I have to say that one of the points that is very rarely made is that , until recently , the public sector in Ireland was being regulated by the private sector ; it was being regulated effectively by the credit rating agencies and the markets .
I am one of those who welcome the fact that we got away from the private sector and , at least , we have the shield of the ECB , the EU and the IMF in the circumstances we are in .
I might not agree with the exact package but I think it is a better position for us to be in than to be at the mercy of the credit rating agencies and the markets .
The markets are supposed to be free ; I think that is something we might have a debate on some other day .
But , in relation to the credit rating agencies , one of those agencies was getting USD 800 million a year for rating structured finances .
Their impartiality really is being called into account and , when we look back on what they did in the past and even when we look back on what they do now , I think we will look back in dismay .
It is time they were called to account and I am glad that there will be stronger supervision for these bodies .
Mr President , I would like to respond accurately , but succinctly to all those who have spoken , to whom I give my thanks .

First , Mr Bodu , I obviously share your point of view on the risks of the issuer-pays model .
I made this point myself in my speech just now .
It is therefore a subject which forms part of our consultation in the future proposal , the third stage .
As I said to Mr Fox and Mrs Băsescu , we will indeed also return to the matter of structured products .
Mr Fox , I listened carefully to your concerns about security as regards exchanges of information , and we will keep an eye on this ; we will come back to this point .
We will also continue to rely on the competence of ESMA in this area .
For us , this is a question of efficiency .
Mr Pittella , thank you for your encouragement .
I think that it is good that , like Mr Klute and Mrs Gáll-Pelcz , you emphasise the importance of this new supervisory authority .
There are still some difficult issues to be addressed , which we have identified , and you yourself quite rightly reminded us of them : the lack of competition in this sector , the issue of rating sovereign debt , which Mr Kelly mentioned just now , and which poses a particular problem .
We will take these ideas into account in the new consultation phase .
I share Mr Klinz 's view on the importance of penalties and the ability of ESMA to impose them .
Mrs Regner also mentioned this point .

On the issue of third countries , Mr Klinz , the aim is to ensure that our requirements remain rigorous , and I say this also to Mr Mitchell , who mentioned Europe 's credibility with respect to these decisions which must be taken .

I am grateful to Mr Giegold for his positive assessment of the progress that we have made together today .
On the subject of recruiting people to manage the European authorities , I obviously cannot provide any specific information about names at the moment , but I would like to say to you , Mr Giegold , and also to Mr Martin , that the process is now under way , that it is being conducted completely objectively , and that , as far as I am concerned , the criteria according to which the choice must be made are competence and independence .
I would also say to Mrs Regner that the agencies will gain in power .
From the very first teams , they will develop in accordance with the competences that they have been and will be given .
We are anxious to ensure the credibility of the agencies ' work in terms of methods and competences .
Mr Klute , thank you for your comments .
You have clearly identified the problems which remain to be dealt with , and I am conscious , as I have said to several Members , that we will have to thoroughly examine these issues .
That is why the idea of dealing with this issue of regulating the agencies in three stages seems to me to be constructive and positive .
Mr Balčytis , the agencies , as I have said myself , are not creating the problems .
They just need to evaluate the problems properly and the thermometer needs to work properly .
With regard to products , businesses and states , we have the right , considering the importance of these ratings , to expect and to take steps to obtain an evaluation or rating which is objective and credible .
I think that from this point of view , Mr Balčytis , you should not underestimate the role that ESMA will play .
Finally , I would also say in response to Mr Szegedi that , regarding the level of the penalties , the specifications for ESMA in the text that you will be adopting go into detail on this , and that ESMA will apply these penalties in accordance with the proportionality principle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank you in advance for your vote of support for this new stage , which will show - I repeat once more - that Europe is making concrete and objective progress , that it is learning the lessons of the crisis , thanks to the support and the impetus given by the Belgian Presidency , and thanks to the support of all the groups in the European Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first , I would like to come back to the fact that many good questions have been asked in this debate .
Commissioner Barnier addressed them one by one .
I would simply like to say to you that this modification , this amendment of the regulation , is a first step in granting the necessary supervisory powers to the European Securities and Markets Authority , and that , as has been said , other revisions of this regulation will take place shortly .
I think that , on this issue , and on many other important issues raised today , this will truly be an opportunity to bring together the whole debate in the revision which the Commission is getting ready to propose to us .
On the same note , I would like to return for a few moments to the removal of the provisions on transparency of credit ratings and associated information , which Commissioner Barnier himself mentioned just now .
I do not think that this in any way means that the European institutions do not support the idea of transparency of credit ratings - quite the contrary .
However , at this stage , when a decision is being taken , the best solution was to coordinate ourselves in advance on the basis of developments on the international stage , in order not to affect the competitiveness of the European markets .
For the moment , therefore , better solutions to this issue are still being researched , discussed and developed , and we think that the best political compromise is the one on which you will be voting tomorrow .
In conclusion , I would like to repeat that this is an important step , as many of you have stressed , which will help to improve the stability of the financial markets and which will support the development of a more effective supervisory framework .


Mr President , Mr Chastel , Mr Barnier , after the comments that you have heard , you can draw two conclusions .
The first is that Parliament will overwhelmingly support this report tomorrow , which will show once again that Parliament , or a large majority of it , appreciates the actions on regulation and supervision that are being taken by the Commission and which have been strongly supported by the Belgian Presidency .
The second conclusion that we can draw is that I will not come to a conclusion today , but that a new debate will open up , on the basis of this consultation , of Mr Klinz 's own-initiative report , to examine all these difficult questions .
Thus , we cannot avoid the fact that in 2009 , when we brought about the first regulation , we were already asking ourselves these questions .
If we have not dealt with these questions , it is because we have not found an appropriate response .
I hope , therefore , that , thanks to the thought that is being given to the matter with the submission of Mr Klinz 's report , the discussion about consultation which is taking place will this time enable us to provide responses to complete the regulation on rating agencies .
In conclusion , however , if you will allow me , I will repeat a phrase by the President of the Securities and Markets Authority , who said that , at the very least , it would be good if the financial markets detoxified themselves of the rating agencies to allow investors to gain a greater personal appreciation of situations and risks .
I think that that would also be a guarantee .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Wednesday , 15 December 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
As a result of underestimating the credit risk , credit rating agencies were one of the factors that triggered the global financial crisis .
On the other hand , there is no real competition in the credit rating agency sector .
This situation increases the danger of conflicts of interest and , by extension , of a lack of transparency and quality in terms of awarding ratings to the various financial instruments .
On 1 January 2011 , the regulation giving rise to the creation of the European Securities and Markets Authority will come into force .
Its main power will be to supervise agencies of this kind .
Introducing a mechanism for monitoring and supervising credit rating agencies at EU level is proving to be a necessity .
I think that this new authority needs to exercise its mandate as soon as it is created .
I would like to point out that the decision made by the United States to introduce tighter supervisory regulations has paved the way for global harmonisation .
The European Union has already implemented rules , which will come into force at the end of the year .
The rules for credit rating agencies that wish to operate in the EU and thus obtain a licence include , among other things , the obligation to register themselves and to comply with specific transparency and ' good behaviour ' rules .
I do not believe that these rules are strict enough , and I welcome the further measure that we are discussing within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
These agencies currently have a great deal of power ; they can plunge a State and / or even a system ( downgrading countries and causing a chain reaction of fear on the world markets ) into crisis with one of their ratings .
Their work is important in terms of guaranteeing reliability and stability , but there are doubts as to the rules and the criteria on which their ratings are based .
Mr Gauzès 's report , which proposes bringing credit rating agencies under the supervision of the European Securities and Markets Authority , is therefore along the right lines .
Outcome of the Climate Change Conference in Cancún ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the outcome of the Climate Change Conference in Cancún .
Mr President , honourable members of Parliament , I am very pleased to be here today , in the European Parliament , once again , after the debate we had prior to Cancún and now that the climate conference has produced an outcome .
I am also pleased to see a few familiar faces here again who were also present as a delegation in Cancún and who were given a mandate by the European Parliament to make a very useful and active contribution to the success of the conference .
I think that this should definitely be highlighted and underlined .
The climate summit in Cancún has ultimately been a success .
It was uncertain , right up to the very last day , whether we would reach an outcome , but , in the end , that outcome has been a positive one .
This was necessary , both for our climate policy and for the continued existence of the multilateral process .
At the climate conference , we reached a decision which actually consisted of two parts : the first part could be considered to consist of a number of specific measures which could be applied quite rapidly , and the second part lays down a number of foundations intended to facilitate a global deal for the post-2012 period over the long term .
Obviously , both of these elements were agreed in the framework of the 2 ° C target , which was included as the starting point in the outcome of the climate conference .
When I speak about immediate implementation or a number of actions which could be undertaken immediately , then I am talking about adaptation , technology , combating deforestation and financing .
Perhaps I could briefly highlight a number of things ?
First and foremost , adaptation .
We have adopted a framework and established a committee .
In that way , we will be offering support for the most vulnerable areas .
Secondly , technology .
Support will be provided for both mitigation and adaptation .
There are two new structures being created : the Executive Technology Committee and The Centre and Network for Climate Technology .
The idea is to further knowledge through research , dissemination and transfer of technologies .
Thirdly , the fight against deforestation .
The national strategies and action plans of developing countries will form the basis of financing action in the fight against deforestation .
Finally , the Green Climate Fund must ensure that USD 100 billion is made available to developing countries by 2020 .
These are the specific achievements of Cancún .
If we then look at the longer term and at the foundations which have been laid down , we should , of course , continue to work next year to bring about an international agreement after 2012 .
The mitigation measures of both developed and developing countries have now been included and embedded in the text , which is very important , because the outcome of Copenhagen has now also been officially included .
In addition , there have been efforts to ensure greater transparency .
The legal form in the longer term , in the post-2012 period , will not be determined until next year .
Now , that will be a debate in its own right : are we heading towards a second commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol and what are the emerging countries and the United States doing ?
This is not an end , therefore , but a beginning , an important new step in the climate debate .
I think that all of us - the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission - will have to continue to work hard together to ensure that we can take a major step forward next year and , hopefully , get a binding international agreement .
In any case , I would like to thank Parliament once again for the efforts it made in Cancún .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think it is fair to say that we in the European Union went to Cancún with the fear that we risked getting nothing .
Of course , we also went there with the very strong desire to ensure that this would not be the case and that we actually got a substantial and balanced package .
As you all now know , that is what we got .
This means that the multilateral process is alive .
More than that , it is relatively well and , as it could have been dead by now , that in itself is important .
I think that all those who were there also felt relief when the final deal was done .
It was as though the whole international community simply wanted this to happen and wanted to prove that of course we need multilateralism when we are fighting global challenges .
I also think that it is important to say that what we achieved in Cancún was not just about saving the process .
It was more than that , which is , of course , the essential thing .
We wanted to save the process .
We wanted to save the prospect of having a global deal and we wanted to ensure that we also got something substantial done in Cancún .
We worked very hard , together with the Mexican Presidency .
We worked very closely with them and gave them our full support from the very beginning .
I must say that the Mexicans fully deserve all the credit they have been given ; they have done excellent work .
A year ago , we took the first steps in Copenhagen .
I think that , if we had met two or three days after Copenhagen was over , few of us would have thought that , one year later , all the elements of the Copenhagen Accord would be included in a binding UN agreement .
That is really good .
But in Cancún , we also took new steps .
We strengthened the international climate regime with new institutions and new funds .
I would like to stress three things that were particularly important to the European Union in the end game - which was very much Friday , as some of those present will recall .
We had three priorities which we wanted to be reflected in the result .
We wanted recognition of the gap between the emission reduction pledges of the Copenhagen Accord now being anchored in the UN text and the challenge of keeping global warming below 2 ° C. It was very important , to state the obvious , that we are not there yet .
We also very much wanted to have increased transparency - through measuring , reporting and verification ( MRV ) , and international consultation and analysis ( ICA ) .
Thirdly , we wanted the possibility of a future legal framework for the period beyond 2012 to be reflected in the text .
On all three points , we made progress .
For the first time , the 2 ° C objective is acknowledged in a UN document , the pledges are anchored and the obvious has been stated , namely , that countries need to do more for the world to stay below the 2 ° C rise . We also started a process to strengthen transparency and , as we said in Cancún , it is not enough just to say that you are in favour of increased transparency .
What does that mean ?
It is very important that the text now contains several pages spelling out exactly what the political guidance for MRV and ICA would be .
That is very important and I would like to add one further point .
I think that it is not just of interest to the international climate negotiations that , for instance , a country like China has now accepted international consultation and analysis .
I think that is also an important signal that reaches far beyond the climate negotiations .
This was actually a very important and significant step forward .
Finally , we managed to keep open the discussion about the Kyoto Protocol and a future legal outcome .
I think that , if we had not had the prospect of having a second commitment period , it is very likely that the process would have been dead by now .
Having said these positive things , I would like to echo what Joke Schauvliege has just said to the effect that this does not mean that we have a very easy year ahead of us .
We have a long and challenging journey to make .
We saw in Cancún how slow the process is .
When you take steps together in the UN context , it is slow by definition , so no one should believe that the road to South Africa is going to be an easy one .
The year ahead of us is a very challenging one .
The only thing I would say at this stage is that Europe will do whatever we can to continue to play this very constructive role and to try to build bridges between different points of view , while bearing our own priorities very much in mind .
I think it is very important now that everybody goes back home and starts to do things in their own nation , in their own region and in their own municipality .
All must now take action , as we are doing in Europe .
We have our 2020 target and we have also initiated the discussion about how we could eventually increase our ambitions in the short term .
As you know , in the spring , the Commission will present a strategy for completing the transition to a low carbon economy by 2050 .
That strategy will also include a 2030 objective .
Let me finish with a word about the European Union in the climate change conference .
I would like to highlight that we actually managed to speak with one voice .
We were discussing earlier in this forum how important that is .
The Commission , the Presidency and the 27 Member States ensured that the European Union played its part on the world stage .
I am pleased to say that there was excellent cooperation between Minister Schauvliege and her team and my team from the Commission .
I would like to thank Joke Schauvliege very much for her contribution towards this result .
Last , but of course not least , I would very much like to thank the Parliament delegation .
I think that they contributed a great deal towards conveying the message that Europe really was speaking with one voice .
I would particularly like to thank the Chair of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , Jo Leinen .
I think that it was crucial that , when members of the delegation were addressed and asked about the European position , they all tried to stick to the common denominator .
I think that contributed a lot to the general impression that this time , Europe actually was speaking with one voice .
Thank you very much for that .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to endorse the congratulating of Commissioner Hedegaard .
We have learnt a significant amount from the events of last year , particularly with regard to speaking with one voice .
If we compare the situation now with Copenhagen , we can say that we went to Copenhagen with high expectations and we were very disappointed .
We went to Cancún with lower expectations and we nevertheless managed to achieve something there .
I am convinced that next year in Durban , we will actually achieve the result that we are all hoping for .
It is important that the UN process is now up and running and that in the European Union , we are aware that many paths lead to the same goal .
Our common goal is to limit global warming to the celebrated 2 ºC .
We have now managed for the first time to enshrine this in a UN document .
However , even in Europe , we have come to realise that the famous binding agreement is not enough .
We also need to recognise the efforts of other countries - and this , in particular , includes the large emitters like the United States and China .
For us , it is extremely important from a political point of view that we are united in our efforts , and we succeeded in demonstrating this in Cancún .
However , it is also important that , as the developed world , we not only live up to our historic responsibility , we also need to do something , and , above all , we must find a successor regulation for the Kyoto Protocol .
It is also just as important that the developing world recognises that efforts are also required by them .
I believe that we succeeded very well in doing that , and we are on the right track here .
The details have already been mentioned .
For me , what seems to be particularly important is the fact that we have made definite progress , particularly in the fight against deforestation .
The individual countries are called on to develop national strategies , and we will then see what they achieve .
That part is very important for us , including from a political point of view .
We have a responsibility with regard to technology transfer .
We need to take more of a leading role in this regard , but , overall , my assessment is a positive one and I would like to thank you once again , Commissioner , for your efforts .
Mr President , we would like to thank the Commission and the Council , Mrs Hedegaard and Mrs Schauvliege , for the daily briefings that the European Parliament delegation received in Cancún .
We can truly say that , in Cancún , the EU was not part of the problem but , in many cases , was part of the solution .
That should please all of us .
The positive mood must now be utilised to bring new momentum to climate policy in Europe and also to the European Union .
I would just like to mention three points .
It was absolutely right for Parliament , in its resolution , to call for us to raise our ambitions and achieve a reduction in CO2 of 30 % by 2020 , and I hope that the Commission and the Council will adopt decisions on this in the spring .
Secondly , we have the Green Climate Fund .
We proposed the introduction of a financial transaction tax to finance this .
The people who rejected this must now come up with alternatives - we can no longer beat about the bush .
Thirdly , we must do our homework .
We must take the hot air out of the EU 's carbon footprint .
My final point is this : This climate conference is done .
Now let us look to the next one .
The work must now be stepped up .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I have absolutely no interest in football but occasionally I have seen pictures of a game , and I have looked at the manager and thought of the Commissioner .
Two-one down and , despite her best efforts , her team faces relegation ; then a goal is scored .
I do not know who scores it - maybe the goalkeeper on the opposite side walks into the net carrying his own ball - but one way or another it is a draw ; a vital point is secured and relegation is avoided .
It is not a triumph , but it is not a defeat ; and the manager lives to fight another day .
I am told that , at Cancún , a great cheer went up when there was a resolution to the negotiations .
I can understand the relief of delegates there of it not being a defeat , but it was hardly a triumph .
Where is the mention of curbing the rise in temperatures by 2015 ?
Where is the ambition to cut CO2 emissions by 50 % by 2050 ?
Where are the post-Kyoto commitments ?
Fudged and dodged and kicked into the long grass .
But criticism is easy ; what is being attempted has never been done before .
It requires the governments of the world to join together in collective action ; that , of course , is why the critics on the nationalist Right hate it so much .
Every government in the world accepts the science and accepts that we are not doing enough to stop world temperatures rising by two degrees centigrade .
Even China , this time , recognised that there are limits to national sovereignty and accepted that there should be international verification of its emissions because we are in this together : one race , one species on a single planet .
There are some very difficult questions to be answered as we go forward .
How do we move from here to make a post-Kyoto binding agreement that places requirements not just upon developed countries but also upon developing countries ?
How do we secure the funding ?
Really , how do we get the money that we promised for adaptation and forest protection ?
How do we persuade our own governments to raise our 2020 ambitions from 20 % to 30 % cuts in CO2 ?
But maybe we have an answer to that .
With China well on its way to reducing its carbon intensity by 45 % , it is in our economic interest to make sure that we take these measures , or we are going to be left behind economically .
Maybe now , thanks to our not being defeated at Cancún , we have the momentum - the sense that we are going forward again - to make the changes that are necessary .

Mr President , like Mr Leinen , I wanted to emphasise the remarkable work that Commissioner Hedegaard and her team carried out in Cancún .
Today , in a way , the success of Cancún means that we have to call a halt to the strategy of saying that , if the others take no action , we will take no action .
The positive aspect of Cancún is that everyone must now engage with the machine of international negotiation , in particular , by strengthening their national or regional objectives .
In terms of the objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions , Europe now has to reach 30 % .
Reaching 30 % is part of the objective of obtaining a decarbonised economy by 2050 ; 20 % will not allow us to make this transition .
Finally , in reaching 30 % , we will also clearly be linking up now with the emerging economies : Brazil , China and South Africa .
We know that these countries have some objectives which , up to a point , are currently superior to those of the European Union .
We must therefore put a stop to inaction and the strategy of the status quo .
The success of Cancún means that we must engage with the process of international negotiation in a much more constructive manner .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I was not fortunate enough to be on the Parliament delegation in Cancún , but I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate everyone who was involved .
I was perhaps a bit of a cynic about whether these sorts of meetings could achieve anything but , whilst there have been many voices in the press complaining about a lack of detail , particularly - as Jo Leinen suggests - about lack of detail in the area of financing for the Green Fund and many other issues that have been left unspecified at this stage , I take the optimistic view that this gathering was not the time or the place for dealing with minute detail , but was the time to flesh out the global aspirations and talk a bit about strategy , and I think that has been achieved .
In my group , the ECR , we believe in light-touch government .
We believe that you will achieve more by encouragement , not by haranguing , and I believe that this is a step closer to that .
I can do no better than to close with the words of my Prime Minister , David Cameron , when he said yesterday ' The Cancún agreement is a very significant step forward in renewing the determination of the international community to tackle climate change through multilateral action ' .
I congratulate every one of my colleagues here who was involved in achieving that .
The main objective yet to be achieved is a global agreement which is legal and ambitious and aims to keep the temperature increase below 2 ° C , or even 1.5 ° C , above pre-industrial levels .
The measure of agreement reached in Cancún is a step in that direction .
I agree with those who say today that we have a lot to do yet .
The governments must build on that achievement now .
The gaps must be filled .
The difficult issues on the agenda must be tackled , and targets must be set now that are much firmer , clearer and binding .
The deadlines between now and COP 17 in South Africa must be adhered to .
My thanks also , therefore , to the Council and the Commission for what we have achieved , but we still face hard work ahead .
In Europe , we must agree immediately to a reduction of at least 30 % in CO2 leakage in Europe , not only for the sake of international agreement but for our own sake .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner very much for her splendid contribution and the excellent briefings given to all of us in Cancún .
However , the whole climate conference , of course , focused on dealing in hot air and the setting up of a fund for developing countries .
This is fine from my point of view , but who will check that the money is being given out correctly and does not end up in the personal pockets of dictators ?
I would have very much liked to have seen the conference also discuss restricting the use of basic resources , the necessity of biodiversity for the natural regulation of the climate and population growth - a subject that all of the politicians of the world are shutting their eyes to , because in only a few years ' time , the planet will have to feed around 10 billion people .
How will we obtain food for them without increasing our CO2 emissions , and without this tipping the natural balance and the global climate ?
The expectations of Cancún were extremely low and it was therefore a success .
However , the door is now open for further cooperation ahead of COP 17 , and I am pleased about that .
Mr President , as carbon crooks and One World Government conspirators celebrate their advances at Cancún , UK Prime Minister Dave Cameron declared his satisfaction with the outcome .
At the end of the coldest first half of December in central England since records began in 1772 , Dave is satisfied that the Green Climate Fund will cost British taxpayers GBP 2.9 billion on top of the GBP 18.3 billion a year that the Climate Change Act siphons from British consumers for the corporate crooks in the green industrial complex .
Coincidently , GBP 2.9 billion is also the amount the Treasury will save by increasing the debts of British students , condemning them to a lifetime of bondage to the banks .

That scam has already caused student riots .
Taxpayer riots over far bigger scams - bail-outs to corrupt and incompetent banks , propping up the zombie euro and the global warming hoax - are yet to come , but come they will and , unlike Prince Charles and Camilla , their targets will deserve everything they get .

( ES ) Mr President , Mrs Schauvliege , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating the Commission and the parliamentary delegation , led by our fellow Member Mr Leinen , on the work that they did in Cancún , a meeting that I was unfortunately unable to attend in the end .
I believe that Cancún and its results can be viewed , along the lines of what my colleague , Mr Seeber , was saying , from the perspective of Copenhagen : Cancún viewed from the Copenhagen perspective .
The first conclusion from this perspective is that there was a fundamental differentiating factor .
In Copenhagen , the expectations were very high , and in Cancún the expectations were much more realistic , as a result of which the assessment of Copenhagen was very negative , while the assessment of Cancún , both by those who took part and by the media in general , was very positive .
Cancún learned lessons from Copenhagen , and I think that is the first , very interesting , conclusion .
I believe that measures have been taken and agreements reached which are not , of course , ground-breaking , but which could be very interesting from the point of view of efficiency .
Among other things , I think that the creation of a committee and a technology network to promote technological cooperation is extremely important .
Here , we are going to adopt a report during this sitting on energy efficiency , which is one of the fundamental keys to effectively combating climate change .
Also , I think that matters such as the World Bank being more involved or official recognition of the actions of countries to reduce emissions returning to the procedure and framework of the United Nations are very positive .
Finally , I would like to say that there is one year to go before we get to South Africa .
It would be a very good idea if , in the same way that Cancún learnt from Copenhagen , we now learnt from Kyoto , and achieved an international frame of reference for an agreement against climate change that is more flexible , more transparent , more efficient and more integrative .
Mr President , I do not think it is a conspiracy to say that we are one world sharing one planet and I think what I got out of Cancún was the reality of all those people working together .
One of the best parts of being in Cancún was sitting on those buses going to and from the conference centre and listening to the delegates who would tell you about what they are doing : the Zambians working with the Russians working with the Japanese and the Chinese negotiator to get an agreement .
We share one planet and we have no future unless we work together .
I want to thank the Council and the Commission for the work they did .
Europe did speak with one voice and , from our meetings with different delegations , it was very clear that Europe 's leadership was appreciated and people were very aware that we had a 20 % target but were thinking of moving to 30 % .
I wonder what the Commissioner thinks now of the prospects for being more ambitious before Durban because , from what we heard , I think that what Europe says in Durban will count .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with my fellow Members that the work done by Commissioner Hedegaard at the Climate Change Conference in Cancún is to be applauded .
Cancún was a step forward , although , regrettably , a much smaller step that what is really needed .
In any case , Cancún officially endorsed the emissions commitments made at Copenhagen .
At the same time , it pointed out that they were not enough to keep climate change below two degrees and urged the industrialised countries to tighten up their emissions targets .
Now , the EU leadership on climate change is , in practice , being tested : are we prepared to tighten up our emissions targets by moving from a 20 % to a 30 % decrease ?
This would be the best way to promote the achievement of something we must have in Durban next year : a comprehensive international climate agreement .
After Cancún , the claim that the EU is somehow alone with its climate targets is clearly no longer relevant .
( PT ) Mr President , I would also like to express my thanks for the work that has been done .
It is a time for balance , certainly , but we all know that it is also time to make commitments , serious commitments : many important things have been said here , and the project specifications that we have in front of us are very long , enormously so .
Important commitments came out of Cancún , but the truth is that none of these will be formalised before next year 's conference in South Africa .
We have a year ahead of us and a lot of work to do , as I have already mentioned .
I would like to underline the fact that the rights of indigenous people and people most affected need to be integrated , as this is a commitment that must be raised and taken seriously .
We must not allow the poor always to be the ones that pay more , because the environmental and climate crisis is a crisis of survival for all of us , and it is a matter that involves us all .
With regard to ambition , I would also like to repeat what I have said before : we need to be more ambitious , like we used to be .
With regard to cutting emissions , we need to achieve 30 % again , with there being no reason for us not to meet this commitment , and the same for temperature and global warming .
We can be more ambitious and take medium- and long-term measures .
To do this , it is not just enough to say it : we have to demonstrate it , and now is the time , because in my opinion , we cannot take tiny steps along this path .
Mr President , I hope everyone enjoyed Cancún .
It is a lovely place but I am a bit disappointed to see that none of them has a suntan .
Well , I suppose that is to be expected really because , while many of you were out there lecturing us on how we need to change our lifestyles to combat global warming , it was actually the coldest week that Mexican city had seen for over a hundred years .
Back in the UK , we have also had the spectacle of scientists trying to suggest that one of the coldest Novembers we have seen in the last hundred years was actually caused by global warming .
Do these people think we were born yesterday ?
This also explains why even more British people now believe that global warming is a scam and a way to raise taxes and exert control .
But what have you actually achieved in Cancún beyond handing over masses of taxpayers ' money in the guise of the Green Climate Fund , which I suggest will end up being a lucky bag for African dictators to buy themselves more Mercedes Benzes and private jets ?
Personally , I think the name of the Green Climate Fund should be changed , and I think the ' Politics of Envy Fund ' would be better and closer to the truth .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Every government in the world accepted at Cancún the science that man 's activities are changing the climate .
Every government in the world agreed that , if we do not take action , more action , we will not be able to prevent world temperatures rising by more than 2 ° C. What does the honourable gentleman know that the rest of the world does not ?
You are giving the game away there , because what you are talking about is world governments , politicians .
We are talking about scientists here .
Science is a slow process , evidence has to be studied and deciphered , but politics is a quicker game and politics is running ahead of the science ; that is where the problem lies .
The fact of the matter is that the globe is actually not warming ; it has not warmed since 1998 .
So the game is up , people are finding out that you have a problem .
What you are doing is conning people ; it is a scam and the people are finding you out .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am slightly concerned about the turn the debate has taken at this point , because I believe that one of the best things about Cancún was the fact that we were able to debate and to reason without splitting into two camps - the doomsayers and the deniers - which was perhaps the worst outcome of the Copenhagen summit .
In Copenhagen , all the main global players came together ; thousands of non-governmental organisations came and demonstrated and , in the intense cold of Copenhagen , we managed to come home feeling overexcited and overheated , with the added disappointment of having failed .
In Cancún - under the extremely capable chairmanship of Mexico , which I think everyone was able to single out and thank for its ability to manage such difficult negotiations , which had previously ended in stalemate - we saw , in fact , that the multilateral process is still alive .
Nevertheless , I believe that we must not waste this new opportunity , created in Cancún , to be practical and to negotiate ; we must not go back to being supporters at a football match , because we are actually talking about something serious here : we are talking about the future of our planet .
I would therefore like to cite the words of an Italian climatologist , who is also very well known abroad , to support my view .
That climatologist is Franco Prodi , brother of the former Prime Minister Romano Prodi , and he calls for calm , common sense and no divisions , arguing a point that we should all agree on : he says that it will take us many years yet to know as much about climate change as we know today about meteorology .
We must therefore help science to speed up its work and to be in a position to provide reliable policy-making forecasts as soon as possible .
In the meantime , the environmental protection of the planet must be at the heart of any serious environmental policy .
I therefore believe that we can continue to work practically on this issue , and I thank everyone for how the work in Cancún has been pursued .
( DA ) Mr President , the American writer Mark Twain once said ' rumours of my death have been greatly exaggerated ' .
Likewise , we could say that , fortunately , the rumours surrounding the UN climate process have been shown to be greatly exaggerated .
The climate process is alive and well .
The conference in Cancún showed that the UN can indeed deliver results .
However , it is , of course , also clear that the major hurdle - the big question of how much to reduce CO2 by and when to do it in order to be able to keep the temperature rise below two degrees - is a question that still remains to be answered .
There is hope , however , particularly if there is someone who will show leadership .
We in the EU must show that leadership .
We did so in Cancún , but we must also do so with regard to the reduction targets .
We have now promised a reduction of 20 % by 2020 .
Here in Parliament , we have also agreed that we believe we should go as far as 30 % .
When we met with delegations from other countries in Cancún , with NGOs and with the leaders of UN institutions , we emphasised very many times how important it was for us here in Parliament to have shown the way and how much we hoped that we , as a European community , would decide as quickly as possible to take on the commitment of the 30 % reduction .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner and the Belgian Presidency for their success in Cancún , because in Cancún , we were able to applaud the Copenhagen trauma away .
I was also applauding this trauma away because now we can finally look ahead .
We can look forward again and we can look at what we need to achieve in Durban .
Let us be honest : the most sensitive issues - the second commitment period , Kyoto , financing , the mitigation targets - are still on the table .
We have a crucial year in front of us ahead of Durban .
Let us be clear .
China and the US are still there and those two big blocs are still not moving ahead very quickly .
That is what we need in Durban .
So I have a very simple question for the Commissioner .
What is the EU concretely going to do to make sure that we get other global partners like Brazil and India on board with the Europeans to strive for an ambitious deal in Durban ?
Speaking with one voice is very good , but now we have to get our proactive diplomacy in place .
( SL ) Mr President , on Saturday morning , I woke up with a sense of relief after learning that both agreements had been adopted and that , of course , gives me confidence that global warming can still be kept below the 2 ° C limit .
This has left a bitter aftertaste , however , because the actual process of negotiation in the international community is far too slow and we should have adopted such an agreement at least a year ago .
Now we find ourselves under great time pressure , primarily because we still do not have any figures and because we still have no specific undertakings as to how individual countries are going to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions .
One positive thing , though , is that the document is comprehensive and that it actually covers all the priority areas which the European Union defined even before the negotiations had begun .
My assessment is that the European Union was successful in the negotiations and that it was also sufficiently ambitious , because it was ambitious enough to retain its leading role and promote the negotiations .
If we were too ambitious now , we would be left by the wayside , as happened to us last year .
I also think that we have learned a lot from what happened last year .
I would like us to take this knowledge with us to the next round of negotiations next year and I would like us to avoid changing that strategy .
This year , we face a very serious task , particularly in our dealings with third countries .
On that score , I think that the European Union must exploit every possibility at its disposal to help the United States , so that next year , we can obtain a much more ambitious undertaking from them than has been the case this year .
We in the EU will have to focus , in particular , on implementing the legislation which we have adopted over the past few years , because there are many new things that we will actually have to start putting into practice .
The European Union is still the only region in the world to have limited its emissions by law .
( PT ) Mr President , I have already said here that , whereas expectations for Copenhagen were very high at the start , expectations for Cancún were not very ambitious .
As a result , Copenhagen was considered a failure and Cancún was viewed as progress .
However , there is another difference in favour of Cancún , which also resulted from the good work done by the Mexican Presidency , which did everything it could to make the conference a success .
The European Union did the work within its remit , and contributed to the progress that was made .
This included confirmation of the limit of two degrees centigrade , and the creation of a Green Fund for supporting adaptation in developing countries and the fight against deforestation .
I would like to emphasise something else that I have already referred to here , which is the re-establishment of confidence in multilateralism and in the possibility of obtaining a binding international agreement on climate change , which needs to be next year in Durban , and we need to make an effort for this to be achieved .
Mr President , like many people , we are just relieved that there is good news .
While it is understated , rather than overstated , you have made progress in a calm way because we had lower expectations .
I want to deal with one particular issue and that is reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation , the so-called REDD programme , which is a very important issue , but I am concerned about a lack of policy coherence in the Commission in relation to this issue .
For example , the Trade Commissioner is currently trying to do a deal with the Mercosur countries which will result in increased beef production in these countries .
That can only come from land that will be deforested , which will add to the climate change problem .
I would urge the Commissioner to bring this message clearly to the College and to address it in a way that shows us as acting in a coherent way , as the European Union .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although Cancún in itself does not yet represent a turning point , without it , we would not have the chance to reach a turning point one year from now in Durban .
I congratulate everyone who contributed to this achievement .
I have been following this process from Brussels and from Budapest , and it is an enormous accomplishment that there will be a chance in one year 's time in Durban to reach a comprehensive international agreement that will lay down mandatory commitments after strenuous work .
It is an important step in the right direction that emerging economies such as China , Brazil and South Africa are committing themselves to the 2 ° C target for the first time .
Finally , I consider it very important that the European Union not only spoke with a single voice , but that it changed the attitude it had exhibited in Copenhagen , and treated the other countries as partners and with empathy , and this contributed considerably to the success of Cancún .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 16th climate change conference in Cancún ended this time , too , with a non-binding compromise called the ' balanced package ' .

There was the birth of the Green Climate Fund , which will cost the most developed countries USD 100 billion a year as from 2020 , while USD 30 billion will be immediately allocated to ' fast-start ' funding , USD 410 million of which Italy will have to find .

Meanwhile , no demands have been made of the most highly polluting countries ; on the contrary , China alone has announced that it is going to double its energy production by 2020 and , therefore , since it has decided to stick with 80 % carbon to 20 % other energy sources , it will also double its emissions .
We believe it is unacceptable to keep asking our companies to make sacrifices for companies in third countries .
It is vitally important for COP 17 , next year , to reach an overall binding agreement on combating climate change that includes sanctions for those countries that still refuse to cooperate .
( PT ) Mr President , the noticeably lower expectations that we saw before the Cancún conference should not justify excessively optimistic discussions with regard to its results , and it should be regarded as a success even less so .
If there were any consistency to the analysis criteria , we would have to acknowledge that the results were , as expected , sparse .
Where is the replacement for the Kyoto Protocol that was absolutely necessary a year ago ?
Where are the targets for reduction in line with the timeframes proposed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ?
The European Union itself remains outside these timeframes , the United States ' target is a 3-4 % reduction compared to 1990 levels , which it took away from Copenhagen .
Where is the serious discussion on the ineffectiveness and perversity of market instruments , such as the carbon market , of flexibility mechanisms like the clean development mechanism , of the hot air and other juggling tricks that serve more to open up good business prospects for a few people than to achieve reduction targets ?
These are questions that we did not ask today , at a point at which one-third of the period defined as being quick-start has already passed .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the delegation from the European Parliament , the Member of the Commission and the whole of the European Union on speaking with one voice at Cancún .
Last year , we deplored the results of Copenhagen , or , to be more precise , the lack of results .
Today , we are happy with Cancún , but my joy is still slightly reserved , simply because I would like more .
It is clear that negotiating is a huge and complex task .
It is a real challenge when there are so many different positions .
However , what worries me most is the image of this issue in society .
Really , society is not being won over .
The difficulties faced in reaching an agreement , by which I mean achieving legally valid measures , is something that is important to us all but it is becoming a tiresome issue .
I agree with the Member of the Commission that we must do our homework , we ourselves must achieve the target of 20 % by various means .
Of course , it is always easier to point the finger at those who are perhaps not doing something and to say that maybe we do not need to do it either .
In spite of what you said - that we managed to achieve something - I would still like to ask whether you really would not have expected a somewhat greater result in Cancún ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Commissioner and to the entire EU delegation , who have helped to keep the process alive .
However , we have not solved the real problems : firstly , we need to give political expression to the Bali Declaration - in particular , with regard to what we in Parliament have already called climate justice - and we need to generalise and simplify the emissions trading system , because it is inconceivable to have a market mechanism where half of the emissions quota is given away free .
Secondly , I would like to stress the need to promote instruments for monitoring , reporting and verifying , in particular , those of the Global Monitoring for Environment and Security ( GMES ) range of services , of the satellites that will provide absolutely vital data in this area .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , can I first say thank you very much for the many kind comments , including those of Chris Davies , although I know even less than he about football so I could not follow the picture , but I guess it was a positive one !
Several have asked about the 30 % .
How are we now stepping up , where is this process and , Linda McAvan said , what are the prospects ?
I think all of you here know what the process is now .
We are now doing the analysis of individual Member States : what are the problems , what are the challenges , what are the co-benefits , what can we do ?
Then we will also have a discussion on the 2050 low carbon strategy that we will present by March - including , as I said , the 2030 target because , if we know where we are going to be by 2050 , it is also very clear that there are some trade-offs involved .
The less we have done by 2020 , the more we have to do afterwards , and the more likely that it will be expensive .
That is the kind of discussion we are trying to get here in the spring , and I am pleased to see that more and more Member States have started to hold this discussion among themselves and also come forward with different signals on how they see this .
Chris Davies asked about 2050 and the 50 % and some other things that were not there .
That was very much dealt with in a special group with some ministers discussing the shared vision .
The Swedish Minister was one of the two ministers leading that group and I can say for sure that Europe was trying to push this very hard .
You all know why it is difficult to achieve this , but that is one of the topics we still need to have on the table on our way forward to South Africa .
It will have to be on the agenda .
Ms del Castillo mentioned that Cancún has learned from Copenhagen .
I would say yes , but mostly perhaps in the sense that people realised in the last 24 hours that if they did not show the will to compromise , there would be a real risk of not getting anything done , and the whole process would risk dying .
That argument was not just a tactical thing , but was a real thing in the room where people knew that this would probably be the last chance for many of them to save the only process where everybody was sitting around the table .
There was quite a lot of pressure there because of the experience in Copenhagen to show the necessary political will in Mexico .
One could ask what exactly the EU is going to do to strive for a deal in Durban .
I would say we will be doing the same as this year , where we have actually done a lot of outreach , a lot of proactive thinking , and also a lot of thinking about where the deal could be done .
Those of you who were there also know that many of the texts and much of the input were also due to a lot of European experts and a lot of European contributions , and we should do exactly the same this coming year .
We should also build on what has been achieved in the Cartagena process in which 25 countries - developing and developed countries alike - really want to move forward .
We will continue that work .
We gained a lot of benefit from having this process in Cancún , because we were coordinating a lot across different regional groups .
That will be one of the first things : we will try to get people together in the Cartagena Group and work there with them , as well as working with a lot of others .
Then there was the question about the treaty that should replace the Kyoto Protocol .
It is not there yet because the world does not agree on it , but this is definitely not because of the European Union .
I would re-state that , had it not been for the European Union signalling its willingness to taking a second commitment period , had we said the same as other Kyoto parties in Cancún , then any prospect of having a legally binding deal by now would have been dead .
Finally , Ms Morkūnaitwas asking if we did not expect a bit more from Cancún , and I would say no , actually not .
In the last hours there , I sat with a check list .
Sometimes you should take care not to get carried away when you are taking part in something .
You think that when you can get some things done , maybe you could also get other things done that you knew before you left home you would never get .
When I sat with that check list , I must say that the list of elements we wanted to see in there was in there .
Of course , there are always things that you do not get , but in truth we knew , for instance , that the second commitment period could not be for Cancún , so we just wanted to save the prospect of having it and continuing to build on what we have .
An adaptation framework , a technology framework , a forestry framework , all the elements from the Copenhagen Accord , the prospect of still having a legally binding deal and some substantial progress on MRV / ICA and a number of other issues , plus the fact that we now have all parties subscribing to the view that we have not all delivered enough together - I think that if we had discussed that result as we did before we left for Cancún , most of you would probably have agreed that it would be a good outcome .
A final word .
Now we have to think very carefully about the strategy for the way ahead .
Many of us will need a break for Christmas and the New Year , but early next year , we should continue the very strong dialogue between Council , Commission and the European Parliament and come back to one another after we have done some reflecting and have digested the outcome of Cancún .
As I said at the beginning , it is going to be a very difficult year , but we should build on the experiences we had here .
If Europe sets a clear strategy , then we can actually move things in the right direction , and although that is not going to be less challenging for Durban , I am sure that we can do this .
Maybe we just need a rest first and then come back to the dialogue in early 2011 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for making many positive comments about the agreement reached in Cancún .
You all know that Cancún is a pragmatic , but very important step in climate policy and the climate debate .
You know that the principle that we should , eventually , reach a global , legally-binding agreement , was retained in the Council conclusions adopted last October .
However , we were all aware that it would be impossible to secure a global deal in Mexico and that had also been determined in advance .
For this reason , we opted for a number of balanced partial agreements .
They are also there and , as the Commissioner has said , the points that we felt were important in order to achieve that balance on the European Union 's part have also emerged from the Cancún conference .
We should also give the European Union credit for taking a very clear and transparent stance , a stance that has been incorporated in the Council conclusions and that was also defended with a single voice .
Everyone from the Commission and the European Parliament made a very positive contribution to the promotion of this stance and , on the part of the Council , we did our utmost to ensure that we explained that stance as far as we could .
Sometimes , it was really necessary to continue to emphasise that : what the content of those conclusions was and what the European Union 's intention behind that stance was .
We were building bridges ; in Mexico , we also received many positive reactions to the fact that the European Union had taken the lead and that we had genuinely tried to bring several different positions closer to each other .
We played that role well and I think that this was also clear to the whole world .
Commissioner , it is true that we now have to take stock of one or two things , but that does not detract from the fact that we now have to proceed fairly rapidly .
I can tell you that , as early as next Monday , we will be having an exchange of views in the Council about the outcome of Cancún .
I also think that it is a good thing that , here in Parliament , we are already exchanging views on this issue .
That said , it is true that we definitely need to develop a strategy and to do so as soon as possible .
The Council has also decided to take up the debate about the 30 % reduction in the spring .
We have asked the Commission to carry out a second screening , so that we know what that 30 % reduction would entail at Member State level , and the Council has agreed to reopen the debate in the spring .
By way of conclusion , I would like to thank everyone once again for your cooperation and , in particular , Commissioner Connie Hedegaard , for the very pleasant and constructive way in which she has worked with us , and for your efforts , which led to some excellent achievements in Cancún .
This would not have been possible without constructive cooperation on everyone 's part and if the European Union had not been able to imprint such a clear hallmark on the agreement reached in Cancún .
I therefore thank you very warmly for that .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Many view the outcome of the Cancún climate change conference , which ended last week , as a success , a breakthrough , the return of hope .
I am , however , of the opinion that we cannot speak of success until a legally binding international agreement has been concluded as a continuation of the Kyoto Protocol , which will expire in 2012 - an agreement on which basis sanctions can be imposed .
No decision has been reached about such an agreement in Cancún .
In fact , some countries would rather have the Protocol itself abolished .
The question of the usability after 2013 of the Kyoto quota surplus , which is of key importance to Hungary and considered to be a national asset , will thus remain unresolved until the climate change summit to be held in South Africa in 2011 .
The possibility still exists that Eastern European countries will inequitably and unjustly be deprived of the reward they would have received for fulfilling their actual emission reduction commitments in the Kyoto system , while infringing parties will face no penalties whatsoever .
Moreover , the USA and China , the biggest emitters , are still not parties to the Kyoto Protocol , and therefore , the results we will be able to achieve in halting global warming will remain minuscule .
Hence , as long as we do not have a legally binding international agreement that is able to both punish the bad students and reward the good ones , we can by no means speak of success .
Mr President , I would congratulate the President of the Cancún conference on the transparent negotiations during such a complex process .
Although it could have gone further , this agreement seems to be the best possible one at this time .
The Kyoto Protocol could still be extended , which is positive : there will be a lot of pressure in Durban next year , given that the only binding agreement on climate change will be expiring , but it is very important that the agreement reached in Copenhagen now becomes an official United Nations document , as it is supported by all countries except Bolivia .
I am glad that many of the socialist positions supported here in this House were introduced into the text , such as the creation of a ' Global Green Fund ' to help developing countries adapt to climate change and mitigate its effects .
I also applaud all of the countries that agreed to maintain the proposal of 1.5 degrees , a more ambitious objective on the table for the next summit .
This is a very important signal , and the next step will be to ensure that it is reflected in CO2 reduction targets .
After lengthy negotiations , the United Nations climate change conference in Cancún has reached a positive compromise .
The outcome is no record achievement , but it is an important step towards combating climate change .
Progress has been made in all the areas which appear for the first time in a UN document .
I welcome the decisions made as they will facilitate the negotiations ' advancement in the period ahead and will ensure significant progress is made , particularly with regard to the elements aimed at the developing countries and the countries most exposed to the impact of climate change .
Furthermore , I support the narrowing of the gap between developed countries and undeveloped regions by granting financial and technical assistance .
I think that this summit marks a crucial juncture where our negotiators have paved the way for an agreement to be signed next year in Durban in South Africa .
I wish to congratulate the European Parliament delegation for the efforts it made and the success achieved .
The outcome of the climate summit in Cancún could hardly be described as a great achievement .
However , it is better than nothing .
Some concrete steps have been taken , for example , in the fight against deforestation , and the go-ahead has been given for the establishment of a USD 100 billion climate fund .
The whole thing , however , is moving at a terribly slow and tiring pace .
It resembles nothing so much as the dancing procession of Echternach .
Meanwhile , the global warming clock quietly ticks on .
What was Europe 's role in this story ?
The EU has certainly learned from the mistakes of last year 's Copenhagen conference .
In Cancún , Europe was at the heart of the negotiations and acted as a united front .
The entire world has its eyes on the EU model and looks on it with admiration , because we have the most progressive and binding agreements .
Europe is a role model when it comes to climate .
We have to hold on firmly to that leading role over the coming years .
It clearly marks us apart from almost all other continents , in a positive way .
It is an enormous asset in terms of our image and , at the same time , it entails major economic and social benefits .
Mr President , I have been monitoring international climate negotiations for the last 15 years , and I am particularly happy with the agreements reached in Cancún .
The decisions adopted represent real progress in negotiations .
The main elements of the Copenhagen Agreement are now under the aegis of the UN .
The United Nations has regained its credibility as a forum for drawing up multilateral climate agreements .
Mexico organised a participative and transparent conference .
The EU played a leading role .
I would like to highlight the efficient management of tasks by the European Commission and the Belgian Presidency .
There was significant progress with regard to technology , forests and adaptation .
In particular , I welcome the creation of a Climate Fund .
On the basis of the results of Cancún , hard work will be needed to make a success of the Durban conference in 2011 .
The Cancún conference has been dubbed a success and that is the right choice of word , considering that nothing had been expected to come of it .
Nevertheless , it is important for the EU that we state the facts : nothing has stirred in the matter of emissions cuts and there have been no pledges made to reduce them .
We have no global agreement in sight and we have nothing to give us cause to tighten up the EU 's own , unilateral target to reduce them from 20 % to 30 % .
At Cancún , Parliament 's delegation met Achim Steiner , Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme , who said , in all seriousness , that Europe has only benefited from the 20 % target : it has apparently given us a boost and improved our competitiveness .
That is why he supported the idea of making the target more stringent still .
I would like now to call on all those companies involved in global business , and which believe that they are exposed to carbon leakage , to tell Achim Steiner and other similar influential leaders of organisations about the financial realities that you face .
Show them the figures for the direct and indirect rise in costs due to emissions trading , if you disagree with the system .
It is not right , as far as European citizens and workers are concerned , if our key decision makers , even the Commission , from which Steiner probably got his information , are living in a fantasy world where their feet do not touch the ground .
Cancún 's success lay in the fact that political pride was saved .
It was agreed that there would be an agreement .
We realise that the climate hype is abating and that climate change is becoming an ordinary , everyday issue .
It is slipping out of the limelight and perhaps that is a good thing .
Let us get back to a sensible , comprehensive policy of environmental protection .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0655 / 2010 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Protecting women 's health
The Commission has adopted a new strategy on gender equality for the period 2010-2015 .
This strategy refers to the social divide that exists between women and men and indicates that women continue to be at greater risk of poverty than men .
Women are at risk of losing their jobs faster than men .
At present , many women are employed in sectors of the labour market that pay low wages , and too few of them attain positions of responsibility .
The rate of employment among women is low because of child rearing , so that women 's pensions are lower than those of men .
In addition , it is not uncommon for women to lack social cover .
The strategy provides for no specific measure or means to ensure that women 's health is protected .
Does the Commission intend to issue guidelines or proposals relating to the protection of women 's health ?
Member of the Commission . - Women and men are exposed to health risks in different ways with , consequently , different health outcomes .
Women live , on average , six years longer than men but most of these additional years are lived in worse health .
Certain diseases , such as osteoporosis , have a much higher incidence among women .
This is why the EU strategy for Equality between Women and Men ( 2010-2015 ) , which the Commission has recently adopted , points to the need for medical research and healthcare to reflect these differences .
The strategy stresses that health services need to continue the process of adaptation to properly reflect the specific needs of women and men .
The strategy for these actions , specifically targeting women 's health , includes awareness-raising seminars on women 's health and exchanging best practices on gender-specific health policies .
We are not starting from scratch here .
The EU Health strategy , adopted three years ago , already signalled the need to take gender-related issues into account in health policy making .
To this end , the Community health programme has supported many projects on women 's health aimed at promoting a better understanding and recognition of women 's health needs .
A good example of how the EU can help Member States improve women 's health is cancer screening .
It is estimated that 32 000 deaths from breast cancer alone could be prevented each year across the European Union if effective national screening programmes for breast cancer were implemented .
This is why the Commission developed European guidelines on breast cancer screening .
Finally , I am pleased to say that earlier this year , the Commission published a report on women 's health , which contributes to raising awareness of the need for policies that are more responsive to gender concerns .
( LT ) I would also like to check something .
Do we have sufficient data on the protection of women 's health in the Member States ?
Do we know the impact that this major economic and financial crisis , in particular , has had on women 's health ?
Should we not also examine the impact that poverty has on women 's health , in particular , that of elderly women ?
Are high quality health care services accessible to women living in poverty ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is trying to get as much information and feedback as possible and to set up a statistical base on all health issues .
Naturally , our level of accuracy depends a lot on the response and feedback that we receive from the various Member States .
I agree that we should continue to seek information and to see how health , especially the health of women , is affected by poverty .
But health and poverty are interrelated ; this is not gender based .
In fact , we find that health is usually at risk in areas of poverty .
We are also taking action vis-à-vis the elderly .
As you know , the Commission has now launched an initiative , namely the innovative partnerships .
The first pilot project on this innovative partnership will be healthy and active ageing .
I am sure that this will affect the health of our citizens of both genders .
( RO ) At the moment , there are 120 million citizens in the European Union exposed to the risk of poverty .
Women have obviously been hit very hard by the economic crisis and are more exposed to the risk of poverty , especially in the case of single-parent families .
Healthcare systems are suffering a great deal due to the economic crisis .
Budgets have been cut and large institutions in this sector have even been closed .
I would like to ask you what measures you have in mind for us to ensure that the measures for the early screening of cervical or breast cancer will be available to all women , regardless of their social or material situation , and especially to ensure that we will have a fair healthcare system , offering good quality services throughout the entire European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Again , we repeat here that healthcare and health delivery are a competence of the Member States .
The Commission has , in fact , issued its guidelines on breast screening and we have been pushing Member States to abide by these guidelines and introduce breast-screening programmes into their countries as fast as possible .
I can say that in most countries , we do have adequate - and very good - breast-screening programmes which are bearing results ; other countries , unfortunately , are still a little slow .
I can assure you that , in all the contacts that we have with the Member States , this is one of the priority areas that we discuss .
Subject : European Parliament declaration of 23 June 2010 on setting up a European early warning system ( EWS ) for paedophiles and sex offenders
On 23 June 2010 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution ' setting up a European early warning system ( EWS ) for paedophiles and sex offenders ' .
The Commission had already , on 22 May 2007 , published a communication entitled ' Towards a general policy on the fight against cyber crime ' .
Parliament called on the Council and the Commission to act on the Commission communication of May 2007 and also to implement Directive 2006 / 24 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or of public communications networks , and to extend its scope with a view to setting rules on preservation of the data of anyone who has uploaded Internet content , so as to enable the police and judiciary to tackle online child pornography and sex offending rapidly and effectively .
Would the Commission please outline the action taken on this resolution ?
Member of the Commission . - I am strongly committed to the fight against child abuse and , specifically , child sexual abuse .
On 29 March 2010 , the Commission adopted a proposal for a directive on child sexual abuse and exploitation and child pornography .
This ambitious text covers prosecution of offenders , protection of victims and prevention of offences .
To take account of risks brought about by technological developments , the proposal introduces , in particular , new criminal offences such as grooming , viewing child pornography without downloading files , online sexual abuse or advertising the possibility to abuse children , for example , through Internet forums .
Special investigative tools should be made available , such as undercover operations for the police to infiltrate sex offender circles , and special investigative units should analyse child pornography material to identify child victims .
Member States should also put in place national systems to block access to Internet pages containing child pornography and undertake actions to remove the content at source .
We have looked carefully at the European Parliament declaration of 23 June 2010 , and I would be interested to know about the honourable Member 's proposal for an early warning system .
I have also taken note of the proposal to extend the scope of the Data Retention Directive in order to retain data about searches made by users for child pornography material and child sex abuse content uploaded on the Internet or messages used to groom children online .
The Data Retention Directive obliges communication and network service providers to retain traffic and location data and data about subscribers .
It does not extend to information about content .
Content can be obtained and stored in the context of criminal investigations by means of the instrument known as lawful interception .
Lawful interception is solely governed by national law and differs across Member States , but in general , it can be used only if a law enforcement authority has indications that a specific criminal activity is being committed and requires further investigation .
This investigative tool lies outside of the scope of the Data Retention Directive .
Lawful interception occurs in the context of a criminal investigation which supposes the existence of a suspect .
The Data Retention Directive , on the contrary , obliges operators to retain certain categories of data irrespective of whether the data holders are suspect or not .
Extending the Data Retention Directive to huge volumes of personal and content-related data such as Internet searches for different key words in different languages , content uploaded , messages exchanged and the elements necessary to identify all users would have to withstand a necessity and proportionality case which has not yet been made .
Such an extension would apply to content uploaded by everyone on every platform , at any given time and on every topic .
The proposal put forward by the honourable Member raises serious concerns about its compliance with the principle of proportionality , even if its purpose is legitimate and deserves our full attention .
The Commission believes that its recent proposal for a directive would be a more suitable instrument to achieve our common objective of protecting children from child sex offenders .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like the floor for just a few seconds because I am satisfied with the response and I am grateful to the Commissioner for it .
I am glad that work is also being done to tackle the problem at its root .
With reference to the declaration adopted on 23 June 2010 , I would just like to point out that specific reference was made to uploaded data , not to the downloading of material from websites .
This is because we believe , in fact , that the right to privacy of search engine users should also be duly taken into account .
Nevertheless , I think that more can be done - that much more can still be done - because if , on the subject of the proportionality principle , citizens have no qualms in submitting to searches before boarding a flight , since they are aware of the superior privacy protection afforded to passengers at the time of the search , there is also every chance of a satisfactory compromise being reached to protect minors in this area , too .
I would like to return to the statement that Parliament adopted on 23 June 2010 .
You will recall that the statement refers mainly to the creation of a fast and effective warning system against paedophiles .
My question in relation to this concerns another issue - should individual police forces not create databases of convicted paedophiles , under the aegis of the European Union , since the police forces of other Member States could make use of these databases created in each individual Member State ?
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Poland recently introduced pharmaceutical castration for paedophiles and rapists , using hormone treatment to repress their sexual appetite , following the arrest of a forty-five year old man who had had two children by his underage daughter .
This measure , as you can image , has provoked intense debate and reaction in Poland as to whose rights take precedence : the rights of society , which expects to be protected from rapists , or the rights of people convicted of sexual crimes , who may be subject to a punishment that many consider inhumane .
Has the Commission taken a position on these issues and on the legalisation of chemical castration for sexual crimes ?
Member of the Commission . - As I said at the beginning of my speech , one of the best tools for fighting child pornography and child sex abuse is the swift adoption of the Commission proposal of March 2010 , the one against child sex abuse .
The Commission is looking forward to seeing the draft report of the European Parliament and to starting trialogues .
I count also on the Member States and the European Parliament to have a final text that will be essential to fight these crimes and I would like to draw your attention again to the principle of proportionality , which I think connects with the latest question on this matter .
Member of the Commission . - Over the last two years , the number of young unemployed people in the European Union has increased by one million .
There are now five million young people under the age of 25 who cannot find a job .
The Commission is keenly aware of the difficulties facing young people on the job market today .
Too many are on short-term contracts which offer slim opportunities for improvement , however well qualified the individuals might be .
What is more , some groups have special difficulty in accessing jobs and staying in the labour market .
They include young people from migrant backgrounds and those from ethnic minorities like the Roma .
At the same time , demand for highly qualified people is projected to rise by almost 16 million and demand for people with medium-level qualifications by more than 3.5 million .
This represents a big employment opportunity for young people and we must make sure that young people can take full advantage of it .
The Europe 2020 strategy , which lays out the EU 's detailed plans for growth and jobs for the next decade , lays special emphasis on young people and sets clear targets for educational attainment .
In September , the Commission presented a set of policy initiatives for young people called ' Youth on the Move ' .
It sets out an agenda for improving education and employment for our young people over the next decade .
The Commission recently presented another flagship initiative , an ' Agenda for new skills and jobs ' .
The Commission encourages the introduction of a youth guarantee to ensure that all young people are in a job , further education or activation measures within four months of leaving school .
Another point is the need to reduce labour market segmentation in line with the common flexicurity policies .
We propose that Member States with segmented labour markets should consider introducing open-ended contracts with a sufficiently long probation period and a gradual increase in protection rights .
We also need to foster greater labour mobility and encourage innovation .
Two instruments that will help here are the EU job mobility scheme - ' Your first EURES job ' - and the European Vacancy Monitor .
Your first EURES job will promote youth labour mobility and the European Vacancy Monitor will allow young people and job counsellors to see where there are jobs across the Union and what skills are needed .
Meanwhile , the European Progress Microfinance Facility will provide support for young entrepreneurs who cannot find alternative funding to set up businesses .
Of course , there is no single solution to the problems facing us , but we can learn a lot from each other by exchanging experience .
The Youth Employment Framework we propose gives guidance on how policy makers , stakeholders and institutions can help things along .
Public employment services , the social partners , employers and support services for young people at local level all have a crucial role to play .
We will work to encourage more exchanges of experience and good practice among them at EU level .
I firmly believe that , by pooling resources at EU level , we can help develop and promote successful policies to support young people .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am satisfied with the Commissioner 's answer .
In view of the global economic situation and the crisis , which has made conditions on the labour market much worse , affecting the most vulnerable group , namely young people , I would ask the Commissioner to give his verdict on the need for more emphasis to be given to European instruments such as the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , which we need in order to retrain workers made redundant for reasons associated with the economic crisis and , hence , also as a result of globalisation .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have listened to your reply to my honourable friend 's question , but I should like to bring your attention to the following , to what is happening on the ground .
The figures for the unemployed in Greece in 2009 were 20 % for young unemployed men and 34 % for young unemployed women .
This situation got worse after the International Monetary Fund had become involved .
At the same time , two programmes funded by the European Union through the National Strategic Reference Framework have take-up rates of 1.9 and 3.2 .
So the question is this : why this low take-up rate in Greece ?
Is the Greek Government to blame ?
And secondly , is the Commission considering any additional measures to address this employment problem ?
Briefly , this is a very important , if sad , topic .
I know that in my own country , 20 % of young people are unemployed and emigration , which had finished , is starting again with what they call ' the brain drain ' including , among others , members of my own family .
And , following on from the last question , are some countries more receptive than others to the measures being proposed by the European Union , and what are the barriers being put in their place ?
Member of the Commission . - I would like to thank you for the comments and for drawing attention to other funds apart from those I already mentioned : the Microfinance Facility , the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
They can also play a role , the latter especially in cases of unexpected mass redundancies which particularly affect people in manufacturing industry , but can affect other industries as well .
We certainly believe that these funds are helpful and we believe they need secure funding for the next financial period or the next programming period , because unfortunately , even if prosperity is coming , we will have to anticipate significant redundancies in certain cases due to restructuring and cross-border relocations .
We have to be attentive to specific cases .
There is now an emerging divide within the European Union - a kind of dualism - with a core region where there is already GDP and job growth , but also countries like Greece and Ireland that continue to struggle under the pressure of the financial market .
I recently held personal negotiations with Minister Katseli in which we discussed how the European Social Fund could be used more effectively in Greece .
There have been several reasons in the recent past , including the crisis itself , difficulties in cofinancing and certain administrative difficulties that made it difficult to draw from the Social Fund in a robust way , but I can assure you that my services are working very hard and very closely with the Greek managing authority to find appropriate funding opportunities from the ESF in this period .
I believe it really helps if we manage to fund in the appropriate way .
It is true that in emergency situations , it is even more difficult and there is a need and also the room to restructure available ESF funding .
For the longer term , I think we have to tailor the Social Fund in a way that can be more effective in specific situations and in counterbalancing the impact of uneven economic development inside the Union , which has already manifested itself in terms of demography as well , triggering migration flows that may not have been sufficiently appreciated in the previous period .
We will pay attention to this and connect that with labour market trends .
Colleagues , we now have 40 minutes until the closing time of 20 : 30 and so I propose to divide that time between Vice-President Reding and Mr Füle .
The first question is to Mrs Reding .
Colleagues , please make the calculation as to whether or not your question will be reached .
I apologise that we have a short time tonight because of the overrunning of the last debate but I intend to stop at 20 : 30 to allow the interpreters to have their supper .
I personally will be here till midnight .
Part two
Subject : Gender equality in decision making
In view of the fact that that women occupy only one seat in four in national parliaments and governments , that only 10 % of the directors of major listed companies in the EU are women and that only 3 % of such companies are chaired by women , the Commission states , in its strategy for equality between women and men 2010-2015 , that it will consider ' initiatives ' , ' monitor progress ' and ' support efforts ' to promote women 's participation .
However , in order to combat this glass ceiling , targeted action is required now .
Does the Commission intend to bring in quotas to ensure a greater role for women in the decision-making process ?
Does it intend to encourage more actively the Member States to develop their childcare systems to enable mothers to strike a better balance between work and family life ?
What other measures does it intend to take , notably to combat stereotypes ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - This is one of my favourite topics , by the way , which is why I am going to consider all legislative and non-legislative measures to redress the persistent inequalities in decision making .
The latest figures are not very positive , which is why we really need to do something - most of all because the figures persistently remain at the same non-positive level .
This is one of the five priorities of the Commission strategy for equality between women and men 2010-2015 , which I have already presented in this House , and I have also already announced that it would be good to have more women on boards and in management .
That is why we need to speak with those who have responsibility .
I will invite the leaders of the big listed companies to sit around a table in March to promote a dialogue with stakeholders in the business sector to get things moving .
If things do not move , I will move to have targeted initiatives to improve the situation .
On the question of data collection and the dissemination of comparable data , we know perfectly well that there is also a deficiency here .
We do now have the gender equality agency in Vilnius , so we can start to rely on more serious data , comparable data and , in particular , a database on women and men in decision making , and regular reporting .
It is true that the lack of a high quality care infrastructure is one of the reasons , but not the only one , why so few women are in decision-making posts , so we will have a look at the Member States ' performance here .
Over the period 2007-2013 , half a billion euro will be available from the Structural Funds to develop childcare facilities and another EUR 2.4 billion to fund measures to facilitate women 's access to employment and to reconcile work and family , including access to childcare .
When you hear me saying this , you will understand that I am not very impressed by what many Member Sates are doing at the level of childcare , so this is also high on the political agenda .
My colleague , Mr Andor , looks at these figures and actions in the Europe 2020 strategy , and I really am convinced that Member States should step up their efforts in this area .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your response and , above all , for your commitment .
I knew that this was one of your favourite subjects .
In particular , I would stress the need to encourage a balance between working life and private life , for men as well as for women ; it is only in this way that we will reach absolute equality .
More than half of the Member States have not attained the objective of creating childcare facilities for at least 90 % of children between three years of age and school age and for 33 % of children under three years of age .
I therefore wanted to ask you if you are intending to take retaliatory measures , or even to penalise the Member States that do not attain this objective .
The word ' quota ' is mentioned in the question and I did not hear a response specifically to that question about quotas .
Secondly , I would regret it if children were seen as a ' problem ' in relation to the participation of women in the workforce .
Children are children for a very short space of time and women can contribute at all age levels .
So please do not just focus on children as a problem .
The problem is not children - in fact , what is a problem is that we need more children in the European Union .
The problem is : how do women break through the glass ceiling that the questioner has recognised ?
( RO ) Although women account for more than 55 % of university graduates , we still fail to find them in management positions in public institutions or often not in businesses either .
In addition , there is also this 17 % gender pay gap .
I would like to ask you to consider some comprehensive programmes and even tighter controls on Member States regarding childcare facilities .
If we fail to create a work-life balance , we will not be able to encourage young mothers to pursue a professional career so that they can attain a management position as well .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I fully agree with the analysis that many Member States are missing the Barcelona targets .
Only eight Member States meet the Barcelona targets for children aged 0 to 3 years and only seven Member States meet the targets for children between 3 years old and the mandatory school age .
As Commissioner responsible for equality , I am not responsible for social affairs and I know that all these questions are on the agenda for the Europe 2020 strategy .
We will certainly have to look at all these questions because the problems are going to become worse with the ageing population .
Who is going to care for the elderly , too ?
Women are going to have not only the babies to look after , but also the elderly .
So we really have to have a look at that and also analyse why the Member States are not taking up the money which is available in order to have more childcare facilities .
Concerning quotas , in my answer I did not , I think , use the word quotas , but I have said very clearly that if there is no progress , then I will do something and I have said clearly what I mean by progress .
Progress means having on the boards of publicly listed companies 30 % women by 2015 and 40 % by 2020 .
I hope that we can reach those targets without the need for strong intervention at European level .
If not , well , quotas are on the agenda and , while there are those who may not believe that I will do what I say , I am known for normally doing things which I have announced .
That is also why businesses now have a big chance to make it unnecessary for me to intervene , because if they do things right , we do not need to intervene .
I completely agree with the figures which have been quoted .
We women make up 60 % of new university graduates ; that means we should also somehow hold 60 % of the management positions , but we are far from reaching that level .
That is the reason why we need to help women to get into management positions .
There are many reasons why they do not make it : one is culture and that is the most difficult to change .
That is also the reason why women in decision making is one of the priorities of the Gender Equality strategy , just as is the gender pay gap - 17 % on average at the European level , some countries being very high , some being very low .
Next year , we are going to start a campaign to raise awareness of these facts .
For instance , there is a very nice project in Germany which we could generalise to other countries where , in public spaces , there is a meter measuring how much longer a woman has to work in order to reach the same medium salary as a man .
Of course , we also have to get the social partners into this discussion and we have to have transparency measures implemented .
All this is on the agenda of the strategy for women and we are going to put that in place step by step - not in order to just speak about it , but to change things .
Subject : Costs for Member States arising from interpretation , translation and information rights in criminal proceedings
The regulation on interpretation and translation rights recently adopted by the Council and on the information rights of defendants which is currently being examined are two basic measures of the road map proposed by the Commission to strengthen defendants ' rights of defence .
Will the Commission say :
Given that it is foreseen , inter alia , that Member States shall bear the entire translation , interpretation and information costs , what are the expected financial impact on and financial burden for Member States arising from the provision of such services ?
Member States , such as Greece and Malta , receive large numbers of illegal migrants and are expected to face particularly heavy costs from the provision of translation , interpretation and information services relating to criminal charges and the training of police officers and prosecutors .
Is the Commission expected to contribute to help these countries and provide them with financial assistance so that they do not have to bear the entire cost of providing these services to illegal migrants involved in legal proceedings ?
If so , which criteria will be used to fix the level of such aid and determine which countries will be eligible ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - When I became Commissioner , I saw that a great deal had been done in the past on questions of security and very little had been done on questions of rights .
That is why , having the tools of the Lisbon Treaty at my disposal and also having the Stockholm Strategy , where many points on how we have to advance have been put into place , we decided to act , and we acted very swiftly .
First of all , let me thank the Parliament for the excellent work which has been done on the procedural rights .
We have already come to an agreement on the right of a person before the court to interpretation and translation in criminal proceedings .
We are making good progress on the directive on the right to information in criminal proceedings : the famous letter of rights .
If we want to become the continent of rights , we will have to have the procedural rights established little by little .
Those come at a price but they are indispensable to safeguarding the rights of the defence for European citizens and also to making mutual recognition function properly .
Before we make any proposal , we always make a thorough impact assessment of the financial consequences of the EU legislation for Member States .
Only then do we submit legislative proposals .
This exercise was , of course , based on the figures provided by the administration of the Member States .
These figures reveal that the additional costs to be borne by Member States should not be too great .
Regarding the right to interpretation and translation , the directive simply reiterates an existing obligation of the Member States already in the Convention on Human Rights of the Council of Europe , so it is not asking for something extraordinary .
It is just asking for something very basic .
The Member States - and there are many who already comply with the Strasbourg Court obligations - are unlikely to have to incur any expenses in addition to what they already spend on this .
Regarding the right to information , the biggest share of expenditure will be in the initial one-off cost of drawing up a letter of rights .
Here , the Commission has already submitted a model as an annex to the directive in all the EU languages .
Member States just have to take this model and copy it , so the cost to them will not be very great .
The Commission does not have a budget containing any appropriation which would allow the institution to provide financial assistance to Member States to meet those expenses .
If Member States make a calculation taking in the risk of a miscarriage of justice , the legal remedies and the retrials , the loss of reputation of a justice system as a whole and sometimes the damages awarded by the Strasbourg Court or by domestic courts , then it is much more expensive not to have these basic rights financed by a responsible state .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your reply .
You are absolutely right in what you say and I cannot but agree with you .
However , I would clarify and ask once again : for countries such as Greece or Malta , for example , where you know how much pressure we are under both from illegal immigrants and from people who may need help in criminal proceedings , if , in addition to the standard letter and various standard documents at their disposal , defendants need any of the documents in their case file translated which , as you know , is a specialist job which differs from case to case , do we estimate what the cost will be , especially for some small countries under such huge pressure and with such massive problems ?
I would like to thank the Commissioner for her answer as well .
Like my previous colleague , I think one of the biggest difficulties that should be recognised is that - whilst we all understand the importance of access to justice in a format which is understandable to the person seeking the justice - these new rules cannot be used as a legal mechanism to delay further hearing of important cases , whether it is for deportation under immigration rules or whether it is to challenge certain criminal records and so on .
Is there any piece within the legislation or the proposal that would allow for the court to ignore the necessity for every single document to be translated into the language ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I can only repeat that the cost of an improper functioning of justice , or the cost of not treating human beings as human beings should be treated in a Europe of rights , is much higher than the cost of investing in those basic rights .
Of course , it is much more difficult for countries which are very much below the minimum threshold to reach that threshold , and it will be much easier for countries which already have a certain level of rights to do so .
Is that a reason for not acting ?
On the contrary .
We have been analysing the possible costs for the different Member States on the basis also of the pressure under which they are operating .
It is not a question of asylum alone .
It is also a question of criminal proceedings , for example , in the case of an illegal immigrant charged with a criminal offence being brought before a court .
We have not made it compulsory to have all the documents translated , only those which are essential to enable the person being prosecuted to understand what is happening to him or to her .
By the way , the great majority of people affected will not be illegal immigrants .
The largest groups affected are people travelling to another Member State , such as tourists for instance , or people who live in another Member State but who do not speak the language of that country .
So this will provide a basic benefit for millions of European citizens .
Imagine that you are travelling from Strasbourg to a neighbouring country .
You are involved in a traffic accident .
You have injured someone .
You are taken to the police , you are taken to court and you have no idea what you are being accused of .
In those circumstances , you would be very glad at least to know what you were charged with so that you could try to defend yourself .
I think that is a basic human right and we should consider the cost to society of not putting this basic human right into practice .
I am sorry but the questions by Ms Harkin , Mr Cashman , Mr Mirsky and Mr Crowley will not be reached tonight .
They will receive an answer in writing .
As I said earlier , we are running late because of the over-running of the previous debate .
We now move to questions to Mr Füle .
Subject : Enlargement of the EU to include Turkey
Could the Commission please outline the current situation regarding Turkey 's application to join the EU ?
Member of the Commission . - The Helsinki European Council of December 1999 granted Turkey the status of candidate country and accession negotiations with Turkey were opened in October 2005 .
The Commission has reported regularly to the Council and Parliament on Turkish progress towards meeting the Copenhagen criteria .
On 9 November , the Commission published the 2010 progress report on Turkey .
The report covers the period from early October 2009 to October 2010 and progress is measured on the basis of decisions taken , legislation adopted and measures implemented .
Turkey has pursued its political reform process , in particular , through the reform of its constitution , and continues to sufficiently fulfil the political criteria .
The constitutional amendments adopted by referendum on 12 September created the conditions for progress in a number of areas such as the judiciary , fundamental rights and public administration .
The implementation of the constitutional changes in a transparent and inclusive way is essential for Turkish progress .
The democratic opening aimed notably at addressing the Kurdish issue has not yet met expectations .
The decision of the constitutional court to close down the Democratic Society Party and a surge in PKK terrorist attacks also undermined this policy .
Significant reforms are still required on fundamental rights , in particular , in the area of freedom of expression .
The high number of legal suits against journalists and undue pressure on the media undermine freedom of the press in practice .
With regard to regional issues and international obligations , it is now urgent that Turkey fulfils its obligation of full non-discriminatory implementation of additional protocols to the association agreement .
The Commission has recommended that , if there is no progress on this issue , the measures adopted by the European Union in 2006 should be upheld .
This will affect the overall progress of the negotiations .
Turkey has continued to express public support for the negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations between the leaders of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities to reach a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem .
However , there has been no progress towards normalisation of bilateral relations with the Republic of Cyprus .
As regards the economic criteria for accession to the European Union , Turkey continues to be a functioning market economy that can cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union .
Turkey has witnessed strong economic growth in 2010 , recouping the losses incurred during the financial crisis , but the process of privatisation and structural reform needs to continue .
Turkey continued improving its ability to take on the obligations of membership by aligning its laws and regulations with those of the European Union .
Two negotiating chapters were opened during this reporting period - environment and food safety - adding to a total of 13 chapters that are currently open .
Important progress has been made on energy security with the ratification of the intergovernmental agreement on Nabucco , and on cooperation in the aviation sector with initialisation of the EU-Turkey horizontal aviation agreement .
Much alignment remains to be done , particularly on fisheries , social policies , justice and home affairs , and the customs union where longstanding trade issues remain unresolved .
It remains crucial that Turkey improves its administrative capacity to implement and enforce EU-related legislation .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to apologise .
We had a group meeting .
Question time with Mrs Reding began at 20 : 00 .
I saw that on the monitor and then came here as soon as the second question was asked - she had six , after all .
I thought that it would last half an hour , as scheduled .
I therefore just missed my question .
I would like to ask if you would be so kind as to still allow me to ask it after Mr Higgins 's question .
I really did arrive in the Chamber just as I should have been speaking .
The problem is that , under Rule 116 , if a Member is not in his place at the point at which a question should be replied to , then the question lapses .
Attempts were made by the staff , although they do not have to , to call your office but there was no reply .
I realise that there are difficulties but Question Time started 20 minutes late .
I gave each Commissioner 20 minutes each .
Mrs Reding had 20 minutes , she answered two questions , and we had agreed to move on to Mr Füle at 20 : 10 .

Mr Posselt , I am very sorry .
I shall take the two supplementaries and we will see where we get then .
( GA ) Mr President , we must recognise that Turkey , although a Muslim state , is very helpful to the West , especially as regards Kuwait , Iraq and NATO .
Although there are difficulties as regards a very large population , 74 million people , and difficulties as regards human rights , economic affairs and Cyprus , at the same time , can the Commissioner not admit that the situation is improving ?
Is he able to give us any timetable , long term or short term , within which we will be able to grant Turkey the right to become a full member of the European Union ?
Just briefly , notwithstanding the progress Turkey has made in certain areas , the Commissioner pointed out that significant progress needs to be made regarding freedom of expression and freedom of the press .
If that is satisfied one day and they do join the European Union , is there not a danger that they will return to type and go back on a lot of the things that we are looking for and which have not been attained yet ?
Member of the Commission . - Regarding the first question , I definitely belong to those who are not satisfied with the pace of our accession negotiations .
I do not think it reflects the importance of the country , and the commitment on both sides , to open just one chapter per Presidency , bearing in mind that we were unable to open a new chapter during this Presidency even though there has been a lot of progress , in particular , on Chapter 8 dealing with competition .
There are a number of reasons for this .
Unresolved issues concerning Cyprus still being divided is one of them .
The number of chapters available for us to open through the framework of the accession negotiations is indeed limited .
We have only three chapters to open in the time remaining - on competition , procurement and social policy - and these are not easy chapters .
Eight of them are being frozen , based on Commission recommendations , as a reaction to Turkey 's non-implementation of the additional protocol , but there are other chapters which are being blocked by individual Member States .
In these circumstances , it is difficult for the Commission to provide any reasonable timetable .
I can say that today in Brussels , in the framework of the General First Council at ministerial level , we had a good discussion on the EU-Turkey relationship and the accession negotiations in terms of agreeing on the text of declarations .
I am also pursuing a number of routes for intensifying this process .
I am confident that after the forthcoming parliamentary elections in Turkey , both sides will indeed be ready to do exactly that .
On freedom of the press , this is an issue of concern and one that the Commission is following very closely .
The goal of this exercise is to go through all the 35 chapters , through all the opening and closing benchmarks , to make sure that Turkey not only aligns itself with the European Union acquis but also provides a track record of the implementation of that acquis .
This very much concerns the political part of the Copenhagen criteria , which specifically relates to freedom of the media and the freedom of expression .
Together with the Member States and with the support of the European Parliament , we are very keen that the enlargement process is not just an exercise in ticking boxes , which might later cause problems with the implementation of some of the legislation or with the working of the institutions .
It is a serious process where the track record is playing a more and more important role .
This is exactly the process Turkey needs to go through before the question of whether it will succeed in becoming a member of the European Union is put on the table .
That would be the best assurance that all freedoms , including the one mentioned by the honourable Member , are guaranteed .
Subject : Cooperation between Vojvodina and eastern Croatia
How does the Commission view the potential for greater cross-border cooperation between the Serbian province of Vojvodina and eastern Croatia ( Osijek / Eastern Slavonia region ) , with particular regard to the development of cross-border infrastructure such as the project to construct a motorway from Sombor to Osijek ?
Subject : The rise of an increasingly virulent form of nationalism in Albania and its prospects of EU accession
For a very long time , the main feature of political life in Albania has been the extreme fragility of its government .
This instability is having an adverse effect on the process of far-reaching institutional reform needed if it is to join the EU .
Amid this climate of prolonged political uncertainty , one cause for special concern is the rise of a particularly virulent form of fanatical nationalism , both in the media and in society , especially among young people .
To give specific examples of this : the murder of an Albanian citizen of Greek origin in Himarë last August ; acts of vandalism at Bobostiticë cemetery in which wreaths laid as a mark of respect were burned ; and the repeated , intemperate verbal attacks by part of the ' mainstream ' Albanian press directed at the head of the Orthodox Church of Albania .
In view of the above , will the Commission say :
Is it aware of the specific events outlined above ?
Is it concerned about the rise in fanatical nationalism ?
Will it make appropriate representations to the Albanian Government to tackle this problem ?
And finally , will all this alter the progress of Albania 's bid to join the EU ?
Member of the Commission . - I will provide succinct answers to both questions .
The main objective of the cross-border cooperation programmes is to support the development of a common socio-economic environment for people , communities and economies , including the delivery of technical assistance .
This should prepare countries to manage future cross-border programmes under the European territorial cooperation objectives of the European Union Structural Funds .
Cross-border cooperation programmes between the Western Balkan countries also aim at overcoming the legacy of the past conflicts .
Cross-border programmes under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance within the Western Balkans started in 2007 .
The results have so far been very positive .
In the framework of their cross-border programmes , both Croatia and Serbia showed readiness to cooperate in the areas lying on either side of the Danube River .
The annual allocation for the Croatia-Serbia cross-border programme amounts to EUR 1.8 million .
This allocation of funds is used for providing grants to small joint projects proposed by local stakeholders in a variety of sectors such as the economy , culture , tourism , the environment and social issues .
Project beneficiaries include municipalities , NGOs , chambers of commerce or cultural institutions .
Large cross-border infrastructure projects , such as the project referred to in the question , are neither within the scope nor the objectives of the cross-border cooperation component of the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance .
The Commission might consider funding such projects under component one for Serbia - which is institution building - and component three for Croatia - which falls under regional development - if the respective authorities in Croatia and Serbia so request .
As for the second question , if I may continue .
As mentioned in the written reply to a previous question by the honourable Member numbered , the European Commission is aware of the deplorable incident in Himarë and is closely following developments .
The alleged perpetrator has turned himself in to the police and is awaiting trial .
The Albanian authorities bear the full responsibility for the efficient investigation of the facts and the equitable trial of those responsible .
The Commission will be monitoring the processing of this case in conformity with the principles of human rights and the rule of law .
In this question , the honourable Member also provides details of other incidents .
Albania and Greece are closely linked by history .
It is very much in the interests of both countries that they continue their cooperation and overcome any nationalist and extremist ideas which have been at the root of much misfortune suffered by the whole region in the past .
The Commission has repeatedly stressed the need for a strict enforcement of the rule of law and for full respect of human rights , notably the protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities .
All applicant countries are aware of the importance of fulfilling these criteria for progress towards the European Union .
In its recent opinion the Commission commented positively on inter-ethnic relations in Albania .
However , efforts are still needed to enforce respect for and protection of minorities .
( DE ) Mr President , thank you very much for your generosity .
I will be very brief , Commissioner .
Would you possibly be prepared to take a look at the link between Sombor in Serbia and Osijek in Croatia ?
There is a large bridge over the Danube there and in Croatia , there is an airport , but no adequate road .
That really would be extremely important for the whole region .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have listened very carefully to your reply and I thank you for it , as regards the specific events .
On the other hand , however , the reason for my question today was primarily the fact that , objectively speaking , there has been an outbreak of nationalism in Albania .
This concerns and worries us in Greece , because this sort of thing should not happen in a country on its way to accession .
We trust that these problems will be addressed .
Mr Paleckis , would you like to make a comment about Belarus ?
Yes , I have a question on Belarus .
Thank you for your presents on the eve of Christmas .
Recently , President Lukashenko visited Moscow and signed very important agreements with President Medvedev .
How would you assess the new situation before the elections and after the signing of these agreements ?
Commissioner , that is three questions .
You have a maximum of three minutes please .
Member of the Commission . - To the first question , the answer is yes , based on the request , for both of these countries .
I am ready to look at it and see what the Commission can do to help .
Secondly , any nationalist race is a concern for the Commission and is an issue which needs to be treated very seriously within the framework of our relations with the country .
As you know , at the beginning of October , we presented an opinion on Albania .
There have been a number of the so-called key priorities - 12 of them - which are preconditions Albania must meet before we can recommend opening accession negotiations .
Within these 12 key priorities , my colleagues and I will make sure that the issue you have raised is tackled satisfactorily and that the Commission makes no recommendation to start the accession talks unless questions , such as the one you raised , are dealt with satisfactorily .
On the third question , I hesitate as to how to answer it briefly .
I think we have seen some limited progress in this pre-election process .
We are very keen to see the report of the OSCE / ODIHR monitoring mission .
Based on that , we are ready to take further steps on engaging Belarus , but that will be an engagement across the board , having very much in mind the steps which are to be made by the Belarusian authorities on the core issues of democracy , the rule of law and fundamental rights .
I will stop here and will provide a written reply on the current work of the Commission and the Member States on the joint interim plan about which I will be talking to you and your colleagues from Euronest tomorrow , as well as the work on the mandate on the readmission agreement , the visa facilitation agreement and also additional information which would answer your question .
I will also include my prepared speech .
Mr Paleckis , I felt it was important to get your comments on Belarus on the record , given the ongoing election .
I apologise to Mr Madlener , to Ms Theocharous and to Mr Hadjigeorgiou , who are also present .
Their questions have not been reached .
They will get a reply in writing .
Mr Madlener , there really is no time .
( NL ) ( without microphone ) ... to ask that question , but now we are , in fact , simply being dropped from the agenda .
Is this standard practice ?
Could you not have let us know earlier or intervened , so that we could all take the floor ?
Mr Madlener , under my chairmanship , we always try and end at 20 : 30 .
It has now run on for seven minutes due to the length of the replies and the fact that the previous debate overran by 20 minutes .
It is not my fault , but I do think it is important that the staff get their food before they come back at 21 : 00 .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 40 and resumed at 21 : 00 )
Energy Efficiency Action Plan ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Bendt Bendtsen , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the revision of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan .
Mr President , the EU 's target of achieving 20 % energy efficiency savings by 2020 could be at risk of becoming yet another Lisbon prophecy .
With the current initiatives , it looks like we will achieve 10 or 11 % .
That is not good enough .
We must invest in energy efficiency for economic , commercial , environmental and social reasons .
A greater focus on energy efficiency will mean , first and foremost , that we use less energy .
This will result in savings and , according to the Commission 's figures , the financial benefits of achieving our 20 % target are in the region of EUR 1 000 per household per year .
While China and the United States are now making significant investments in this area , things are moving more slowly in Europe .
We are trailing behind .
In China , the state subsidises these industries .
The United States has fantastic framework conditions for business , whereas European citizens only think about how much luxury we will get for our monthly salaries .
There is too little focus on innovation and on achieving results .
From a political point of view , we must focus on some areas that can allow us to leave this world a better place than it was when we took it over - areas which will also provide a large economic return , create new jobs and improve our competitiveness .
Energy efficiency also has the additional benefit of providing work for Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises .
The three central pillars of the EU 's energy efficiency policy are , as I see it , the national action plans , the product policy and buildings .
These are three very different types of policies , and if we start with the national action plans , they have not proven to be very effective , but they nevertheless have a large amount of potential .
We therefore need to streamline them and give the Commission the opportunity to use them actively as a tool .
The Commission will have the chance to reject the action plans if they are not sufficiently ambitious .
This will result in transparency for citizens .
However , it is of the utmost importance that we maintain the Member States ' independence and give them the opportunity to decide for themselves where they want to apply their efforts .
Thus , in some countries , the potential for energy savings in buildings is greater than in other countries , just as entirely different countries will presumably focus on increased energy savings in connection with production .
The second pillar is the product policy , which concerns both standards and labelling .
Standards are , by far , the more important of the two , and it is very easy to demonstrate the size of the savings that will be made as a result of the standards , and again , this will increase innovation .
The buildings policy is also important .
Targets will be set in relation to the 2050 road map .
Buildings are absolutely crucial in energy and climate policy . Forty percent of energy consumption comes from our buildings .
This is an area where savings can be made that will be evident in the final accounts .
I am convinced that these three areas will provide an important foundation for competitiveness and innovation for many years to come .
Thus , the report recommends a financial instrument for leveraging investments in projects relating to energy efficiency .
There are models in some European countries in which investments are leveraged many times over , and the question is whether the EU should not also arrange its finances in this way .
I hope that Parliament can agree to adopt this report with a large political majority , as this is important - it is a very important area for Europe and for our enterprises .
Mr President , honourable Members , first of all , I am grateful to Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the Committee on Regional Development for the intensive debate and for the report that we are debating today .
That applies to Mr Bendtsen in particular , but also to other Members who have been involved in this matter for a long time and have shown a high level of competence .
If we just take stock of the interim situation with regard to the three 20 % targets that we have been set - CO2 , renewable energies in the energy mix and greater energy efficiency : with regard to CO2 and renewable energies , we are making good progress , but where energy efficiency is concerned , we are just beginning .
If we do not take action , we will not meet the target .
That means that , although we have been set a target - Parliament , the Council , all European institutions - our progress , particularly after the crisis , is not likely to result in 20 % more energy efficiency ; instead , as things currently stand , it would only be possible to achieve a maximum of 8 , 9 , 10 % in ten years ' time .
My second point is that I am not completely happy with the term energy efficiency , because no one except us understands it .
If you ask your neighbours or your friends , they understand energy saving , but energy efficiency is just some sort of technical term .
In fact , the issue we have with regard to this target is that what actually needs to be achieved has not yet been conclusively defined .
We have an overall assessment of energy consumption for 2005 , supplemented by data from 2007 on account of the inclusion of Romania and Bulgaria , and that year is the starting point .
The level of consumption referred to there is well-known .
At that time - it was before my time - all decisions reflected a normal forecast , in other words , an energy demand that would increase , and from that , in turn , 20 % was deducted .
If energy savings are disregarded , will our energy demand actually increase , I ask myself .
In my country - Germany - probably not .
However , in new Member States - I only need to mention motor vehicles , the number of cars per inhabitant , housing sizes , industrial development - it certainly will increase .
However , up to now , there has been no objective report that assesses the forecasts .
Twenty percent - of how much , we do not know .
We have PRIMES and other models - I have doubts about many of the predictions of the figures .
For example , there are founder members of the European Union who claim their energy demand will increase sharply by 2020 without energy savings .
The deduction of 20 % gives exactly the same figures as those from 2005 .
That is surely not possible .
That means , first of all , that we need figures , perspectives and forecasts that have authority .
We want to produce these by February or March .
I am counting on the Heads of State or Government to take this matter just as seriously in February as they did before the crisis , as it seems to me that , as things stand , the Member States will not vote for binding targets .
They may achieve a majority in Parliament , but the Member States want to work on a voluntary basis and they are still a long way from agreeing to the binding targets decided on two or three years ago .
Thus , we need to clarify what the forecast for 2020 is without energy efficiency - more from a purely theoretical point of view - and then simply cut it by 20 % .
Then we need to ask : where do we start ?
First of all , in the area of building stock .
In the area of housing , work and industry , it is existing buildings where we have the most to do .
In this regard , I see public owners - municipalities , states - setting an example .
In other words , efficiency must , first of all , be sought wherever the state owns property .
Secondly , we have structural programmes at European level and we have different refurbishment programmes in the various countries .
We have to link these two together .
We will perhaps have to provide less money for paving market places and have fewer bypasses , but instead , we will cofinance more energy efficiency .
I also consider this to be a crucial objective for the next budgetary period at European level .
Then comes the subject of transport .
It goes without saying that we have to make savings there when we know that there are some Member States in which there are 550 cars for every 1 000 members of the population - petrol and diesel engines - and others where there are 100 or 120 .
This will be harmonised , but not at a level of 100 cars per 1 000 citizens in Germany , but at 400 to 500 cars per 1 000 citizens in Europe .
We therefore need more energy efficiency in the area of transport .
Incidentally , the most efficient form of transport is the one that is avoided .
Thirdly , there is industry and , fourthly , the energy sector .
The question of the binding nature of any such measures has been discussed at length in the European Parliament .
We brought this issue up at an informal lunch in the Energy Council a few weeks ago . I can tell you that the Member States and the energy ministers are handling the subject of energy efficiency very sensitively , but are not yet prepared to take a decision on binding targets .
Incidentally , consider an emerging Member State like Poland : will it manage minus 20 % ?
I doubt it .
Or consider a saturated Member State like Germany , Austria or Italy : how would we get Austria or Germany , for example , to accept a cut of 30 % so that Poland can adjust its economic development , number of cars per citizen and whatever else to the targets ?
In this regard , we still have some tough discussions ahead of us with regard to how this will be implemented in detail in the various sectors - industry , the energy sector , transport and housing - and in the Member States .
I will now take the report on board and I thank you for its contents .
I want to debate this matter on 4 February in the European Council in order once again to see clearly how seriously the governments are taking this and I will then come back to you with a concrete proposal for a new energy efficiency plan .
I am sure we will then have sufficient opportunity in spring and summer to discuss everything , including the question of binding targets .
Bearing in mind the principle of subsidiarity , perhaps a two-stage plan might be the right approach .
Stage 1 would be voluntary .
We will expect national energy efficiency action plans to be provided on an annual basis and we will specify what we expect each year in terms of achieving the targets , but we will not wait until 2020 .
Instead , if appropriate , we will switch after two years to binding targets if we notice that in the first two years , the voluntary phase has not resulted in progress towards 20 % in the Member States .
Thank you very much for today .


Mr President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to make a correction : the German translation states that I am the chair of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , but that is not correct .
I am the rapporteur .
However , in this role , I would like to express my sincere thanks to Mr Bendtsen for his splendid work and excellent cooperation .
He has presented an ambitious strategy on the subject of energy efficiency in the European Union .
Energy efficiency is the most cost-effective means of lowering emissions and reducing our dependence on energy imports .
This will create jobs in Europe , and the money we invest will no longer flow in the direction of Russia , the Middle East or other regions , but will remain in our economy .
The Environment Committee has adopted a comprehensive opinion .
I do not need to repeat everything it contains , but it is also very ambitious .
Not everything it contains is of equal importance , either .
However , I would like to emphasise two points once again .
Firstly - we have talked about this , Commissioner - we propose that the European Union sets itself a long-term target in the area of energy efficiency , because if we plan up to 2050 , we also need to know roughly how much we consume .
Secondly , we have also pointed out the problems with the definition .
I believe that we should take the quantity of energy consumed as the basis , as that is measurable and we have data for that .
We do not have data for anything else as far as measurement per unit is concerned , for example .
Therefore , this is the right approach in my view , and I hope that we can incorporate it into the strategy accordingly in the coming months .
Mr President , Commissioner , energy efficiency is one of the main challenges facing the European Union over the next 10 years .
It is also a key element of our energy strategy .
At present , the priority is for the report 's constructive provisions and the Commission 's energy strategy to be implemented by the Member States .
For this to happen , several problems need to be resolved .
At EU level , we are still facing the problem of measuring energy efficiency .
We are currently using the 2020 forecasts for this purpose ; however , it would not be sensible to adopt binding legal goals based on these forecasts .
In terms of the future , we are not clairvoyants .
For this reason , new and better technology needs to be developed , and this has already been mentioned in today 's discussion .
This technology will allow us to achieve our goal .
It is also important to take regional differences into account .
The way that energy is used in Copenhagen is different to the way it is used in eastern Poland .
There is no single plan of action that suits everything , and we have to ensure that these plans are compatible with reality .
Regional and local authorities will be responsible for implementing policies on energy efficiency , and so the European Commission and Member States must coordinate their activities with local authorities .
Otherwise , they will be perceived as bureaucratic red tape and the source of huge costs to regions and citizens .
Without multi-level management and the earmarking of funding for this goal , the whole project will be condemned to failure .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank those who have worked on this report and , in particular , Mr Bendtsen .
I would like to mention two aspects and perhaps give you pause for thought .
We are all agreed that energy efficiency , using energy economically , is the most simple and most sensible solution .
The question is : how do we achieve this goal ?
I would also like to ask the question : what have we actually achieved here in Parliament by keep going back to the people with new and higher percentages ?
Have we really achieved more and had more of an effect ?
Why and in which areas have we been using energy more efficiently ?
I am told that industry , which consumes a lot of energy , is using energy more efficiency because it saves money by doing so and because it is beneficial for it .
I am also told that when people know that a particular appliance consumes more or less energy , in other words , if they can see that and can see an advantage to themselves , they will decide in favour of energy efficiency .
Perhaps working with percentages is completely the wrong way to go about it and we should instead take an incentives approach .
My second question is : the Commissioner made some very eloquent and clear comments about how complicated it is just to explain what energy efficiency is .
What is it in fact ?
How differently is it implemented in the Member States ?
My fellow Member has just pointed out that the Member States also have very different situations in terms of their economies and geography - completely different .
Is it the right solution to work with a single binding figure , or should we not think of something else ?
I think that , in terms of energy policy , we need , to a certain extent , to move away from the debate of the past , which sought to achieve something with simple figures , binding targets and miracle solutions , because we have clearly not achieved enough .
Perhaps , for once , we should try the alternative route of differentiated , varied solutions , which takes account of the different situations , but then also achieves results .
What matters is the effect we achieve rather than our particular circumstances .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , I have just one question for Mr Reul .
Is it not possible to have binding targets in the course of development and yet still to regard them as differentiated ?
You contrasted ' binding ' and ' differentiated ' , whereas I believe that it is possible to unite the two .
I am completely behind some of the steps that the Commissioner has put forward , but perhaps we can find a way to proceed in a differentiated manner according to the geographical and other circumstances , but still ultimately obtain binding targets .
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , advocate differentiated solutions and , like you , Mr Swoboda , I am in the process of considering how such solutions can be brought about .
We should not rule anything out at all in respect of where something is to be done .
I will take today as my starting point .
At the moment , I believe it to be the wrong approach to essentially buy ourselves a little leeway with binding targets and percentages .
I would invite us all now to give more thought to what we can achieve and how , on a step-by-step basis .
It saddens me that we have not achieved more .
Perhaps we need to choose a different approach for that reason .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Mr Bendtsen and the other rapporteurs for their productive cooperation on this report .
We have succeeded in reaching agreement in many areas - not least , the ambition to harvest the low-hanging fruit resulting from boosting energy efficiency .
There have also been areas of disagreement , however .
We are not in agreement when it comes to setting ambitious and binding targets for energy efficiency .
In my view , it is crucial that we stand firm on a minimum target of 20 % increased energy efficiency .
That is the way forward if we want a green and sustainable economy that can create a million new jobs in Europe .
However , it is crucial that these energy efficiency targets are binding for the Member States , as it is plain for all to see that the EU has recommendations and objectives in a great many areas that are never realised in practice because they are not binding .
At the same time , we have seen that binding targets do work .
It is therefore obvious that this should also apply to energy efficiency measures .
We know that this is easily the cheapest way of reducing CO2 emissions , guaranteeing the security of supply and , at the same time , ensuring that consumers have lower heating bills - and less expenditure on heating bills would represent progress , in particular , for the many Europeans affected by what we could term energy poverty .
People suffer from energy poverty if a relatively large proportion of their income has to be spent on heating their home . There are currently no common definitions of energy poverty , nor are there any proper political initiatives in place to reduce it .
The consequences of energy poverty are disastrous .
It results in the deterioration of the health and the general living conditions of low income groups .
We must therefore provide cheap loans for investments in energy efficiency in private homes and we must also use the Structural Funds for this purpose .
I am looking forward to the vote tomorrow , and I hope that we can get a large majority to support the report and more forceful action to combat energy poverty .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I want to pay tribute to Mr Bendtsen who has worked extremely hard on this report and cooperated closely with the shadows from other parties .
He has succeeded in bringing parliamentarians together on this issue and he deserves warm congratulations .
Energy saving ticks an awful lot of boxes .
First of all , climate change .
Cancún has reminded us how much we need to do , and energy saving is the cheapest and easiest way of moving to a 30 % reduction in greenhouse gases .
Secondly , energy security .
I was in Zaghreb last week discussing Croatia 's accession with Liberal colleagues , and they told me that Croatia imports 50 % of its energy and also uses twice as much energy as it would do if proper energy efficiency measures were in place .
Now that energy is a shared European competence under the Lisbon Treaty , energy efficiency must also be a shared responsibility .
By doing more on energy saving , we are also tackling the very practical problems that people face in their lives .
Too many people are living in fuel poverty , struggling to keep warm in houses that are not properly insulated .
Making homes more energy efficient puts money in people 's pockets to spend in the local economy at this time of financial and economic difficulty .
It would also create many thousands of jobs in the local economy .
So , given all these positive effects , it comes as a great shock to realise that the 20 % energy efficiency target is the one part of the 2020 package which is currently heading for failure , as the Commissioner said .
Indeed , the latest figures show that we are on target to reach only 9 % of the projected 20 % by 2020 .
And the time has come I think for us to put up our hands and admit that we got it wrong in 2008 .
We should have made the target binding then , and we really need to go forward now and find ways of making it possible .
I thank the Commissioner for having given us an insight into what he is preparing for the next year .
I think the time has come to make a political decision here that we have to have a binding energy saving target because without it , we are actually undermining everything else that we do on the economy , on energy security and on climate change .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of his work and , in principle , clearly , to support the adoption tomorrow of the report adopted in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
Let us come now to the unbelievable potential associated with energy savings , a point that has been made here .
Reports from the European Commission itself say that if we called a halt to our excessive energy consumption , if we reduced our energy wastage by 20 % , we could create one million jobs , we could save almost EUR 1 000 per European household , and we could clearly reduce our external energy bill .
A 20 % energy saving or reduction in Europe is the equivalent of 15 Nabuccos in energy terms , and we are currently missing that target .
Mrs Hall made this point , and the way I see it , we have trouble calculating .
If reports show today that we are far from achieving 20 % , then we can evaluate the savings that we make or do not make each year .
We also know that this eco-design or eco-labelling approach for cars and so on does not result in overall coherence and does enable us to obtain the results that we are seeking .
I am a little surprised at the debate that we are having here .
Excuse me , Commissioner , but when you say that we have a problem in defining energy efficiency , this is perhaps true from a theoretical point of view , but the climate and energy package is very clear on the objective .
It says that energy consumption must be reduced by 20 % below the baseline level .
This problem does not have to do with the definition of energy efficiency .
There are energy levels that we need to return to - that is what the climate and energy package says .
We are told that we do not need a binding objective . We are thus making one on renewables .
A few days ago , in Cancún , the European Commission negotiated a binding agreement on climate change and tried to defend the Kyoto Protocol , and in this House we are citing the arguments of the United States and China by saying : ' We will go for voluntary targets , and then , if one day we realise that they are not working , we will create binding targets ' .
With regard to the report under examination , a number of Members have proposed strengthening the part on building .
There is scope to take a large-scale European initiative on building , which nevertheless accounts for 40 % of our energy consumption ; we can go much further on renovation .
Finally , citizens are today facing the cold .
They are paying very high prices for their energy .
If Europe emerges from the crisis , energy will be much more expensive internationally .
Citizens will be confronted with a two-fold increase in energy prices .
We must move much more quickly , and I would also ask you , Commissioner , to please stress to Mr Van Rompuy that the 4 February meeting should also be a meeting about energy consumption .
From this point of view , the road map that he is proposing today is outrageous .
Mr President , I would like most of all to thank the rapporteur for the very constructive and open cooperation in preparing the report .
In my speech , I would like to focus on one issue .
Our political group will not be able to accept the introduction of binding energy efficiency goals for the European system .
First and foremost , we do not have a common methodology for measuring efficiency ; too many indicators are not comparable .
Goals should be set for each country separately so that the varying potential for savings is taken into account as well as current achievements in this area .
I will give the example of my country - since 1990 , Poland has improved its energy efficiency by 50 % .
Despite this , Poland remains a country of low efficiency compared to the European average .
The introduction of a uniform , binding goal will be politically harmful and mean that the cost of making changes will be spread unequally between Member States .
Mr President , I would also like to begin by saying that I believe this to be a good time to table a motion to review the Action Plan on Energy Efficiency and , if there are any doubts , I believe that the debate that we are having here today will clarify things .
Energy efficiency policy is absolutely fundamental in a number of sectors , from buildings to energy infrastructure , information and communications technology , transport , matters of finance , all of these issues and many more , and all other sectors .
It is essential that we have coordinated and joined-up policies , because otherwise , we cannot achieve our objectives .
Energy efficiency policy is also essential to enable us to combat climate change , as I have already mentioned , in connection with the reduction of emissions to which we need to respond .
We cannot have a discussion , on the one hand , in support of reducing emissions and , on the other , have another discussion relating to energy efficiency saying it is not possible .
I would therefore like to make a few points that seem to me to be fundamental to this discussion .
Firstly , it is important for us to set binding targets .
As I have mentioned before , the situation whereby we still have voluntary criteria has simply brought us to where we are now : we cannot set binding targets because it will be impossible to achieve 20 % energy efficiency by 2020 , and we will tell the European public that , in the end , it was an empty promise , and that nothing of the sort is going to happen in reality , because we only achieved 9 % .
I believe that this is an unacceptable argument that contradicts itself , because the fact that we are not going to achieve 20 % energy efficiency is precisely why we do not set binding targets to do so .
If targets have this effect , they also have the effect of providing the motivation for policies and projects .
If we do not want to do this , we are being cowards , and cannot depend on good will .
We have to depend , unfortunately in this case , on political will .
I hope that tomorrow , the political will is leaning towards setting this target of 20 % energy efficiency by 2020 , and not just because achieving this will enable one million jobs to be created : new jobs , and we are not in a position where we can miss the opportunity to create jobs .
What seems to be happening here with this assumption of no joint commitment is the same thing that is happening with economic policy at European level .
The European Union is showing itself to be incapable of having an economic policy for job creation .
It is also showing itself to be incapable of having a common energy efficiency policy .
I hope that this does not remain the case , I hope that we are successful not only in this sector , but also in the construction sector , and I sincerely hope that tomorrow , we are able to give a response that is not only coordinated and articulate , but a response to the crisis that we are experiencing .
Mr President , the negotiated revision of the action plan for energy efficiency describes many ways in which the Europe Union might contribute to fulfilling its ambition for a planned reduction in greenhouse gas volumes by 2020 .
The philosophy of the submitted elaboration is based on the logical notion that we can achieve dramatic cuts in production costs and environmental pollution if we manage to handle energy rationally and if we take necessary and affordable measures to limit energy waste in all energy consumption sectors .
The proposed measures do not apply only to the area of energy infrastructure , in other words , production and transmission of energy , but also to the construction sector , industrial output and transport .
The measures are generally depicted as fundamental postulates , with no need to describe their expected benefit .
It is undoubtedly a good thing that the EU will have a kind of summary list of measures enabling a gradual increase in energy efficiency . However , with regard to the target deadline for the EU commitment to reduce the volume of greenhouse gases produced in Europe by 20 % by 2020 , it would perhaps be a good idea to think about the measures , scope , cost and end result we are prepared to implement in the next 10 years within the framework of current options and powers .
I am not saying that we should give up on promoting changes or on increasing efficiency in energy production and transmission , but in view of the cost and the amount of time required for planning , design and implementation , I do not think that much will change in this area by 2020 , or even in a number of other proposed measures .
I therefore firmly believe that it would be a good thing if the Commission could now select measures from the previously mentioned extensive document that are feasible from an organisational , financial and timing perspective , and on which we can concentrate in order to create a strong initial impulse for the adoption of an energy handling philosophy as a component in the thinking of the specialist community at first , and the wider public later .
After all , Commissioner , we are already attempting to provide support with the heating of buildings , and encouraging people to swap consumer goods or cars , so that they can purchase more efficient and better ones .
Let us continue with this in a more emphatic , and perhaps more sophisticated way , and let us provide further encouragement for the introduction of new and sensible measures .
In my opinion , that is the way to boost energy efficiency .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have a question .
Who knows how much oil and gas we import in Europe ?
Who knows how much oil and gas we extract in Europe ?
The answer is that , although we do extract a certain amount in Europe itself , compared to our requirements , we import oil and gas on a massive scale from the Middle East and Russia .
This dependence on imports , which is on an upward trend , also means that it is becoming increasingly difficult for us to shape relations with these third countries on an objective basis .
However , ladies and gentlemen , let us reflect for a moment on what this importation of oil and gas is .
What does it mean for our populations ?
It is , in fact , the export of Europe 's money to these third countries .
By importing oil and gas , we are actually exporting money .
What do we know about the future ?
We know that in future , the price we pay for oil and gas will only increase , for these resources are becoming ever less accessible and ever more expensive to extract .
This means that in future , if we do not alter our behaviour , we shall continue to export increasing amounts of our own money out of the European Union to third countries .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is a simple way of stopping this massive export of money from the European Union , and it is extremely simple : we do it by conserving .
By conserving energy .
By conserving energy , we are actually gaining money , which we can invest not in third countries but in our own economies .
I therefore call on all my fellow Members to support Mr Bendtsen 's report on energy efficiency , which is a way in which we can actually help our own economy . Thank you for your attention .
( SV ) Mr President , I , too , would like to start by thanking Mr Bendtsen .
The conclusion is very clear in the report .
We need binding energy efficiency targets as soon as possible , and this is important for a whole host of reasons : economic reasons and reasons relating to competition , jobs , the environment and the climate .
Commissioner Oettinger mentioned the issue of language .
This relates to energy saving or energy efficiency , and the question is : what are we actually talking about ?
In my country , we usually say that it is stupid to let the fire go up the chimney .
In other words , we should not use our energy resources in such a way that we get insufficient benefit from them .
That is rather self-evident , and several of you mentioned the balance between energy production and the costs involved in production , taking risks with it and the consumption of energy .
We must , of course , be as smart as possible .
How are we to measure the targets that the Commissioner mentioned ?
As in all other contexts where we have common ambitions at global or European level , we need to agree on a common measurement method and then decide on binding targets .
What we are putting to the test right now is the inefficiency of not having binding targets and , using the step-by-step method , we are putting off making a change until the future .
I think we should stop doing that and we should support Mr Bendtsen .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , energy efficiency has always been the biggest resource proffered to us .
It is the sleeping giant with the hidden but enormous potential for the European energy economy .
All that is true , and the nice thing about it is that it is so free of ideology .
Above all , the approach to this issue can be technology-neutral .
All that interests us here , and it is a point that is clearly also a little divisive , is the issue of whether or not the targets are binding .
I have to say , Commissioner , in this regard , that I like your two-stage approach whereby you start by trusting in the Member States and by building voluntary agreements and then , if we observe that we will not achieve the targets by 2020 , we perhaps get the thumbscrews out .
That is the right approach to take .
This report , by and large , moves in the right direction - there is little to criticise .
There is one issue that I would like to raise , however , which is the role of the regional funds .
You mentioned this issue , Commissioner .
In the regional funds , together with the Cohesion Funds , we have an immense instrument in our hands in the European Union that we are not making use of .
In this field of energy efficiency , we could finally create European added value which we could put to use in an innovative way to get to grips with energy efficiency in a way that has not happened in the past .
As the current rapporteur for budgetary discharge for the Commission , I can see just how badly we have wasted money in the sphere of cohesion .
Let us put a stop to that waste !
I endorse the focus that you are giving to this issue , Commissioner Oettinger , and the fact that you are seeking to bring about greater use of these funds , including for this energy efficiency instrument .
That is the only way that we will ensure that there really is cohesion , at least in the energy sector .
I feel I must warn against smear campaigns , as we saw with light bulbs and with shower heads .
Such campaigns are the kind of things that alienate the citizens .
We must thus ensure that we aim to achieve energy efficiency in general and that we keep this objective in mind without pursuing ideological smear campaigns that ultimately lead to the citizens losing their positive impression of the EU .

( NL ) First of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bendtsen , for the report which he has prepared and which lays down the core of what needs to happen here .
However , let us put everything into perspective .
Everyone knows that , by 2050 , Europe has to reduce its greenhouse emissions either by 80 % or , as we advocate , by 95 % .
That is an incredible challenge .
Where can we make the biggest savings ?
The biggest savings are to be made if we consume even less energy .
We would then need to import less energy , replace less energy , that is , develop fewer alternatives , and that is simply the cheapest way forward .
It is therefore absurd that , while we are already aware that Europe is on course to fail to meet this very energy conservation target , we , and particularly those of us in the Commission , continue to focus on achieving reduction and renewable energy targets .
This means that energy conservation , or using less energy , is a target that we are going to fail to meet .
There is so much energy that could be saved from everything around us , though .
For example , from the built environment .
The built environment consumes approximately 40 % of our energy , 99 % of which is accounted for by existing buildings .
They have to be adapted to make them more energy efficient .
The current rate of adaptation in Europe is 1.4 % per year : in other words , it will take us more than 60 years to replace our built environment in its entirety .
That will take us up to 2070 but , meanwhile , we have set ourselves targets which we have to reach by 2050 !
That is exactly what this should be about : we have to ensure that we can make energy savings in the built environment , for example , in a much faster timeframe , which is why we have submitted an amendment for a European Building Initiative .
It will save everyone money , it is a cheaper option , we will be preparing ourselves for the future and - most importantly - it will save people money .
They will not have to spend so much on energy .
Now , that is an argument that you hardly ever hear .
Ultimately , however , ordinary people will have to spend less on energy .
That is what this should be about !
( PL ) Mr President , ever since September 2009 , Europeans have been exchanging traditional light bulbs , to which they had grown accustomed , for those produced with new , energy saving technology .
The need for this change was justified by energy saving slogans , and the change has taken place despite signs that the financial costs to be borne by EU citizens would be too great , particularly over such a short period of time .
It is an open secret that the data presented at the time by the European Commission regarding the effects of such a change came from the advertising materials of the producers of these new-technology light bulbs , and there is a great deal of evidence to indicate that this was the case .
In the report being discussed , we can see similarly over-optimistic assumptions .
Insufficient reference is made to the development differences between the EU Member States and , as a result , to the costs they will have to bear if the recommendations are implemented .
If industrial plants are to make annual energy saving improvements of 2 % as stated , while , at the same time , reducing greenhouse gas emissions , the result will be an increase in production costs and the transfer of production outside Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , trying to make savings is a real challenge - a challenge which will enable us to reduce Europe 's dependence , a challenge which will enable us to release substantial financial resources which can finance research into new forms of energy production , and a challenge which will enable us to revitalise our regions .
While the energy efficiency of buildings must be at the centre of our concerns , it is essential that the objectives and actions of the Union , like those of the Member States , focus on social housing , because the poorest must benefit the most from our energy efficiency efforts .
We must put an end to this scandal of making the poorest pay the highest energy bills , while at the same time , in the name of energy efficiency , fiscal loopholes are created which allow the richest to reduce their bills while paying less tax .
A true energy efficiency policy should also mean an opportunity to sell electricity at a lower price to railways , metros and trams , as happened in France before the European directives on the single energy market prohibited it .
Thus , one of the first measures would be to abolish the single electricity market within the Union , because competition on a product such as electricity , which cannot be stored and is hard to transport , is an aberration with regard to energy efficiency .
Finally , energy efficiency will not create high quality jobs unless it is based on a genuine EU strategic industrial initiative which is free of the constraints of the free market .
( PL ) Mr President , I agree with the rapporteur that greater emphasis should be placed on system innovation , such as intelligent networks , intelligent measurement systems , easier integration of renewable energy sources and also the development of a comprehensive strategy for heat generation producers and distributors .
However , I believe that the greatest savings and the greatest efficiency are to be achieved by fostering the personal responsibility of every European Union citizen .
Just as we learned to save water , we have to learn to respect energy and use it efficiently .
All procedures for granting permission for new infrastructure should be simplified and accelerated in order to maximise potential savings .
Energy efficiency and energy security will be priorities in the upcoming Hungarian Presidency of the European Union .
Poland , which will take over the Presidency from Hungary , and which has included the matter of energy security in its agenda , will also intensify the debate on modern legislative and non-legislative solutions that will allow the European energy sector to stay competitive while , at the same time , improving energy efficiency .
I have to highlight at this point that for me personally , an increasingly critical issue is the plausibility of forecasts and the quality of the PRIMES model used by the European Union , particularly in view of the failure to achieve a consensus in Cancún .
This is a subject for a separate debate , but I would like to appeal now for consideration to be given to a new , post-crisis approach to the issue of consumption and energy demands in the European Union .
Transport seems to be the most appropriate way to implement modern , energy efficient solutions .
Energy efficiency in the European Union should be adapted in the direction of demand , which is directly tied to expenditure and changes in citizens ' habits .
In my opinion , changes will be brought about by measurable benefits for consumers and appropriate incentives and long-term forms of funding for manufacturers .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Bendtsen 's report is positive for at least four reasons :
it reaffirms that energy efficiency is the most effective and fastest way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and that a firm commitment to provide resources and investment in this area will result in economic growth and job creation for small and medium-sized enterprises ;
it makes valid proposals concerning workable financial instruments and calls on the Commission to firmly focus on professional training , access to information for small and medium-sized enterprises , and the refurbishment of existing buildings ;
it sets specific objectives and confirms Energy Performance Contracting as an instrument for purchasing guaranteed energy savings and a launch pad for creating jobs and reducing European citizens ' bills ;
lastly , the report will be all the more useful if binding emissions targets can be set without any ifs or buts .
We must make the 20 % target an achievable one ; we cannot let this opportunity pass us by , since it would send out an encouraging signal to Europe .
( BG ) Mr President , achieving a high degree of energy efficiency is the fundamental political aim of the European Union , as it is an integral component in the overall strategy of building a competitive , low carbon economy which will stimulate business activity and improve employment by creating plenty of new jobs .
With tomorrow 's vote on the energy efficiency plan , the European Parliament will send a strong signal to the Commission and the Council on the need for urgent and targeted measures in this area .
In the first place , I call upon the European Commission to conduct a thorough analysis of the effectiveness of existing legislation on the renewal of the current housing stock and higher energy standards for new builds .
Creating an effective energy infrastructure and developing modern technologies for vehicles are other important priorities which I hope will be part of the Commission 's proposed new energy efficiency plan for 2011 .
In conclusion , I would say that energy efficiency has the potential to , and must , become a profitable business .
It can do this on its own and produce a high social return .
( PT ) Mr President , reality shows that it is not enough to adopt an Action Plan for Energy Efficiency .
An assessment needs to be made of the results of the 2006 plan , and policies put in place to help targets to be implemented , diversifying methods of increasing energy efficiency .
The crisis argument cannot be used as an excuse for non-fulfilment of the 20 % objective in 2020 , nor for shooting down solutions for resolving the serious problem of energy poverty .
It is important to report positive experiences from other countries , not forgetting China and the United States , and to invest in the funding of measures that increase energy efficiency in buildings , in social housing , and in transport and industry .
The necessary resources should be included within the EU budget to support Member States and families that have greater difficulties .
Energy efficiency also increases employment , reduces poverty , and is a factor in progress and social development .
We need to invest in this .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , you put forward a very sound plan , and Mr Bendtsen made it even better .
We must succeed in breaking through the equation ' more economic growth equals more energy consumption at the same time ' .
This poses a particular challenge of us , as politicians , as we have normal technological progress which is , of course , characterised by the fact that we have more energy efficient products and modes of economic operation .
We must succeed , however , in reducing our energy bills despite stronger economic growth .
In this connection , we need to bring forward truly innovative solutions and provide the right incentives through policy .
Economic history , too , has shown that those societies that enjoyed the most success over the long term were those societies that made this efficiency - whether in relation to raw materials or energy - the motto that they lived by .
This is a particular challenge for us Europeans , with our high standard of living .
We need to drive forward energy efficiency if , realistically , we hope to attain our climate targets .
I would also like to take the liberty of reminding you that reducing the dependence on imports of fossil fuels remains an important policy goal .
In addition , the capital that is freed up as a result of the lower power bills releases a major potential for consumption which , furthermore , can contribute to our economic growth in the long term .
That said , I believe that the approach that you have chosen , which is to say , not laying down these targets in binding form , is the correct one .
We should not allow ourselves to get lost in debates about definitions and problems of measurement .
It is important that we chart the path forward .
The Commission and the rapporteur are taking the right approach in this regard .
We should indeed leave this target as non-binding , but that does not mean that we should lower our ambitions .
For the reasons stated , those ambitions must continue to be set high , but choosing a path where this can only be achieved through a binding target is not the right way to go and our group will therefore be rejecting that approach .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Bendtsen on a very good report .
Basically , I have just one comment to make , Commissioner , and that is that your background is in regional politics , in a large state in Germany , whereas mine is in local politics .
We will not achieve the targets , whether binding or otherwise - and I advocate binding targets - if we do not address states , regions and communities directly and specify to them what can be done .
When I think of the refurbishment of housing , transport policy - which , thank God , you repeatedly mention - and combating energy poverty , these are areas that are not regulated at the national level but essentially at the local , the regional and the municipal level .
We therefore also have to be active at that level .
It would be a major opportunity to win over the towns and the communities to our great European project of energy efficiency , energy saving and , of course , other areas of energy policy .
I would therefore ask that you act accordingly and perhaps also give some consideration to how we can better get through to the citizens , specifically via the towns , the communities and the regions , as that connection is absolutely vital in order to make it possible to actually get those targets accepted - binding or otherwise .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , energy efficiency is crucial for increasing security of supply , improving air quality , reducing emissions of greenhouse gases and increasing the competitiveness of our society .
Energy efficiency means doing more with fewer resources .
This report sets out an ambitious vision for energy efficiency through , for example , the introduction of individual goals and positive incentives .
Important elements are introduced with regard to the modernisation of energy infrastructure , such as smart networks , energy efficiency within buildings and transport , the use of information and communication technologies , and the development of scientific research in the area of energy .
This report underlines the need to double the funding for scientific research into technological development and demonstration in the area of energy .
In the area of funding , the report encourages the use of Structural Funds in support of energy efficiency , and calls for this to be made a priority within the EU budget after 2013 .
In the light of the above , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Bendtsen , for the excellent work carried out and for the balance achieved , and would invite all of you to support this important report .
( LT ) Mr President , although many legislative measures have been introduced in the area of energy efficiency and saving , not all of them are producing the desired results .
According to scientific research , at the current rate of progress , we will not even achieve half of the 20 % target set .
Therefore , it is necessary to take more binding measures and greater control in the Member States .
I believe that when revising the Energy Efficiency Action Plan , the European Commission must seriously take into account the fact that the Member States are not exploiting energy saving opportunities sufficiently , which is preventing an increase in energy independence .
It is also necessary for individual Member States to set binding energy efficiency targets and monitor how they are implemented , because otherwise , the huge potential for energy saving will remain untapped .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am happy to make a few comments on this report .
It is an excellent report , because it will enable us to achieve a number of things simultaneously : not only environmental and CO2 reduction objectives , but also some of our production objectives and other objectives designed to ensure that we remain competitive .
It will be kind on both the environment and the wallet .
Commissioner , you have also spoken of your ambition to produce an action plan within a short timeframe .
Allow me , however , to make three points : my first point concerns national energy efficiency action plans .
There is a great deal more scope for improvement there and they need to be examined critically by the European Commission .
Commissioner , you have indicated that you will be working in two stages .
The first stage will involve consultation , but with some pressure being applied , and the second will possibly involve a degree of coercion .
I have insisted on pressure being brought to bear in my earlier discussions with the Commissioner and in my amendments , and I am pleased that this issue is now gaining prominence .
I have just one question for the Commissioner : will you have sufficient instruments to enable you to stay the course whilst moving into the coercion stage ?
Could you give us an analysis of that , now , or in the near future , or in your action plan ?
My second point is about regional policy .
Mr Swoboda has also spoken about this .
A great deal more could be done with those funds .
In most countries , the funds that are available are not even being used to improve energy efficiency .
I have therefore tabled an amendment to Article 81 in order to clarify its wording .
It does not always have to mean more money ; it is also about spending existing resources wisely .
Lastly , my third point - and here , too , I agree with Mr Swoboda - we need to get citizens , local authorities and companies more involved in energy conservation , through measures such as quality marks , covenants with mayors and agreements with industry .
In my country , the Netherlands , an agreement with industry alone has already resulted in a 2 % improvement in energy efficiency a year .
Now , that is a measure of what we could achieve in concrete terms !
Thank you , I wish you every success , and thanks to the rapporteur .
( RO ) Mr President , between 50 and 125 million European citizens are affected by energy poverty .
This is why we think that priority should be given to energy savings and energy efficiency policies in the area of social housing .
Only 1 % of the buildings which will be standing in 2020 will be new buildings .
This is why , when discussing existing buildings , we cannot talk about binding targets without allocating sufficient financial resources .
For this reason , we think that innovative funding schemes are required , as well as fiscal facilities which will make investments in energy efficiency attractive and provide long-term institutional support .
Commissioner , a meeting of the CONCERTO programme group was held recently in Parliament , five years after it was set up .
Unfortunately , the 400 representatives from local and regional authorities mentioned that it is not known at local and regional level that all Member States have the opportunity to use 4 % of the European Regional Development Fund allocation at national level for energy efficiency in buildings .
For this reason , I would like to end , Commissioner , by asking you to use the mid-term review to allocate a larger sum of funding to energy efficiency programmes and , in particular , to promote the opportunities to use up to 15 % of the European Regional Development Fund for energy efficiency in the future financial perspective .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur Mr Bendtsen for his precise report .

The Commissioner opened this sitting by saying - and I agree with him - that we are somewhat rhetorical today when we talk about efficiency , that uncertainty surrounds the 20 % target , given that it has already been halved , and we do not really know what we are referring to .
I would add that the culture of energy saving and energy efficiency does not exist .
We therefore find ourselves in a situation and at a point where we have no option but to change .
How ?
First , I believe that we should move towards innovation and new technologies in both areas - the energy efficiency of buildings and , above all , the energy efficiency of transport .
I would also like to focus on the importance of having sufficient resources to achieve these objectives .
I believe that we have to spend in order to save .
Today in Parliament , President Barroso stated that Eurobonds are not going to be used and that he has other financial instruments set aside .
Commissioner , we recently adopted a report that establishes a fund for financing energy efficiency through the use of the funds left over from the previous recovery plans .
Even with a limited budget , I think the fund is highly symbolic insofar as it establishes the principle of attracting private capital in a public-private partnership ( PPP ) model , rationalising the funds that are already at our disposal - Cohesion Funds and others - and putting them into a container that can attract money , that , instead of giving money away , loans it through the development of major projects ; it should be a revolving fund that gives meaning to all of this .
I believe this is the right system for seeking resources and ensuring that efficiency is no longer a taboo subject .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Energy Efficiency Action Plan should be revised in accordance with a holistic approach that combines Europe 's numerous strategic policies .
While investing in energy efficiency is essential because it will help ensure that the emissions reduction targets are met by 2020 , it is also important to emphasise those initiatives that will enable us to more fully exploit the EU 's as yet unused energy saving potential .
I am satisfied that ample attention has been paid to the energy performance of buildings ; initiatives in this regard must be undertaken at European level also .
Our businesses should think again about how they can make both their production processes and their products more efficient .
Lastly , setting mandatory efficiency targets is a good thing , because without them , it will be difficult to achieve ambitious results within the EU .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to come back to one point : the importance of adopting a binding energy efficiency target for the European economy .
Under the difficult economic conditions in a series of Member States which need powerful incentives for growth and for the protection and creation for jobs , a binding target will create a suitable investment environment for strengthening the competitiveness and export potential of European companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises trading in energy efficiency technologies and services .
The Member States will acquire the incentives needed to strengthen those markets in each economy on which they can offer the greatest added value and create the most jobs .
In addition , households , businesses and the public sector will have considerable comparative economic benefits , as they will have lower energy bills .
I should therefore like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report and call on the European Commission to implement the proposals in the Bendtsen report , thereby helping our economies out of the crisis at the same time .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , clearly , energy efficiency is a very important subject , and naturally we have to be very economical with fossil fuels .
Clearly , the key figures required need to represent a challenge , but they must also always retain an adequate sense of proportion ; they always have to be realistic .
They need to be efficient for society but also for the individual , and it needs to be affordable for owners .
For citizens , it must be comprehensible and explicable and , above all , it must also be economically feasible for them .
This is because , without public acceptance , there will be no climate protection .
This aspect , in particular , is an element I find to be missing from this report .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the negotiations in Cancún were relatively successful .
Negotiations on climate change are progressing .
Countries such as China have been waiting for the outcome from Cancún .
They have been taking measures even since the failure in Copenhagen .
If we do not invest in sectors such as energy performance and energy savings , we shall lose twice over .
On the one hand , our households , our businesses and our public services will continue to pay absurd costs and , on the other , we risk losing the lead in the green economy in Europe .
That is why we need to think that , if we are already having trouble competing with countries such as China , how will we be able to compete in future with a green China ?
That is why it really is important for us to support a binding target for the European Union , in the aim of achieving 20 % energy savings .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the energy efficiency policies implemented so far by the various Member States for 2020 will not enable us to achieve the target of a 20 % reduction in energy consumption ; we will be lucky to manage 10 % , which is a decidedly disappointing result .
If energy consumption continues to increase , achieving the 20 % renewable energy target may also be in jeopardy , since that target is calculated as a proportion of the EU 's final energy consumption .
I am firmly in favour of setting a binding target for energy efficiency also , so as to ensure that Europe 's climate and energy policies are mutually reinforcing .
Unfortunately , the facts suggest that counting on the goodwill of individual Member States is not going to work .
The European Union must show the way with clear and effective policies and objectives .
Let us stop investing in new facilities to produce more energy , and let us plough our money and our efforts into the cleanest energy in the world , energy that we can avoid using .
Lastly , I call for the adoption of Amendment 2 , which calls on the Commission to launch an initiative on the energy performance of existing buildings in 2011 .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , energy efficiency is the key word of our future economy , but it should be promoted , not imposed : the Member States must be brought on board to ensure that anyone who chooses to make his or her business or home more energy efficient is assisted in doing so .
We cannot conceive of forcing private individuals to invest without convincing or encouraging them : improving energy efficiency means helping the environment and saving resources , but in such a sensitive area as this , it is crucial to combine these choices with European policies aimed at a single European energy market .
Binding targets mean only unnecessary and very often ineffective expenditure ; it is better to convince citizens , institutions and bodies that savings in this area have a bearing on people 's security and quality of life , too .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our position is that the root of the climate change that has a growing influence these days does not exclusively lie in the environmental pollution caused by humanity .
However , we all share the responsibility to put an end to the destruction of our environment , both locally and globally , and to make efforts to restore its original , healthy state to the best of our abilities .
Accordingly , the call for energy efficiency is also welcome .
The buildings we use are responsible for approximately 40 % of the world 's energy consumption , and therefore , addressing the matter of these buildings is of exceptional importance .
We must take a step towards new , zero CO2 emission properties , and we must also find a solution for the problems of upgrading existing buildings in terms of energy efficiency .
Additionally , we must continuously reduce the consumption and pollutant emissions of vehicles by urging the introduction of hybrid and fully electrical technologies .
I am convinced that we , as Members of this House and politicians , must lead by example when it comes to energy efficiency .
( RO ) Mr President , I , too , would like to stress the importance of promoting energy efficiency as it can provide significant benefits for the whole economy .
The social benefits must also be mentioned , which includes the creation of new jobs by 2020 .
I think that it is vital to develop and sell new , cutting-edge energy technologies .
This is the way to maintain the competitiveness of energy intensive European businesses in the face of global competition .
I support reaching an agreement on a common methodology for measuring national energy efficiency targets and monitoring progress on achieving them .
I also welcome the Commission 's work ' towards a single Energy network ' .
It ought to submit practical proposals to simplify and speed up authorisation procedures for infrastructure projects .

Mr President , thank you to Mr Bendtsen for mentioning the construction industry in his opening remarks .
I would just like to bring to his attention that my report on construction products will be voted upon in January and we did discuss energy efficiency in that report , too .
However , two quick points .
Mr Swoboda mentioned the importance of local authorities .
I just wanted to bring to the House 's attention the sensitivity at the moment , certainly in the UK , of budgetary cuts that are affecting local authorities .
I think we need to bring that into the debate and the discussions which will come about .
I also want to ask a question to the Commission .
In the report we talk about the importance of smart meters and it gives a date of the end of 2011 for the minimum common functionalities .
Will we be able to achieve this , Commissioner ?
I am sorry we do not have anybody from the Presidency this evening , but I think that is important .
I would also add to previous speakers in raising the issue about energy poverty , which I think all in this House would agree is vitally important to emphasise .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to start by endorsing Mr Swoboda 's comment that implementation takes place on the spot - regionally and locally .
In fact , we have manifold , mostly positive experience of refurbishment programmes - often with each euro of public money attracting six or seven euro of private investment .
We will also need to examine whether our regional programmes can be involved in this .
I find it difficult to imagine that a local authority would apply to the Commission directly for funding , but opening up the regional programmes to a greater extent to the vigorous refurbishment of the building stock would seem to me to be a very important step for the next funding period at the latest .
There is then also the question of an interest-rate rebate on loans .
Do we want to use public structural banks to reduce the interest rates for loans relating to the refurbishment of buildings ?
There is also a point I would like to make in relation to building stock .
It has been said a number of times that if you increase energy efficiency , you save money .
That is true , but not immediately .
If we look at Europe 's housing stock , we can see that , on average , the required refurbishment for each dwelling - from windows , to active and passive insulation and right down to appropriate electric equipment and appropriate improvements to heating systems - would amount to EUR 30 000 to 60 000 per dwelling .
You do not save the money in the first year .
The result of this is that we need to invest for the next 10 years in order for energy expenditure to be reduced and reinvested for the next 40 years .
In essence , this represents an intergenerational contract in reverse .
Hitherto , my generation has built up enormous debts , as evinced by the currency problems we have been having .
Now , for the first time , we have the opportunity to invest , through energy efficiency , so that in forthcoming decades , our children will reap the rewards via lower expenditure on energy .
Can we do this ?
Are we ready to do so ?
I am counting on you .
We need to lay down new priorities in relation to budgetary issues .
Anyone who brings up energy efficiency refurbishment within the European budget also needs to address it from the point of view of the consequences .
We will not receive any more money , so where do we want to reorganise ?
That will be the crucial issue in relation to this subject at the European budgetary level , too .
I have a second issue to raise as well .
Two Members of this House , Messrs Jadot and Eickhout , have said that the basis is clear .
I have to disagree , however : it is not clear .
I say that with the decisions of the European Council on the table here .
Incidentally , the last decision by the European Council from March of this year , which stated - and I quote - ' and moving towards a 20 % increase in energy efficiency ' is , in itself , something of a reduction in consistency .
This is because ' moving towards 20 % ' also means that 18 , 19 or 17 % would also be sufficient .
I am sticking by 20 % , unchanged , although the European Council adopted something of a retreat from this for the first time in March .
The decision of March 2007 refers to projections of energy consumption in 2020 , which were to be cut by 20 % .
The body that supplies Europe with studies in this regard is PRIMES .
I will cite three columns of figures to show you what problems we are facing in this connection , which have not been raised so far .
Italy 's energy consumption for 2007 was 173 million tonnes .
The projection for 2020 was a rise to 208 million tonnes , from which the 20 % was then to be subtracted .
That then leaves Italy roughly where it was before .
The projection goes up and the 20 % is subtracted .
Or let us take the example of a really small country - Luxembourg .
Luxembourg 's energy consumption for 2007 was 4.6 million tonnes .
The forecast demand rises to 5.6 million tonnes , but that is then reduced to 4.5 million again .
Or let us take Portugal as an example .
The consumption for the reference year was 23.8 million tonnes , which then increases to 30 million , before being brought back down to 24 million .
We urgently need to discuss the projections .
This is the crucial point and it has been dealt with too briefly in the debate overall , country by country .
Many of you have risen to advocate binding targets .
I am an optimist and a realist .
If we in the Commission were to put forward a binding target for each Member State , these would , today , be rejected by the Member States , of which we are all also citizens .
There is thus no chance of us doing so , as we would then achieve nothing at all .
Perhaps a two-stage plan , where we take the Member States with us , would be more realistic and more pertinent .
In such a plan , I would instruct the Member States to now create national efficiency plans on a voluntary basis , but the 20 % would apply all round .
If we observe in two years ' time that we have not made sufficiently consistent progress , then we will issue binding targets , which the Member States would then presumably not be in a position to reject .
I ask you all to examine whether this - including to the knowledge of your governments - would not perhaps be the better European route for our common targets .
Whether binding or voluntary , national action plans are required .
We can examine the contents , the consistency and the impact of the plans from a policy point of view .
We will also certainly not accept unchanged any plan whose contents do not meet our specifications .
We would send back any such plan on a policy basis .
Thank you all very much for today .
I would be happy to return here to Parliament in March in order to formally launch the debate with a proposal .
The report is an excellent first step towards this .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for a constructive debate .
If people are sitting and listening to this , it might seem as though there is a great deal of disagreement on energy efficiency .
Binding targets or not , energy efficiency is something on which we need to take a stand .
It is something that we need to do something about .
I would like to point out that even though we have had a comprehensive debate on this subject - binding targets - the rapporteurs have , of course , also discussed the fact , and agreed , that it is important for us to ensure compliance with current EU legislation in this area .
We have enacted legislation on a great many things .
It is important that this legislation is complied with , and it is important that it is implemented .
It is also important for us to take action in connection with urban development , buildings , the use of new energy technologies and in respect of a better product policy .
Transport is also something that we need to take a stand on and , last but not least , it is important to get many of these energy initiatives financed in the future .
From where I stand , there is still plenty of ripe fruit within reach that we have the opportunity to pick - in other words , opportunities to increase energy efficiency in Europe .
Why is it so important now ?
I will not repeat what my fellow Member , Mr Kariņš , from Latvia said in this context , namely , that Europe is paying out a great deal of money to both the Middle East and Russia .
Could this money not be put to better use in Europe ?
That is not all : there is no doubt that if Europe wants to lead the way in this area , it is necessary for us to invest .
The investments will , of course , bring dividends in the form of higher employment , more innovative enterprises and new jobs - in particular , jobs for our small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe .
Having said all that , I would like to thank all of those involved .
I would like to thank the Commission and the relevant services .
I would like to say that you have all been very willing to cooperate , and I would like to thank my own group , which has shown a great deal of trust and supported me right the way through the work on the report .
I would also like to say thank you to the shadow rapporteurs for their extremely constructive cooperation , in which they also showed resistance .
However , what is important now that we have come this far is that a clear signal is being sent from this Parliament to the Commission concerning the way we need to go in order to achieve energy efficiency in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Wednesday , 15 December 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Energy efficiency measures are vital so that the EU can achieve the targets it has set for itself for combating climate change .
We have a target of cutting energy consumption by 20 % .
However , whereas we have directives for the other two objectives , clearly setting out how the target will be achieved , we have no such instrument for energy efficiency .
This is why I insist on the need for an energy efficiency directive .
Furthermore , to be able to achieve the results we want , energy efficiency must be promoted at every level , in every national and European policy .
Innovation is one of the keys to success in this respect .
This is why I think that the future Research Framework Programme ought to make energy efficiency a priority .
Last but not least , I believe that public authorities must set an example in this respect and turn the buildings they own into energy efficient buildings .
In addition , Member States can promote energy efficiency through the requirements stipulated in public procurement procedures .
Therefore , priority must be given to businesses which use cleaner technologies .
Finally , Member States can boost demand for green products using fiscal measures or subsidies compatible with the internal market .
The Energy Efficiency Action Plan is not a competition in which obstacles and hurdles are placed in one 's way , but the start of a cultural process , a key European policy objective aimed at influencing the behaviour of individuals and businesses .
It is a process that is made easier not by strict constraints that create unaffordable costs for citizens and businesses , but by real incentives ; a process that is realised by means of energy infrastructure , changing urban development , products , packaging and transport .
I would point out that energy efficiency is considered to be the most cost-effective way of managing greenhouse gas emissions and other emissions resulting from energy production .
Furthermore , according to a study carried out by Confindustria , the General Confederation of Italian Industry , in Italy alone , energy efficiency could have a socio-economic impact on the entire national economy worth some EUR 238 billion and could increase the value of total production , with an associated rise in employment of around 1.6 million standard work units , in the period 2010-2020 .
I therefore consider it vital not only to channel investment into this sector , but also to ensure the effective implementation and strengthening of the European instruments available .
Energy efficiency , in the most general terms , is the restriction of individual consumption by rationalising appliance use .
Essential opportunities for increasing gross energy efficiency are , however , to be found in physical and chemical industrial processes , which are based on : 1 ) better use of heat streams from fossil or nuclear fuels by a ) transferring Carnot cycle conversion to a higher temperature and pressure , b ) using appropriate recuperation of waste heat , e.g. in cogeneration processes ; 2 ) reducing Ohm resistance during the transmission of current ; 3 ) reducing heat resistance in heat exchangers ; 4 ) increasing heat resistance by using insulating materials in construction ; 5 ) reducing friction resistance ; 6 ) reducing magnetic field losses ; 7 ) shortening excessively long energy conversion chains .
The political goal of 3x20 by 2020 does not therefore relate merely to limiting energy use by 20 % gross , for example , as a result of price increases , as this would only cause a fall in living standards , but rather by means of rationalisation , which would allow 20 % more useful work to be obtained from the same amount of primary energy .
Appropriate methods for Member States to evaluate the implementation of this political goal will therefore be needed .
The revision of the 2006 Energy Efficiency Action Plan is an increasingly urgent task since , in connection with the EU 's 20-20-20 targets , the lack of progress is most evident in the area of energy efficiency targets .
Many initiatives already point in the right direction , but the present achievements are still dwarfed by the range of unexploited possibilities .
Europe has just begun to recognise its lack of progress , and has realised that it cannot afford the luxury of taking the development of energy efficiency lightly .
Such investments can reduce emissions more cheaply than any other solutions , and can immediately invigorate the economy .
One sign of a positive turning point is that on the basis of the European Parliament 's decision , even the hitherto unused resources of the Economic Recovery Programme can be used for energy efficiency developments and green investments .
The Energy 2020 strategy published by the European Commission in November also ranks energy efficiency as the highest priority .
Now it is the Bendtsen report that formulates specific recommendations as to how we could exploit our possibilities more effectively .
I am glad that innovative solutions such as smart grids and ESCOs that implement investments producing a return on energy efficiency have also been included in the report .
However , financing still remains the most important issue .
Energy efficiency aids must be included in future long-term EU budgets as well , having particular regard to the building reconstruction programmes of the former socialist countries .
This is the area where impressive savings can be realised with relatively small outlay .
Energy efficiency is one of the key priorities of the Europe 2020 strategy and the Energy Strategy for Europe 2011-2020 , which also makes the submitted report highly important and topical in relation to the recent summit in Cancún .
The report builds on the Energy Efficiency Action Plan from 2006 , calls on the Commission to update this plan , to revise the directive on energy services and also to establish binding targets to achieve a 20 % improvement in energy efficiency by 2020 .
The report discusses arguments for the advantages of greater energy efficiency : social ( potential creation of 1 million jobs or decline in energy poverty in the EU ) , economic ( potential energy savings of up to EUR 100 billion ) , strategic ( retaining the competitiveness of European companies through energy savings ) and , last but not least , energy security ( greater energy self-sufficiency for the EU ) .
The report includes recommendations in the area of energy infrastructure , the development of towns and buildings , information and communications products , tenders and financing .
In my opinion , the role of the funding sources ( the Structural Funds , the ELENA instrument of the European Investment Bank , national funds for energy efficiency , etc . ) in financing energy efficiency projects is particularly important .
Overall , I think that the report submitted by Mr Bendtsen contains an accurate analysis of this issue , as well as relevant recommendations on energy efficiency , and I therefore recommend approving it in its proposed form .
It is the essential interest of the EU , and of all its Member States , to make the most of as little energy as possible .
In doing so , the dependency on external energy can be reduced , energy security can be increased , and so can the competitiveness of the European Union .
Energy efficiency must therefore have special priority in the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy , and the drawing of as much of the energy funds as possible should be made conditional to its principle .
In accordance with the targets undertaken under the Europe 2020 strategy ( from 2005 onwards ) , Hungary 's National Action Plan envisions very serious steps in the field of both energy produced from renewable sources and energy efficiency .
The Energy Efficiency Credit Fund ( EHA ) has been in operation since 1991 , and has been lending support to the energy efficiency investments of the citizens .
Moreover , the Hungarian Government is planning to improve the energy efficiency of the biggest public sector consumers by 60 % through the upgrading of public institutions ( including the installation of solar collectors and the modernisation of insulation and heating systems ) on the basis of the draft Complex Building Energy and Climate Protection Programme .
These are great plans , but their implementation has been seriously jeopardised by the financial and economic crisis that continues to this day .
Therefore , we must ask the Commission to pay serious attention to national action plans and their implementation , and to ensure that the EU directives adopted thus far are transposed into national legislation , as the implementation of the 2020 energy strategy and the achievement of the CO2 emission reduction targets can depend on this .
Other than that , progress in this area can only be expected through the joint application of the appropriate financial instruments and the establishment of a suitable legislative framework .
An increase in energy efficiency contributes directly to an improvement in energy security for the whole of the EU .
If changes are introduced properly , they will result in reduced emissions of pollutants .
This is definitely a very positive direction for development , which supports our efforts to combat climate change .
Using up-to-date technologies in the modernisation of infrastructure will also ensure financial savings and , as a result , economic growth in EU Member States .
Thanks to this , as the rapporteur himself emphasises , new jobs will be created not only in urban areas but also in local markets and in the countryside .
Of course , all these goals will initially require appropriate resources and investment .
However , I think that it is absolutely worth ensuring that Europe has an energy saving , efficient and environmentally-friendly economy .
The European Union needs to take action to secure the future of its energy provision and protect its vital energy interests .
Energy efficiency measures play a crucial role in achieving this by guaranteeing that the climate and energy targets set are achieved at the lowest possible cost .
I think that wide-ranging consultations need to be initiated with local and regional representatives in order to set out well defined guidelines on energy efficiency and support must be provided in devising projects and ensuring access to the EUR 9 billion made available by the Commission via the cohesion policy .
The smart use of these funds will enable us to achieve the 20 % energy efficiency target , which will help , to a large degree , to meet the European Union 's objectives on sustainability and competitiveness .
Furthermore , decreasing consumption through energy efficiency is the most sustainable way of reducing dependency on fossil fuels and will bring about a significant drop in imports ( approximately 25-26 % ) .
Concerning the revision of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan , one of the most effective means of reducing emissions of CO2 and other gases is energy efficiency .
It also has enormous benefits in the fields of job creation and economic growth .
Since the adoption of the 2006 Energy Efficiency Action Plan , the economic environment has undergone significant changes .
Therefore , I definitely consider the revision of EU energy efficiency policy , and its alignment with our current priorities , to be a necessary step .
I am of the opinion that we should use the document evaluating the results and shortcomings of the 2006 Action Plan as the basis for this evaluation .
We must do everything in order to be able to meet the 20 % target set out in our Europe 2020 strategy .
While values pertaining to emissions and renewable energy sources are easily measurable , data on energy efficiency are more difficult to calculate .
In this , we need the assistance of the Commission .
Through the statistical data supplied by the Commission , we will be able to track the changes of our energy policy .
It is commonly known that the energy efficiency of buildings also holds considerable opportunities .
We must therefore urge the upgrading of our existing buildings , since the proportion of new buildings being constructed is declining .
There are numerous buildings , mainly in Central European countries , which , after appropriate renovation , could have serious potential in terms of efficiency .
As regards legislative measures in support of energy efficient solutions , the US and China are far ahead of us .
We must do everything in order to minimise our disadvantage .
The European Union and the Member States must support measures and means for increasing financing in this area .
Although the European Union has set targets for reducing energy consumption by 20 % by 2020 , these are not binding , unlike targets in the areas of reducing emissions and renewables .
Member States are therefore not sufficiently motivated to achieve the best possible results in the area of energy efficiency .
The technology and the practical processes for improving energy efficiency already exist , but since there will be no binding targets , these projects will not be properly financed and , consequently , will not be implemented .
If the EU were to achieve its target by 2020 , however , that would mean financial savings of up to EUR 78 billion a year .
Apart from reducing dependence on imports of oil and natural gas , thereby boosting energy supply security , this would also mean significant savings for households .
I consider this factor to be highly important , because the number of people living in so-called energy poverty , where electricity and gas bills swallow up most of the family budget , is currently growing .
If binding targets were set , however , households could save up to EUR 1 000 annually , according to figures from the European Commission .
Besides greater competitiveness , improved energy efficiency would also boost the creation of permanent jobs and would lead to a reduction in CO2 emissions of 780 million tonnes , which is more than is required under the Kyoto Protocol .
in writing . - The benefits of reducing energy consumption and dependence in Europe would be , at once , economic , environmental and political .
The Energy Efficiency Action Plan therefore has far-reaching implications .
I was rapporteur for the opinion of the Environment Committee on the contribution of ICT to energy efficiency , and I know that one of the most important tasks here is to facilitate the integration of renewable energy sources into the power supply .
Smart grids can help to achieve this , whilst smart metering in households can make us conscious of when we can save energy and so help us to reduce consumption .
The Commission needs to focus properly on these two elements in the Action Plan , and the Member States need to give their full support to installing the infrastructure needed to make it happen , if necessary , through public procurement contracts .
in writing . - Energy efficiency ( EE ) is the most cost-efficient measure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
Through lower energy consumption , we are less dependent on imports of oil and gas and their varying prices .
It is of crucial importance to focus investment on energy efficiency and to limit the money we spend on oil and gas imports .
That money should create jobs in our SMEs , agriculture , forestry sector and industry .
The Commission 's estimates showed that a 20 % increase in EE could potentially create as many as a million new jobs in Europe and an average household can save at least EUR 1 000 per year .
A lot has been achieved since the last EEAP , but there is no evidence that the target can be met by 2020 .
New instruments towards boosting energy savings should be introduced at EU and national level with the emphasis on two main areas : renovation of existing buildings and measures to boost financing .
Old buildings have the highest efficiency potential and the appropriate financial instruments to utilise that potential are missing .
These two issues should be properly addressed in the revision of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan in order to get things moving as desired .
Repeal of directives regarding metrology ( debate )
The next item is the report by Anja Weisgerber , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council repealing Council Directives 71 / 317 / EEC , 71 / 347 / EEC , 71 / 349 / EEC , 74 / 148 / EEC , 75 / 33 / EEC , 76 / 765 / EEC , 76 / 766 / EEC and 86 / 217 / EEC regarding metrology - C6-0467 / 2008 - .
Mr President , Commissioner Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by offering my sincere thanks to the shadow rapporteurs from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , those who helped produce this report and everyone who contributed to this splendid result .
Without the constructive and very open collaboration with both the Commission and with the Belgian Presidency of the Council , it would not be possible to conclude this package tomorrow .
As I am sure you can imagine , I am very satisfied with this result .
The repeal of a total of eight outdated and obsolete directives will enable us to take another step in the direction of less bureaucracy in Europe .
What is interesting in said directives is that they largely became obsolete because they have already been replaced by international standards that represent the latest state of the art .
Member State rules and regulations are often rendered obsolete by harmonised European rules and regulations , after all .
In this case , European rules and regulations have become superfluous thanks to international stipulations .
If we want to make progress towards our target of having 25 % less bureaucracy in Europe by 2012 , we need to nail our colours to the mast now .
To put it in the words of the Chair of the High Level Group of Independent Stakeholders on Administrative Burdens , Edmund Stoiber , we in Europe must not only purse our lips , we need to whistle loudly .
In other words , our words must be followed up by tangible action .
When it comes to that action , the devil is often in the detail , however .
This directive repealing eight directives relating to metrology has shown this clearly once again .
Measuring instruments for cold water meters for non-clean water , alcohol meters , certain weights , tyre pressure gauges and equipment to measure the standard mass of grain or the size of ship tanks have been replaced , in practice , by more modern digital equipment .
The outdated equipment is used increasingly rarely and the rules governing such equipment can thus be abolished .
There are also no consequences for the functioning of the internal market or for the high standard of consumer protection , which remains of great importance to us .
Yet the Council has been blocking this package for some time .
We have managed , however , to reach a reasonable compromise between the Council and Parliament in the informal trialogue , and even to do so at first reading - which is always the exception rather than the rule for us .
The substance of that agreement is as follows : one directive - namely that concerning the calibration of ship tanks - is to be repealed immediately , which is to say , with effect from 1 July 2011 , while the remaining seven directives will be repealed once the recast version of the Framework Measuring Instruments Directive ( MID ) , which the Commission is currently working on , has been adopted .
The Commission will produce a new proposal for the MID by the end of April 2011 .
The idea is that the Commission , when reviewing the MID , will also examine whether and , if so , what elements from the old directives should be retained and should therefore be incorporated into the MID to that end .
If the Member States provide evidence that certain elements within the seven directives are still necessary , for example , on consumer protection grounds , such as provisions from the directive relating to tyre pressure gauges for motor vehicles , these sections will be incorporated into the Framework Measuring Instruments Directive .
Once the recast version of the MID has been adopted , the remaining directives will be repealed .
This is a signal that Europe is serious about cutting red tape and that we are eager to create the conditions for sustainable economic growth .
I am proud of the fact that the European Parliament is doing its bit , in this way , to help cut red tape and to produce better , more streamlined and simpler lawmaking .
Allow me just to conclude with a brief word about the correlation tables .
These are the tables that the Member States are supposed to draw up in order to document how they have implemented the directive .
In the end , we agreed on a less strict wording in this regard .
We fought for stricter wordings in future , however , and we achieved our goal in this regard .
The Conference of Presidents will champion this cause accordingly to the Council and the Commission .
This represents a success that we have the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs to thank for .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating and thanking Mrs Weisgerber for the in-depth work she has done on an intricate and complicated proposal , which has been at the centre of a long debate ; her work has therefore not been easy , and the fact that it has been possible to reach an agreement at first reading shows the rapporteur 's skill in securing a good agreement .
This decision certainly marks an important stage in the area of simplification and smart regulation .
Better regulation must be something that the European institutions increasingly strive for , and the Commission is completely unanimous in wanting to focus on ever better European regulation .
As the rapporteur pointed out , this proposal will actually repeal eight obsolete directives relating to six categories of legal measuring instruments , based on the fact that the instruments covered by the directive in question are now obsolete and that corresponding trade is falling .
Furthermore , there are no barriers to trade in technically more advanced substitute products , which do not fall within the scope of the directives .
In future , Member States may wish to enact national rules .
However , this will not create new barriers to trade since there are international standards that already fully regulate these old instruments and most of the more advanced substitute products as well .
Pursuant to the World Trade Organisation Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade , Member States must base their legislation on these international standards .
The Treaty on European Union stipulates that Member States must also mutually recognise equivalent products legally sold in another Member State .
The Commission therefore welcomes the first-reading compromise between Parliament and the Council , which provides for the repeal of one directive by July 2011 and of the other seven directives by December 2015 .
Lastly , the Commission emphasises the joint statement made by the three institutions and states its willingness to re-examine the arguments in favour of harmonisation presented during the legislative process .
As stated , we will refer to those arguments by the end of April 2011 and , where appropriate , submit the legislative proposal in accordance with the principles of better regulation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I fully support the rapporteur 's position in relation to the Commission proposal to repeal eight directives in the field of metrology .
In particular , I welcome the proposal concerning the advisability of giving Member States sufficient time to analyse the possible consequences of a repeal in the context of the review of the Measuring Instruments Directive ( MID ) .
Indeed , while I support the general aims of better regulation and simplification , which are also promoted by the Lisbon Strategy , I think it is imperative to give the Member States the time they need to investigate whether repealing the directives will lead to legal uncertainty .
This situation would actually help ease the concerns expressed by the various Member States about not having a reasonable amount of time to tackle the legal vacuum that a repeal would create .
This is therefore an excellent compromise between the position adopted by the Commission , which is in favour of a full repeal of all the directives and against new regulations in this area within the framework of the MID , and the critical positions initially adopted by the Member States with regard to this proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to express my thanks to Mrs Weisgerber for the truly collegial collaboration that we enjoyed .
I would like to say , on behalf of my group , that I am far from euphoric about the repeal of these eight directives .
There are , in fact , a number of outdated measuring instruments for which the rules and regulations are being abolished , but we have noted in the debates that the devil is in the detail , as you yourself have said .
It therefore was not always clear whether this route really was the right one to choose .
My group will vote in favour of this compromise in light of the fact that we have obtained an assurance from the Commission that it will examine the idea of properly incorporating these measurement instruments into the European Measuring Instruments Directive ( MID ) , which is , of course , being drawn up at the moment , where necessary .
This commitment to investigate - this , too , I am assuming - will also be taken very seriously and given earnest consideration .
We are voting for the compromise on this condition , well aware that there are still one or two issues that need to be investigated .
As for the correlation tables , I would like to say , at this point , that we have now stated that we are ready to accept the mild wording that is currently to be found in this text but that this is one of the last documents in which we have accepted this , as , for us , this really is about European law , which is created once the Member States have given their consent , being truly and properly implemented .
We can only check that , however , if we have the information , and we only get the information from these correlation tables .
We will continue to work towards that , at all events .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and the other colleagues who have contributed to this dossier .
Although it had initially appeared to be a very technical dossier , in the end , it was very clear that the political decision would find a solution for this report .
There is a need to simplify the acquis communautaire by repealing those directives which contain provisions on means of measurement that are no longer used as a result of technical progress and the use of international standards .
The Commission 's approach is reasonable .
If the mutual recognition principle ensures free movement and no specific barrier exists , then no further additions are needed and the technical specifications should be adopted by the Member States .
However , the repeal of the directive should not lead to any new barriers to free movement or to additional administrative burdens .
We also need to ensure that there will be no gaps between the old directives being repealed and the 2004 directive on measuring instruments .
Furthermore , the first reading report adopted in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection enabled the inclusion of provisions on the measuring instruments covered by the directives being repealed in the general Measurements Instruments Directive .
The Member States have been given more time to investigate whether the repealing of the directives will lead to legal uncertainty .
The report includes a provision that the Commission shall evaluate whether the measuring instruments falling within the scope of the repealed directives need to be included in the scope of the Measurements Instruments Directive .
Taking account of the fact that a horizontal decision has also been taken regarding correlation tables , together with other shadow rapporteurs , I propose to support the text agreed at the first reading with the Council .
Mr President , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for their sterling cooperation .
I think I can keep this brief as all the essential points have actually already been addressed .
Clearly , our group will support the compromise , but we are also working on the assumption that the Commission will take another critical look at things in the review of the Measuring Instruments Directive ( MID ) .
Clearly , we support the fact that this compromise on the correlation tables was found .
This compromise has a time limit on it , however , and in future , the Council must react much more strongly .
We are no longer prepared to give way .
Ultimately , it must also be possible to monitor the Member States and for that , we urgently need correlation tables .
Mr President , from the outset , I have personally supported the original Commission proposal to repeal all eight directives without compensation .
I believe that the Commission proposal was a prime example of the right way to simplify European law and promote the approach of ' better regulation ' .
We should not push for harmonisation in all areas at any price .
We should think about other regulatory instruments than just EU regulations , such as international standards , for example .
We should also deploy these alternative regulatory instruments in cases where they would be more effective .
With the introduction of regulations in the area of metrology , I would prefer a voluntary system of mutual recognition of national regulations , based on international standards , rather than a top-down centralised harmonisation .
I am sorry that Parliament , along with certain Member States , does not support this exceptional and liberal approach of the Commission , preferring instead a conservative approach to eliminating excessive regulation .
Despite everything , however , I would like to thank the rapporteur very much for the effort she has devoted to finding a common compromise solution .
I applaud her personal enthusiasm , thanks to which the Commission proposal did not disappear from view , and part of the original intention at least has come through .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are in favour of the report on metrology .
It is a very technical text and one on which we have been waiting to vote in plenary for months .
The report , which sailed through the competent committee , was submitted last March , and the situation has dragged on for so long because an agreement on the associated correlation tables had to be reached within the Council , between the 27 Member States .
The real problem is that the European Commission has still not presented the proposal for a directive on measuring instruments , which should supersede the obsolete directives that we are repealing today and regulate this matter once and for all .
I wish to criticise the Commission for having reached the stage where it is abolishing the obsolete directives without having presented , at the same time , a proposal to revise the Measuring Instruments Directive .
Such behaviour is unjustifiable , and it is a long way from meeting the needs of businesses and citizens .
At the same time , I would criticise the excessive fear of those who believe that the law of the Member States is incapable of filling the gap during the vacatio legis .
Fortunately , European businesses have a system of international standards for the sector that is independent of , and goes beyond , EU rules .
Therefore , the fears of a disaster happening in the period between the promulgation and entry into force of the directives are unfounded .
Businesses will fill the legislators ' gaps with their trade organisations , with their skills , with the rules that they have set themselves in order to create a dynamic and balanced market .
We must remember our businesses , which continue to operate in Europe with great difficulty .
We must stop squeezing them with taxes , red tape and absurd requests .
Sometimes , work is done swiftly in Parliament .
Common sense and a desire to reach agreements with the other European institutions transcend political divisions .
( CS ) Mr President , the eight obsolete directives on measuring instruments are not , at first sight , an interesting political topic , but in fact , their repeal represents the concrete fulfilment of the principle of subsidiarity , as well as an effort for ' better regulation ' .
In the area of metrology , there are already international agreements which were made necessary by the globalisation of science and trade , and any harmonisation at the European level is therefore really not necessary .
I applaud the responsible approach of the rapporteur , Anja Weisgerber , who decided , on the one hand , to support the Commission proposal for a complete repeal of the directives , while leaving time in the case of seven of them for the relevant Member State metrological institutes to perform an analysis of the implications for national legislation .
The solution , which we will surely approve tomorrow , will therefore also be an interesting test for other directives , as to whether the mutual recognition of regulations at the national level will be sufficient and will not lead to legal uncertainty , and will therefore be more advantageous than an amendment or full harmonisation .
Personally , I would be surprised if Member States gave preference to harmonisation .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on achieving full support in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and I would like to thank her for negotiating a consistent position with the Council .
Mr President , first of all , I want to join in the thanks to Anja Weisgerber who is a stalwart member of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and has done a number of these very technical reports with great diligence , and this is a good example of that .
I think that when she started on this work , which was soon after the elections last year , we all felt that what appeared at first sight to be a deceptively simple proposal from the Commission to repeal what appeared on the surface to be outdated legislation would probably be dealt with relatively quickly and without much argument .
The time that this has taken and the relative complexity of the solution show that deregulation and cutting red tape are nothing like as easy as people think .
It is very easy to come up with these facile phrases about deregulation , but in the real world , there are always people who want to keep regulation in place .
As soon as this proposal hit the Council , we began to realise some of the deep-seated problems that existed from country to country .
There were countries which had problems with measuring the weight of ships , or alcohol meters , or tyre pressure gauges .
Everyone had their own particular issue .
My conclusion overall is not about the value of the proposal , because in a few months , we will have the alternative proposal which will effectively make this one outdated , and we could almost have waited for that .
My appeal to the Commissioner is that the Commission does need to look at its impact assessment and its homework on deregulation proposals much more deeply and get Member States to engage with them before coming up with these proposals .
On reflection I think we could have spent more time on that had we been allowed to do so .
It is a success for the committee , but I would say a qualified success , and we need to learn the lessons from that as we go forward .
Mr President , I , too , welcome the rapporteur 's proposals and certainly we are living in a much smaller world than ever before .
Interaction between people is far greater , and that is set to continue rapidly into the future , so obviously the more harmonisation we have in measurement instruments , the better .
I certainly welcome the repeal of the metrology directives and cutting red tape by 25 % .
Sometimes , I think we underestimate the ability of people to adapt .
I saw in my country how easily we adapted from the old pounds , shillings and pence to the euro and cents , and also only in recent years from miles to kilometres in terms of travel and speed limits .
This has made life easier for many people and will continue to do so .
I think this is a step in the right direction , so congratulations again .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to everyone who spoke during the debate , because it means that there is interest in this proposal for simplification .
That is why I wish to emphasise once again the advantages entailed by this choice and , hence , the benefits to be had from it .
I am talking here about advantages for consumers , instrument manufacturers and national administrations .
I also wish to assure you , in response to the specific issue raised by Mrs Gebhardt , that the Commission is ready to conduct the studies necessary to re-examine the arguments in favour of harmonisation by April 2011 .
In response to Mr Rossi , who criticised the Commission but has now left the Chamber - after making a criticism one would do well to listen to the response , too - there is a joint statement by Parliament , the Council and the Commission on this matter , which reads , and I quote : ' in accordance with Article 25 of Directive 2004 / 22 / EC on measuring instruments , the Commission is invited , by the European Parliament and by the Council , to report , before 30 April 2011 , on the implementation of that directive and to submit , where appropriate , a legislative proposal ' .
As I said in my speech at the start of the debate , I intend to abide by that statement .
Thank you Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for your commitment and cooperation .
Lastly , on the subject of correlation tables , the Commission supports Parliament 's position .
Mr President , I would like to express my sincere thanks to all my fellow Members , including my appreciation of their valuable contributions to the debate tonight .
After the vote in the morning , we need to shift our focus to the future .
Naturally , we are looking forward to seeing how the individual rules and regulations turn out - the Commission has now announced that it will table its proposal for the Measuring Instruments Directive ( MID ) by the end of April .
It will then also be possible to check whether any of the individual legislative regimes that we are removing from circulation are to be incorporated .
It is important , as Mrs Comi also said , that no legal vacuum arises .
Mrs Gebhardt , I can tell you that that was also a very important concern for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and it was one that we were able to follow up on .
For me , however , it is also important to mention that the Member States are required to document even more strictly why certain aspects or elements should be retained , as it is only in those circumstances that we really need European regulations ; they are not an end in themselves .
I am also looking forward to the Internet consultation that the Commission has announced and which will take place between 6 September and 1 November 2011 .
The consultation will also involve the companies affected , the authorities and so forth .
Once again , I will be listening closely to businesses .
When it comes to the existing directive , too , I checked whether these measuring instruments were still in use and , as it happened , the response every single time - for example , from my wine growing association , which I asked about alcohol meters - was that such items of equipment certainly are not used any longer .
We therefore need to look very closely into this .
If we really do want to make progress towards this target of cutting red tape in Europe by 25 % by 2012 - and that , of course , is no longer very far away - we need to make major progress in this area .
We , as Parliament , are ready to play a part .
Finally , I just have one more thing to say about the correlation tables .
I want to state , at this point , that , once again , what we have here is a compromise , but , with regard to the future , I would like to call on the Member States to commit to actually drawing up these tables because this really is about a uniform implementation of the rules and regulations throughout Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Wednesday , 15 December 2010 ) .
Safety of toys ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on safety of toys by Andreas Schwab , Anja Weisgerber , Marianne Thyssen , Anna Maria Corazza Bildt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Evelyne Gebhardt , Christel Schaldemose , Anna Hedh , Barbara Weiler , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , Cristian Silviu Buşoi , Jürgen Creutzmann , Antonyia Parvanova , Nadja Hirsch , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Heide Rühle , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , Malcolm Harbour , on behalf of the European Conservatives and Reformists - B7-0658 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , in relation to the adoption of the Toys Directive , I would like to point out that , when we adopted the directive , we had an objective in mind , namely , making children 's toys safer , as children , in particular , still growing and developing as they are , have a particularly sensitive reaction to hazardous substances and chemicals .
Considering the most up-to-date scientific knowledge at that point , we laid down the strictest requirements anywhere in the world for toys through European legislation .
As every year , this issue comes to the fore in the run-up to Christmas , and for me personally , too , as a mother-to-be , this issue is one that is close to my heart , and I think it is very important that we have the strictest standards .
That is why I helped initiate this debate .
I did so in the light of new expert opinions that have concluded that the strictest limit values for heavy metals are not strict enough , given the latest scientific knowledge .
We included a clause in the directive specifically for cases like this , which makes it possible to modify and tighten up the limit values at a later date , and we now need to make use of that clause .
Commissioner Tajani , that was something that we also called on your predecessor to do a year ago .
I am pleased that , as I understand it , the Commission is to announce today , at least , that the limit values for certain heavy metals are to be tightened up , albeit with a delay from when we called on it to do so and certainly encouraged by the debate today .
In general , however , we need to review all hazardous substances , and we should not , therefore , restrict ourselves to the heavy metals .
Instead , we need to look into the latest information on the hazardous substances known as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) .
Should it also turn out that it is necessary to amend the limit values in order to protect our children , I call for a rectification of the legislation in this regard , too .
At the end of the day , this is about the safety of our children .
Mr President , year after year , we have this debate about the safety of toys .
Year after year , we have to observe that there is still much that is in need of improvement .
We are talking , here , amongst other things , about what are known as carcinogenic , mutagenic and reprotoxic substances ( CMRs ) , substances that cause cancer and that may be very hazardous to the health and , in some cases , even the life of children .
The new information does indeed show that we need to ensure that the limit values are adapted and we are calling on the Commission to finally do so .
Commissioner , I really hope that this will actually happen .
This is not the only problem , however .
There is another problem in the shape of market supervision , and the Member States , too , have a responsibility here .
They have a responsibility to ensure that only toys that truly satisfy the safety standards that we have adopted reach the market .
That is not always the case , which is highly regrettable .
We therefore need to ensure that these safety standards are improved .
The third and final point that I wish to make relates to the marking of toys .
Many people wrongly believe that the CE mark is an indicator of safety .
It is not , however , as the Commission itself says .
It is therefore time , Commissioner , that the Commission gave some thought to how we could issue a European safety mark that is truly reliable and that is monitored by third parties , independent authorities or bodies , so that a dangerous toy simply cannot make it onto the market or into the shops where it can threaten the health of our children .
I believe that we have a major debt to discharge in this regard , and there is still much that we need to do , and urgently so .
author . - Mr President , the safety of toys is a subject of great importance , and not only because it is the time of year when sales of toys increase substantially .
It is our duty as the representatives of EU citizens to ensure that we are looking after the best interests of consumers and protecting children .
The revised Directive 2009 / 48 / EC is meant to assure consumers that toys sold in the EU fulfil the highest safety requirements worldwide , especially those relating to the use of chemical substances .
Market surveillance measures have been reinforced .
The documentation which toy manufacturers and importers have to keep available for inspection now has to contain a detailed description of the design and manufacture of the toy , specific information on the components and materials used in the toy as well as an analysis of the hazards that the toy may present .
However , concerns are raised by the scientific opinion of the Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks on the evaluation of the migration limits for chemical elements in toys , which states that the method used to measure the migration of chemical elements is not really reliable .
We therefore require clarification of the calculation method chosen to regulate CMR - chemical substances in toys .
There is also cause for concern regarding toys designed for children under the age of three .
Since this is the most vulnerable age group , toys designed for these children should be tested independently .
The latest RAPEX reports also underline problems concerning market surveillance for toys .
There are still a large number of toys entering the EU market that pose a high risk to the most vulnerable consumers .
There are clear signals that the revised Toy Safety Directive needs to be strengthened in order to assure the highest level of protection for our children .
We consider that these issues need to be addressed as soon as possible , making sure that there are no loopholes following the implementation of the revised directive .
We need to remain focused on toy safety , market surveillance and the prevention of the use of hazardous substances in products specifically designed for children .
author . - Mr President , I think the importance of the question that we are addressing tonight is the fact that this committee continues to be extremely vigilant about issues related to the safety of toys , as indeed it does on the whole gamut of consumer goods .
So we put a huge amount of effort into passing the revised Toys Directive in 2009 .
But things do not stop there , and that is why I think it is a welcome opportunity to give you , the Commission , the chance to reassure us that you are keeping a very close eye on developments , on test results , and ensuring that the provisions of the existing legislation and the future legislation will continue to be updated to reflect the growing amount of scientific evidence about potentially hazardous chemicals .
And that , of course , includes the need for consistent testing methods .
Part of the issue here is that , in many cases , we find that toy manufacturers are faced with difficulties about getting some consistent standards against which to test , and I know that is something that you will address .
But I also want to pick up the broader issue because I think , as a number of my colleagues have said , the issue here is not just about the regulation ; it is about the whole supply chain for toys , much of which come from outside the European Union .
I was recently invited by your colleague , Commissioner Dalli , to represent the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection at a major trilateral summit between the Americans and the Europeans in China to talk about toy safety .
And one of the important things that we did there and that the European Commission did - and I give them credit - was to talk to Chinese manufacturers about designing safety into the product from the beginning : the knowledge of those directives .
This is nothing to do with marking , it is nothing to do with third-party testing ; it is actually the basic principles of transferring information and knowledge so that we get safety designed into the products from the beginning .
And then those safe products are sustained in production by proper quality systems , not just for the toy itself , but for all its suppliers .
Now that is how we ensure safety .
It is not going to be about marking .
It is about the right regulatory framework , which means getting everybody in the supply chain to understand their responsibilities .
Mr President , I have a comment that I would like to direct to Mr Harbour .

That sounds great , Mr Harbour , but I still think that we have some work to do on our side , too .
It cannot be a coincidence that we debate the issue of toy safety in Parliament in the run-up to each Christmas , as we are doing again this year .
Just last year , it was the carcinogenic substances in toys known as softening agents that we were debating .
Commissioner Verheugen promised us specifically over the last year that there would be new studies and that he would take action where appropriate .
These studies have been on the table since the middle of this year .
According to the study by SCHER , the Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks , the limit values for the PAHs - the carcinogenic substances - are too high .
The methods of testing , too , are not reliable enough .
We need to give this some thought .
My questions to the Commissioner are , how will he deal with what he has inherited in this regard and what action will he take as a result of this criticism and in this field ?
The limit values for heavy metals , too , especially for lead , are ' no longer appropriate ' , to quote another SCHER study .
What does that mean for us ?
If we make adjustments for the heavy metals , will we provide different limit values in the comitology procedure ?
I call on the Commission to take action in this area , too .
In addition , we are also still awaiting the promised limit values for noise made by toys that is deleterious to health .
We were promised these values when we passed the first reading ; they should be presented to us soon .
I hope that we will have these values soon .
Last but not least , I would also like , once again , to come back to the issue of market supervision , as the best directives are only worth as much as their market supervision , which ultimately ensures the monitoring of compliance with the directives , and of course , to the tariff issue .
Mr Tajani knows , of course , that we would be happy to collaborate with him in this area .
In the shape of Mrs Schaldemose , we have a rapporteur who is looking to bring about further moves in this very area .
We will work closely together on this .
This will be the next important step , alongside the issue of the limit value for heavy metals and for carcinogens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate in plenary on the safety of toys in the European Union could not have come at a better time than this year , especially in the light of the recent events that have seen countries such as Belgium withdraw various types of puzzle mat from the market because the concentration of formamide , a chemical substance classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic and toxic for reproduction , was high enough to be deemed a risk to children 's health , and other countries , such as France , accordingly step up their market surveillance of these same products .
At the moment , we are awaiting notification of the measures taken by the national authorities , and then we will see to it that the data provided are analysed immediately by our scientific committees .
If it is confirmed as a result of these tests , as a result of scientific data , that such concentrations of formamide do indeed present a risk to children 's health , then acting under the committee procedure , we will take all the measures necessary to amend the provisions of the directive accordingly .
The directive - and here I wish to reassure Mr Harbour - does indeed provide for this mechanism , which means that it can be constantly updated to reflect the latest available scientific data .
As Mrs Weisgerber mentioned , the Commission , for example , has already made these amendments for certain chemical substances , such as lead and cadmium , so that their values are in line with the latest scientific data .
These amendments will be scrutinised in accordance with the regulatory procedure ; hence , Parliament will be fully involved in this work .
However , over and above the mechanisms provided for by the committee procedure - and I am addressing Mrs Rühle here - I personally undertake to keep you constantly informed of the progress of the work on these two substances .
With regard to the other specific issues raised in the question tabled , I would like to start with the Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks , which refers to a study conducted by the Joint Research Centre to analyse the methodology used in laboratories to identify traces of heavy metals such as lead in toys .
These analyses were carried out in accordance with the EN 71-3 standard .
According to the study , 40 laboratories took part in the analysis , 15 of which are bodies notified by the Member States as being qualified to assess the conformity of toys within the meaning of the directive .
Only three out of 40 laboratories misinterpreted the results of the analyses .
The Commission has sent the results of these studies to the Member States that notified the names of the laboratories and to the laboratories themselves , inviting them to take the appropriate measures .
The study in question has also been sent to the European Committee for Standardisation so that it can be incorporated in the review of the EN 71-3 standard , which is currently under way .
The aim of the review is to establish a new standard by the deadline set , namely 2013 , for applying the new provisions on chemical substances .
As regards the new directive on toys , adopted in May 2009 , it is based on a new legislative framework for the marketing of products and it provides for greater market surveillance .
The Member States are bound to provide the instruments necessary to ensure that only safe products are accessible to European consumers .
They have an obligation both to strengthen border controls and to ensure that their inspectorates monitor effectively products that have already been placed on the European market .
Lastly , should the Member States discover any irregularities in toys , they must immediately notify the other countries of this information via RAPEX , the EU rapid alert system for dangerous consumer products .
Mr Harbour , the Commission is cooperating very closely with the Chinese authorities , in particular , with regard to the safety of toys .
European and Chinese experts on the subject meet regularly to exchange information on applicable legislation and standards , and on administrative practices , too .
The Chinese authorities ' inspectors are receiving training with a view to improving the quality control of products .
As regards chemical substance limits , Mr Buşoi , it is true that a migration-based method is preferable from a scientific point of view , because it is based on the real risk to which children are exposed .
However , setting migration limits means assessing the risk and the exposure to risk , as well as permitting acceptable daily intakes in order to calculate those limits .
Given the large number of chemical substances - more than 1 000 - and the lack of sufficient information on all of them , we cannot implement this method with the scientific knowledge we currently possess .
That being said , the directive already lays down migration limits for some chemical substances for which scientific information is available and permits , again via the committee procedure , the future introduction of migration limits should further scientific data be made available for other new substances .
Mrs Rühle , as regards compounds and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , these substances can be found in various consumer goods and not just in toys .
Hence , the possibility of adopting specific measures has now been tested within the framework of the REACH Regulation , which has a broader scope , and this appears to be the most consistent and effective method .
Toys intended for use by children under three years of age are subject to stricter rules .
Children below that age are more vulnerable and require greater protection .
Should there be any doubt about the age group for which a toy is intended , the manufacturer must apply the most rigorous standards .
However , there does not appear to be any justification for making all toys subject to the same restrictions as toys intended for babies .
The exposure to risk and the way in which those toys are used are not , in fact , the same .
Furthermore , certain categories of toys that are intended for older children and for which no risks or accidents have been recorded would end up simply being banned .
This method would be disproportionate and would contradict the objective of better regulation .
The new directive also prohibits the use of chemicals classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic for reproduction , but this Parliament itself decided that an outright ban without any possibility of derogation would have been neither justifiable nor realistic .
However , if a substance presents no health risks , because it is inaccessible , say , then it may not be prohibited .
Assessments must be carried out on a case by case basis using the scientific information available for each substance .
Stricter limits may be adopted under the committee procedure to ensure an adequate level of safety .
The Commission will propose this whenever a genuine risk and specific data deem it necessary .
As you know , the new directive will apply to economic operators from July 2011 .
The obligations relating to chemical substances will apply from July 2013 .
Ensuring that all those concerned - Member States and economic operators - apply the new rules and integrating the necessary adaptations to scientific progress is a priority for the Commission .
In particular , the Member States have already met twice to discuss the changes in certain chemical substance-related obligations , in October 2009 and in September of this year .
A further meeting is planned in April 2011 to conclude the work .
An expert group on chemicals has also been set up to give the Commission guidance .
The group already held a meeting in November , which produced good results with regard to defining the issues to be addressed and the options to be suggested .
A further meeting is scheduled for January 2011 .
Mr Harbour , with regard to market surveillance , I shall have an opportunity to answer your questions at a later date .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Toy Safety Directive marked an important step forward in the protection of children up to 14 years of age .
It lays down the essential requirements that toys must meet during manufacture and before being placed on the market .
The European harmonisation bodies drew up harmonised European standards on the basis of the essential requirements : the conformity of toys is assessed and guaranteed by the CE mark , which ensures a high level of safety with respect to international standards .
Naturally , I hope that in time , the CE mark can be replaced by microchips .
Moreover , I personally believe that the European Union is constantly striving to update its safety tests , adapting them more and more to new technologies .
I must say that I am puzzled about the need to hold a debate , immediately before Christmas , on a study in which it is stated that the test on the migration limits for chemical elements in toys is non-compliant .
Let us not cause a false alarm and disguise it behind the legitimate need to continually update our control systems , because that could also damage the many European businesses that operate in the toy sector and comply with all the rules in force , and it could do so at a crucial time for their production .
Furthermore , it is worth mentioning that improvements in legislation must always be matched by improvements in its application .
While our work here in the European Parliament will continue along the lines of improving the quality of toys , my hope for the new year is that non-European countries will use our standards as a model so as to improve the quality of their products at international level .
Mr President , Commissioner , the directive adopted in 2009 was a success because it updates the legislative framework governing the safety of toys .
It is a major step in the right direction , because it is showing us which way to go , but it is not sufficient .
We need to be constantly vigilant and alert to ensure that toys that are sold do not endanger the health and safety of children .
All toys that are on the market have to comply with current legislation .
We must revise and improve the monitoring mechanisms for detecting dangerous toys , due to substances that are considered to be carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction ( CMR substances ) , fragrances , or other dangerous substances , such as heteropolyanion ( HPA ) compounds .
The legislation to follow needs to be clearer regarding minimum age warnings and the dangers arising from inappropriate use .
We need to ensure that the recommended age for toys is based on child behaviour studies .
We need to be capable of adapting our legislation to scientific advances , based on sound studies , and be more rigorous in monitoring the market and toy imports .
We need to work together , increase cooperation between Member States and rely on the customs services working together to monitor the route taken by imported toys .
Europeans are preparing to make their Christmas purchases , and we must guarantee that the products that they buy comply with all the safety requirements .
( CS ) Mr President , the recommendation of the Commission 's Scientific Committee regarding the limits for release of the six chemical substances is not unequivocal , and that has led to this question being put .
I agree with the six experts who performed the assessment , that they could not clearly prove harm to children from these substances , because in simulating exposure , they use water and not children 's spit containing lactose .
We cannot leave parents of young children in doubt over the possible health risks of toys made from synthetic materials , however , and I would therefore like to ask whether the Commission intends to continue its investigation by starting experiments on mice , for example , as was the case when investigating the effects of bisphenol , which is released from baby feeding bottles made from synthetic materials and which will now be banned throughout the EU from March .
I would like to ask two more specific questions .
Does the Commission agree with the proposal of the Scientific Committee , which recommends assuming exposure for a child amounting to 50 % of the exposure for an adult ?
Furthermore , in view of the fact that the Scientific Committee recommends reducing the limit for cadmium from 0.5 micrograms per kilo of weight of the child per day to 0.36 micrograms , I would like to ask how the Commission will transfer this conclusion and also the other findings of the Committee into specific measures concerning limits for toys and also other consumer goods .
Commissioner , we really would like to know what the timetable is for these measures , so that the parents of young children will know where they stand .
( EL ) Mr President , while listening to the Commissioner talking so knowledgeably about polycyclic hydrocarbons , carcinogens and toxic substances , I thought for a moment that he was a chemist , not a Commissioner .
Then I remembered that he is the Commissioner responsible for this issue and , therefore , the first thing he should have done was to reply to us in detail on the CE mark , the issue raised by my fellow Member , Evelyne Gebhardt , the mark which is supposed to be a safety guarantee for the toys which our children play with .
Then I realised that he had not replied for a very specific reason : this Friday , it will be two years exactly since the former Commissioner signed a safety agreement with toy retailers and importers in a toy shop outside Brussels .
It is eighteen months today since we had a new directive ; and yet , here we are again today , like last year , as the Chair quite rightly pointed out , talking about the same subject , the safety of toys , and this year , things are even more serious , because we have a recession and , in a recession , parents who want to buy toys and are short of money will go to the section of the market that sells sub-standard toys .
However , sub-standard toys cause three problems : firstly , that section of the market does not know what it is doing ; secondly , it has no staff and thirdly , there are no controls , meaning that we still have no protection .
As we all know and accept , children are the most valuable thing we have and , as you quite rightly said , Commissioner , they are the most vulnerable members of society .
Please reply on the CE mark , which is the safety guarantee .
I beg you , Commissioner , to find a practical solution , so that , next year , neither you nor we are here addressing the same question .
Mr President , the subject of toy safety is important to all families across the European Union .
While it is a parent 's duty to ensure the safety of the children they have responsibility for , they need to be secure in the knowledge that the toys their children are playing with are safe .
In fact , I have brought some with me this evening just to remind us what some toys look like .
Therefore , this easy-osy attitude to toy safety , and the fact that we are here at 11 : 30 at night to again ask questions about toy safety , does not rest well with me .
So what has to be done ?
I would like to know from the Commission which companies directly selling or distributing toys have been successfully prosecuted for misusing the CE marking ?
On the subject of market surveillance , owing to the austerity measures impacting on many Member States , it is the very organisations that are there to protect consumers which are disappearing , merging with other cash-strapped organisations , and having their funding withdrawn and their powers diminished .
At a local level - often the front line in the battle against unsafe toys - budget cuts will impact on the effectiveness of trading standards .
Can the Commission and Council investigate whether these cuts will breach commitments made in the General Product Safety Directive regarding effective resourcing , and what monitoring is being applied to ensure that Member States are protecting children from unsafe toys ?
To this end , will the Commission be bringing forward any legislation on the common European framework for market surveillance ?
As in the question tonight , people have acknowledged the job of RAPEX .
However , it is resource-constrained and there is more that can be done to exchange information and withdraw dangerous products from the market as quickly as possible .
What support is being given to the sharing of best practice between surveillance officers in the European Union ?
In addition , will the Commission introduce a comprehensive EU-wide database on accident and injury , introducing this in the first instance for children and toy-related harm , so that unsafe products can be removed from the market as soon as is physically possible ?
I hope that in 2011 , we will see improved commitment to tackling the problem of unsafe toys on the European market once and for all .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is an eternal truth that our future lies in our children .
Therefore , it is extremely important to keep them safe from the earliest age , and to ensure that they use high quality toys that do not present a health hazard .
However , determination of testing methods is only one aspect of ensuring the safety of toys .
What is the most important is compliance with legislation .
Comprehensive testing , as well as the application of sanctions with a serious deterrent effect in the case of any irregularities , are particularly important in the case of imported products .
We often hear about health hazards in connection with cheap , poor quality toys , which primarily originate from the Far East .
As a practising father , I often find that instead of being deterred by more stringent inspections , such paltry products find their way into the hands of our children in increasing numbers and varieties .
We must prevent the continued influx of such toys and support the widespread use of toys made from natural materials .
( GA ) Mr President , I spoke about this matter last year and , like other speakers , I am here again tonight , another year gone , and that is not good .
Nevertheless , I suppose there is nothing more disconcerting than to see your child getting injured or dying as a result of playing with a toy .
We think of this in terms of swallowing something or strangulation , but there is a more covert killer and that is cancer .
The evidence is there that cancer is rising amongst young children in particular .
Many people feel it is as a result of being exposed to chemicals in children 's toys .
PAHs are particularly mentioned and therefore , it is important that we reduce CMR substances in children 's toys to the minimum .
Therefore , we need to take action .
( GA ) It is time for us to do it and to ensure that the toys used by our children are safe for them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to point out once again , in response to the many questions asked during the debate , that the directive will apply to economic operators from July 2011 and that the obligations relating to chemical substances will apply from July 2013 .
During my speech , I said that the application of the new rules by all those concerned was a priority for the Commission .
As regards surveillance , it is clear that strict legislation is not only necessary , but that it must also be applied correctly or else it will never be effective .
That is why I am convinced that the Member States have a fundamental role to play ; indeed , a toy that enters the internal market in Rotterdam or in Constanţa , Romania , today , may wind up in Bologna , Lisbon or Helsinki tomorrow , without any border controls .
What gives consumers peace of mind , more than directives being updated every fortnight , is being able to trust in the rigorousness and proper functioning of market surveillance ; in other words , in the fact that , if someone tries to sell unsafe toys , he or she will be punished and the dangerous products withdrawn from the market .
Obviously , the same argument applies to businesses ; those that abide by the rules pay the price for this situation .
Indeed , they appreciate the fact that they are not being exposed to unfair competition from those that more or less knowingly sell non-compliant products and toys .
In short , the real challenge is to give consumers peace of mind , businesses legal certainty and a level playing field , and market surveillance authorities resources and cooperation mechanisms .
Hence , in 2011 , the Commission will examine the possibility of developing a multiannual market surveillance programme for identifying the long-term measures to be taken and for making the necessary financial resources available , so as to ensure uniformly rigorous checks and consistent action by the Member States .
I would also like to inform you that , in 2011 , I intend to organise an event at Rotterdam port with the Dutch authorities , possibly to coincide with the entry into force of the directive .
The idea is to see how the largest port in Europe will go about complying with the new rules laid down by the new directive .
As regards the CE mark - which was one of the main topics addressed in my hearing before Parliament prior to my appointment , and which was also discussed in my hearings before the Committee on the Internal Market - I would remind you that it does not certify quality ; it certifies only conformity to certain standards .
Hence , it is a certificate of conformity to standards , not a certificate of quality .
As I have said many times , a quality mark is something that we could only envisage in the future .
Implementing the CE mark and preventing its misuse - something which unfortunately happens in the case of many products , including non-EU ones - is already a big job .
Thus , I believe that we can continue to work on this matter , to develop the CE mark - and I personally am not against discussing the introduction of a quality mark in the future perhaps , but I think it is premature to do so now .
As for databases , they will be included in the review of the Product Safety Directive .
However , with regard to bisphenol , which is contained in baby feeding bottles , it is not a toy , it is not covered by the directive , but , as the honourable Member pointed out , it has already been withdrawn from the market .
I believe I have answered most of the questions put to me .
I am grateful to the President and to the MEPs who put questions to the Commission .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Thousands of new toys come on the market in Europe every year , and Christmas is the time when demand for toys in the shops is at its peak .
Therefore , this is a timely issue .
There are significant concerns regarding harmful chemicals found in certain toys .
The Commission must address this without delay .
Safety standards must be based on reliable methods of testing , and intensive research must be undertaken to ensure that no harmful substances are found in children 's toys .
Although all the toys that appear on the market from 20 July 2011 onwards will have to comply with the new Toy Safety Directive , and although we in Europe have the world 's strictest legislation as regards toy safety , constant care is necessary .
The Commission must be vigilant and strengthen the market surveillance of imports .
Every recall of dangerous toys is a cause for concern , and an immediate examination of each case must be made .
Consumers must have confidence in the CE mark which guarantees that a product is of EU standard and made from non-toxic materials .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Presentation of the Commission work programme for 2011 ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Future of the Africa / EU strategic partnership ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Preparations for the European Council meeting ( 16-17 December 2010 ) - Establishing a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
Council and Commission statements on preparations for the European Council meeting ( 16-17 December 2010 ) ,
Oral Question by Mrs Bowles to the Commission , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on establishing a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area ( B7-0659 / 2010 ) .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , Commissioner , honourable Members , on behalf of the Council I should like to thank you , Mr President , for this opportunity to come before Parliament to present to you the issues that will be discussed by the European Council .
By all accounts , the European Council meeting tomorrow and the day after tomorrow will be decisive for the strengthening of the economic pillar of Economic and Monetary Union .
The major item on the agenda will in fact be the reinforcement of financial stability .
We are living in exceptional times , which have created and continue to create significant challenges for both governments and citizens .
We need to do whatever is necessary to ensure that the current financial crisis is overcome and confidence is restored .
Since the start of the crisis we have demonstrated our determination to take the necessary measures to preserve financial stability and to promote a return to sustainable growth .
In particular , the crisis has highlighted the need for an additional instrument to preserve the stability of the euro area .
We had to establish an ad hoc mechanism , which we have just used to support Ireland .
However , we really need a permanent mechanism in the medium term .
To this end , and in close consultation with the President of the European Council , at the next meeting of the European Council tomorrow morning , the Belgian Government will submit a proposal for a decision to change the Treaty with a view to establishing a mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the entire euro area by amending Article 136 .
The European Council will be called upon to give its consent to this draft decision and to the launch of the simplified revision procedure as provided for by Article 48.6 of the Treaty on European Union .
The objective is the formal adoption of the decision in March 2011 and its entry into force on 1 January 2013 .
In addition , the implementation of the report of the Task Force on economic governance endorsed by the European Council in October is an important step towards increased fiscal discipline , broader economic surveillance and deeper coordination .
This issue , to which we attach a great deal of importance , is currently before both Parliament and the Council and should be concluded by next summer .
Finally , I should like to underline the importance of the new Europe 2020 Strategy for growth and employment , which plays an important role in getting us out of the crisis .
The Belgian Presidency has been committed to moving forward with its implementation , so as to pave the way for sustainable economic recovery .
In addition to these economic issues , I would like to make two further points .
The European Council will deal with the Union 's relations with its strategic partners .
The Foreign Affairs Council , chaired by Baroness Ashton , prepared progress reports on three of its partners , the United States , China and Russia .
The European Council will therefore listen carefully to Baroness Ashton 's presentation on the Union 's relations with its strategic partners .
Baroness Ashton will also be called upon to take this approach with other partners , such as Ukraine , Africa , India and Brazil , and to present a report in March 2011 describing the situation regarding her contacts with our partners .
My final point concerns the application for accession to the European Union submitted by Montenegro .
The General Affairs Council welcomed the opinion of the Commission on Montenegro .
The country has made progress in meeting the political criteria set by the Copenhagen European Council and the requirements of the stabilisation and association process .
Nonetheless , further efforts are needed , especially to implement seven key priorities set out in the Commission opinion .
Taking account of the Commission proposal , the Council recommended granting Montenegro the status of candidate country and this issue will be examined by the European Council .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , President of the Council , honourable Members , this week 's European Council will focus on two main goals : to agree on the key features of a future permanent European Stability Mechanism for the euro area and on the limited Treaty change that will make this mechanism legally waterproof .
I therefore hope and expect this European Council to focus on delivery , steadying the course and strengthening the consensus .
In reaching an agreement , this European Council will also send a signal of unity , solidarity and unambiguous support for the European project , but it will require a lot of hard work to get there .
We all know that at the moment there is a lot at stake for the European Union and the euro area in particular .
Many people are looking to the European Union for answers : the markets for one , our partners in the world for another , but most importantly , our citizens .
What are they expecting ?
How can we best reassure them ?
For me the answer is clear .
We need to show that the European Union is in control of events , that we have a course of action that we are sticking to , and that we speak with one voice and act as one .
What we do not need is a beauty contest between leaders , a cacophony of diverging scenarios , or announcements that are not followed by action .
Yes , we are facing serious challenges but , if you stand back and look at the facts , the European Union is meeting those challenges head on this year .
We faced two particular issues with Greece and Ireland .
In both cases we took the decisions needed .
The reality is that in both situations the EU was able to act but we need to put far-reaching reforms in place to ensure that such situations do not arise again in the future .
Real European economic governance is a necessary precondition for this .
The economic governance package should therefore be seen as the key building block in a system which gives Europeans and the markets confidence that the right structures are in place .
I hope that this Parliament will continue to treat these Commission proposals as a priority , so that they can be fully implemented by the middle of next year .
Our future system will be one that rests on individual and collective efforts , responsibility and solidarity .
We are moving fast in this direction .
At the same time , public finances must be consolidated .
Sound public finances are needed to restore the confidence which is so essential for growth .
In many Member States , the current course of fiscal policy weighs heavily on the long-term sustainability of public finances , and requires corrective measures .
Of course , we need to look beyond fiscal consolidation towards promoting growth , and we are sowing the seeds of Europe 's future growth through the Europe 2020 Strategy .
This offers a real growth prospective for Europe .
I see more and more Member States fully grasping the potential of Europe 2020 .
Let us build on that by accelerating growth-enhancing reforms .
Taken seriously , Europe 2020 can direct our local , national and European economies towards tomorrow 's sources of growth .
We are working hard to bring forward the first Annual Growth Survey in one month 's time .
I am confident that this will be a major theme for this Parliament next year .
So too will be the future budget of the Union , and how its great potential can be used to help the task of boosting growth and creating jobs .
We must also look at our banking system and take the necessary action in order to ensure that banks are in a position to finance the economy appropriately , particularly SMEs .
When it comes to stabilising economies , much of our action was ad hoc or temporary .
Another important element of our approach for far-reaching reforms must be a permanent stability mechanism .
That is the objective of the European Stability Mechanism .
After intense consultations , which went very well , we were able to come forward with an outline for this mechanism at the end of last month .
I am confident this will be endorsed by the European Council this week , although the precise contours will have to be worked out over the coming weeks .
The mechanism should also be supported by a decision to move forward with a limited and focused treaty change .
Now that there is a consensus between the Member States to take the treaty change route , this approach must be swiftly implemented .
The purpose of the treaty change is very specific .
It is a straightforward , pragmatic amendment to meet a specific need .
It needs no more than a simple change to implement it .
So let us resist the temptation to overcomplicate or to make artificial linkages with other subjects , and let us not allow ourselves to be distracted from the task in hand .
There is massive political will behind the euro .
Both the temporary mechanism and now the permanent mechanism are key decisions which show that Member States are as willing as ever to put their weight behind the stability and integrity of the euro .
All of these elements - economic governance , fiscal consolidation , securing growth-enhancing reforms , effective banks , the European Financial Stability Facility , and its successor , the European Stability Mechanism - are interconnected .
They must be approached as a whole put together in an articulated way , so as to create a comprehensive response to the crisis , and to ensure that nothing like it ever happens again .
The action that the European Central Bank is taking is , of course , a vital contribution to this goal .
Everyone agrees that the action taken this year , most obviously for Greece and Ireland , is also in the wider interests of the whole European Union and all its Member States .
It rests heavily on fundamental principles of solidarity , of collective responsibility , of sharing the risks and bringing mutual support at times of need .
I know that these principles are close to the heart of this Parliament .
They are close to my heart too , so I can understand why other ideas have been floated to give form to these principles through other possible mechanisms .
On this point let me be clear. eurobonds in themselves are an interesting idea .
The Commission itself put forward the idea back in 2008 when assessing the first ten years of EMU , but we are in a crisis situation and we already have financial mechanisms to address this crisis , like the European Financial Stability Facility .
These are far from exhausted and can be improved and adapted far more quickly than any alternatives , however interesting they may be .
So while I can understand that you want to think about every possible solution , this is a time for immediate action .
Let us not kill the idea for the future , but concentrate at this stage on what can be the solution to achieve a consensus among Member States and can be done quickly and decisively .
Let us work together to end this year with a message of confidence that the European Union has a unified vision for its economy and is putting this vision in place .
Let us do it with a clear sense of our destination and let that destination be clear as well : a strong and stable euro area in an ever closer European Union .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Chastel , and the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , for their introduction to the discussion .
We are talking about something which is very important .
Overcoming the crisis and creating jobs is the priority for our citizens .
Tomorrow and the day after , the European Council will give its attention , first and foremost , to this very matter .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council , which opens this week , is taking place in a particular context : speculative attacks against the euro , the revival of euroscepticism and the beginning of reflections on Europe 's finances , while this Parliament is preparing to vote on the 2011 budget .
These are , of course , closely linked .
The euro crisis and the solidarity measures have an impact on the purchasing power of the European people , who are wondering if all these efforts are worthwhile , if they are leading to anything , whence the euroscepticism even in countries hitherto traditionally pro-European .
This is a phenomenon hijacked by populist and extremist political factions , which feed on fear and the temptation to withdraw into oneself and which , when they are in government , do not have a miracle cure .
I will start with the euro , which we must protect and strengthen while , at the same time , asking ourselves some fundamental questions .
My first question is this : has Europe ever had a currency as stable as the euro ?
I say this to those nostalgic for national currencies : a step back would have catastrophic consequences for Europe .
My second question is : who is behind the attacks to which the euro has been subjected for months ?
Who is standing to gain from the crime , if I may call it that ?
I am not a conspiracy theorist but , in my conversations with political leaders and financial analysts , the paths are converging on the source of our problems .
When will we learn ?
I think we can talk directly to our friends .
My third question is this : why is the euro still trading above USD 1.30 ?
This is seriously hampering our exports and everyone is saying that the euro has had it .
Why are our countries the only ones to practise a strict policy of orthodoxy while our competitors profit from their weak currencies to boost their economies ?
This is what our citizens are asking us .
These are questions I have been asked in the last two weeks in meetings with elected politicians .
Ladies and gentlemen , what we need is a message of confidence that we will overcome the crisis , measures to encourage a return to growth and concrete measures like those taken recently by the Barroso Commission to relaunch the internal market or to make the financial markets more ethical .
What we need , and the euro crisis proved this , is convergence in our social and fiscal policies .
That takes courage .
President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , go further and faster and we will solve quite a few problems .
We are going to need a lot of courage in the years to come if we want to strengthen our countries in the arena of global competition and if we want to use taxpayers ' money in the most effective way possible .
This effort to streamline expenditure must be made at all levels : local , regional , national and European .
The political and financial priorities of the Union need to be reexamined and the public finances of Europe need to be fundamentally reviewed .
We need to ask ourselves the real questions and , depending on the answers we give , adapt our budgetary framework for the period 2014-2020 .
It is for this crucial debate that the European Parliament is calling and it is in these substantive discussions that , as the representatives directly elected by 500 million Europeans , we intend to fully participate , even if this displeases certain governments who wish to deny us this right .
I ask the European Council to give us its agreement and , if necessary , to vote , so that those who deny us this opportunity to participate in the debate assume their responsibilities .
It is not , for us , about power but about contributing to a crucial debate on the future of European construction .
We must lance the boil , we must take the right decisions , the necessary decisions to ensure that the European budget increasingly becomes an investment budget .
If our Member States , mindful of budgetary constraints , can invest less in education , training , research and innovation , let us do so at European level by combining our resources and , therefore , by achieving economies of scale .
For the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the debate on Europe 's finances must not be allowed to descend into a quarrel between Member States who want their money back .
On the contrary , the debate should be about reconciling our fellow citizens with Europe by exposing them to the added value that concerted and visionary European action can represent .
I am currently visiting the capital cities and I can tell you that the debate is taking hold .
Do not miss this opportunity .
Because we are coming up to Christmas and the New Year and this Presidency will soon come to an end , I should like to thank the Belgian Presidency for its very good collaboration with Parliament , as well as José Manuel Barroso , who had the courage to undertake to present a document on capital requirements before the end of June .
I believe that we must continue , together , in this direction and that the Heads of State or Government must follow us .
We have to show them the way .
( Applause )
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , it is not often that we have come together at the end of the year with greater cause for concern .
We are deeply concerned because Europe finds itself in the midst of a growing and multiplying crisis of confidence .
There are causes for this crisis of confidence and I would like to attempt to describe some of them here today .
I believe that we are confronted by a double salami-slicing approach .
There is the approach taken by those who are trying to conceal the actual situation from the citizens of a country .
It seriously shakes people 's confidence when governments say to them : ' Everything is fine , no problem , we have it all under control ' and then suddenly turn around and explain that they need countless billions of euros in aid .
This has occurred twice now .
I do not know whether a government will once again say that it has everything under control and can finance its bonds , even if interest rates are rising , and then suddenly change its mind and say : ' We need a rescue package .
Help us ! ' .
This must not happen .
We need an inventory of the actual national debts and bank debts .
I believe that it will create more confidence if we explain what the real situation is , however bad it might be .
If all the cards are on the table , then it is easier for us to look for solutions .
However , there is also the salami-slicing approach on the other side .
This is what happens when the strong countries say ' We do not need to help ' .
We hear the renationalisation message : ' We are not prepared to pay for the others ' , despite the fact that the countries which are saying that know that we will ultimately all have to stand together and pay up .
The salami-slicing approach of not telling the people the truth , although you know that you will have to pay in your own interest , is just as damaging to confidence .
We are currently preparing for a meeting of the European Council .
What about the different voices there ?
One is in favour of eurobonds and another is opposed .
One says stabilise the rescue package and build it up , another says do not build it up .
I wonder where the logic lies in explaining that these are all just temporary measures , because we have everything under control , but we have to include the temporary measures in the treaty , so that they are available in the long term .
Everyone notices a contradiction of this kind and that also shakes people 's confidence .
It damages confidence when a government subjects its banks to a stress test in the summer and only a few months later realises that it was really a stress test for the euro and not for the banks .
We are in the midst of a crisis of confidence and I must say to you , Mr Barroso , that although what you said this morning may be true , it gives the impression not that we will look for the best solutions and put them in place , but instead that we will discuss the minimum consensus which we can reach on Friday .
That is simply not enough .
It will heighten the crisis of confidence .
A policy which pacifies the national markets in the short term is not enough .
We need a policy which stabilises the markets and the euro .
Why is no one in this House or in the European Council talking about the external value of the euro ?
Today the euro is trading at 1.34 against the US dollar .
Its lowest value during the crisis was 1.20 and when it was introduced it was worth 1.15 .
The euro is a stable currency .
In intercontinental competition , where regions of the world compete with one another in economic terms , it is no longer the individual national currencies that count , but the currency structure of the entire region .
In economic and social terms , the euro area is definitely the strongest region in the world .
It is only being made politically weaker by policy makers who are implementing policies aimed at damping down national debate in the short term .
The euro is strong and it could be much stronger if those who act as its political framework and those who are responsible for it would finally fulfil their obligations and take bold , consistent decisions on social and economic issues which would bring the crisis of confidence to an end .
You simply need to look at what is happening in London , in Paris and in Rome .
If we do not stop this crisis of confidence , we will have major problems over the next few years .
This is why I would like to say to the Council that I am in favour of eurobonds .
If there is another suitable measure , then please take it , but you must finally come to an agreement on stabilising the euro internally , because it is strong enough externally .
Mr President , I think that , in life , there is a rule that applies everywhere : when a group is under attack it must react with unity and with solidarity .
Exactly the opposite happened in 2010 when the euro came under attack , because , since the Greek crisis , we have witnessed nothing but disagreements in the debates , certainly no unity and certainly not enough solidarity .
We need to have the courage now - and I am addressing the President of the Commission as well - to recognise that all the temporary measures taken are just not enough .
This is not my analysis , it is the analysis of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD , of Mr Trichet , who is , after all , the head of the euro 's monetary guardian , the President of the European Central Bank , and for whom all the measures that have been taken and all the measures that are in the pipeline do not go far enough .

Everyone says that action needs to be taken on four points : first , a stability pact with real sanction mechanisms ; second , a permanent , enlarged crisis fund - I am not the one proposing it , Mr Trichet says that it must be enlarged , the Heads of State or Government do not want to enlarge it , and we want confidence to return to the markets ; third , real economic and fiscal governance , fiscal and economic union and , fourth , a single eurobond market .
These are the four things that need to be done , because nowhere in the world , fellow Members , is there a currency that is not backed by a government , by an economic strategy and by a bond market .
Such a thing exists nowhere on earth .
And what are we being told here today ?
We are being told ' Yes , it 's a good idea , but we need to wait a little while longer . '
We need to wait for what ?
Perhaps we need to wait for complete chaos or for the euro to disappear .
The time has therefore come to take that decision and I am not expecting the Commission , Mr President , to tell us today ' Yes , it will be difficult , we must not continue these debates on eurobonds ; it 's a good idea but this is not the time , because we have the crisis fund , which we are going to make permanent now . '
The one has nothing to do with the other .
The crisis fund is necessary now to counter attacks against the euro , but eurobonds are also necessary for the medium- and long-term stability of the euro .
There is no contradiction between the two .
Both are necessary , as is the case throughout the world .
I therefore believe that , along with the Heads of State or Government , who are going to discuss tomorrow and the day after tomorrow and are going to say ' Yes , we are going to tweak the Treaty , and the crisis fund , which should normally be enlarged - which is what everyone else is calling for - may be made permanent ' , I believe that the time has come for the Commission to put forward as quickly as possible a package that is much more significant , courageous , global and coherent as far as that approach is concerned .
With regard to the Stability and Growth Pact , which has real sanction mechanisms , Parliament can do its work , because the package is here and we are going to revert to the Commission 's initial proposals .
As regards the other three points , an enlarged crisis fund , yes , but propose it .
Propose it !
Take a stance on this point and say that the crisis fund needs to be enlarged .
Why ?
Because having an enlarged crisis fund will put an end to speculation against the euro .
Secondly , propose a global package on fiscal and economic union and , thirdly , do not be afraid , propose a single eurobond market .
We know that , when all is said and done , that is what will stabilise the euro in the long term .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , there is , however , something strange in all of this .
Mr Chastel , you spoke of the next summit .
You could have told us that things were going to be a bit shaky before this summit .
You could have told us that you would have to curtail some of the debates .
Mr Barroso , I believe that we will not make any progress , we will not move any further forwards , with all this waffle .
Martin Schultz is right : we have to describe the reality of the crisis and to tell it like it is , but we must also describe the reality of our own political powerlessness and the reasons for this powerlessness .
It is no use just saying that we took the right decisions .
You know as well as I do , and everyone here knows , that we always took them too late .
We are taking one step forwards and two steps backwards .
I am not saying that it is your fault .
Quite the contrary , I think that the Commission has even been a point of stability at a time when lucidity was in short supply .
But now - I think that Guy Verhofstadt asked the real question - what should our strategy be in the coming months ?
As I see it , the strategy is simple : the Commission should put forward a stability pact , which it already has , defining the necessary stability and therefore the responsibility of all towards the euro , and a solidarity pact defining the solidarity we need .
There is no stability without solidarity .
These discussions between Mrs Merkel and Mr Untel no longer interest us .
Yes , the position of certain countries , including Germany , which say that there must be stability and that what has happened must never happen again , is right .
Yes , if we do not say at the same time that solidarity forces us to create an opportunity to protect the euro with eurobonds to invest , to continue to make the ecological and economic transformation .
We need to invest , except that , at national level , this is no longer possible .
We have a two-sided currency : stability on the one side and solidarity on the other side , with responsibility in the middle .
President of the Commission , put forward a proposal to reform the functions of the Union so as to achieve stability and solidarity with the eurobonds in such a way that there can no longer be any speculation against the debts of certain countries and , with the eurobonds , you have the opportunity to invest at the same time .
Mr Oettinger tells us that he needs EUR 1 000 billion to reform the energy sector , but where is he going to get this money from ?
Is he going to play the lottery or what ?
It is utterly absurd to say that he needs EUR 1 000 billion without telling us how we are going to mobilise the necessary funds for this necessary economic transformation .
So , the strategy is simple : the Commission proposes , Parliament amends and decides , and there will be a position from the Commission and from the European Parliament for or against the Council , and the Council will have to react to this common position .
That is it .
The only solution in today 's debate .
If we wait for Mrs Merkel to make up her mind to take a decision a quarter of an hour before she has to take it , you can be waiting till the end of time .
By the time she takes it we will have missed the train .
Of course , you can tell me that , as there will be another train , it does not matter , we can always catch the next one .
But that is not true .
Gorbachev was right when he said : ' Dangers await only those who do not react to life . '
( The President cut off the speaker )
I do not want history to punish Europe .
Face up to your responsibilities .
We are facing up to ours and we must demonstrate to the Council that the political stability we need is here , in the Commission and in Parliament , and we will defy the instability of the Council .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I share the hope that measures will be agreed at the European Council to reassure the markets and reintroduce stability to the eurozone , because , whether we are members or not , we should all have an interest in that .
Ahead of the meeting we are told that more sanctions are to be a central part of the solution , but sanctions need to be credible to be effective and the track record of the Union in this regard is pretty bad .
Making them automatic will hardly make them more credible if the belief remains that a political solution might be found to avoid them .
What is really required is for eurozone members to have the political will to deliver on their current obligations .
We hear rumours that a key part of the solution is to make the private sector share the burden of future bail-outs .
It would however be a terrible paradox if the main consequence of such an initiative would be to raise borrowing costs for some of the weaker eurozone Member States and contribute to the next crisis .
Having just finished a major reform treaty process , a reform package , we are told , would close the book on treaty change for a generation .
We are now , just a matter of months later , apparently to embark on another .
We are reassuringly told , including by the Commission President , that the changes need only be limited , but that does not appear to be what the German Government believes .
The German finance minister , Dr Schäuble seems to have opened the door to a new round of integration leading to a fiscal union and , ultimately , a political union .
Where is this going to end ?
Surely not another lost decade focusing on the wrong kind of reforms ?
Europe needs economic reform , public finance discipline , deepening the internal market , changes to labour laws to boost employment , and a package of measures to make a success of the Europe 2020 programme .
These are the key reforms , boldly and rightly set out by President Barroso in the programme for his Commission , but already I fear this opportunity may be slipping from our grasp .
The terrible risk is that , despite the talk about building Europe , it may in fact be undermined , and while hoping for a stronger Europe , the failure to address its underlying economic problems will in fact just make it weaker .
We believe the priorities of the European Council must be to agree a limited number of specific measures , so that eurozone members can help each other through the immediate crisis without imposing any burdens on Member States who have chosen to remain outside , and then to reassert the vital importance of dealing with the long-term crisis which we face : the risk of a permanent collapse in our economic competiveness .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have been dealing with the global economic and financial crisis for three years now .
One of the conclusions to be drawn from this long-lasting discussion is that our measures are obviously not tackling the roots of the crisis , but simply treating the symptoms .
I would like to repeat once again that decisions at EU level must not be determined by the financial markets .
We must not allow the banks to get away largely scot-free , to continue speculating and to leave the Member States to take responsibility for the risky transactions that the banks have entered into .
The tough austerity packages imposed on Greece and Ireland will result in the people bearing the cost of the crisis which they did not cause .
This will restrict consumer spending and prevent the necessary economic upturn from taking place .
Drastic savings measures will put other countries that are currently at risk , such as Portugal and Spain , in the same position as Greece and Ireland .
Simply readjusting the financial instruments or putting new safety nets in place will not help .
A permanent mechanism for preserving financial stability must include measures which regulate the activities of the markets .
These include , among other things , the introduction of a financial transaction tax and an obligation to meet minimum social standards .
It is also important for us to change the statute of the European Central Bank to allow it to provide direct financial aid for ailing states , while circumventing the banks .
These are the first steps we should be taking , but they are long overdue .
To make the situation absolutely clear , a narrow-minded national approach is blocking the regulations needed for effective control of the financial markets .
The Heads of State or Government are preventing us from making progress in the right direction .
I include the Chancellor of Germany among them .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , 2010 will be remembered as the year when the deep flaws in the euro project were exposed and the public in Europe woke up to the sheer stupidity of their leaders .
So here we have another summit , another crisis , confidence in the euro ebbing by the week .
It is like watching a slow-motion car crash and now you want a permanent bail-out mechanism .
You think that , if you have a fund of say a billion euros , all will be well .
Well it will not be well .
The failure of the euro is nothing to do with speculation .
It is nothing to do with the markets , be they currency or bonds , it is because the North and the South in Europe cannot today , or at any point , be put together in a single monetary union .
It will not work .
And politically , of course , you have to change the treaty .
The reason being that the four German professors will win at Karlsruhe and prove that the bail-outs you have put in place already were in fact illegal under the treaties .
Well , in many ways I welcome this treaty change because it will mean that there has to be a referendum in Ireland .
And you never know , David Cameron might even keep his promise and hold a referendum in the United Kingdom .
I am sure that , as democrats , you would all welcome a referendum on the EU in the United Kingdom .
We should also reflect at the end of 2010 not just on the state of the Union , but on the state of Belgium .
For six months the Belgian Presidency-in-office have sat here telling us we must integrate more deeply .
What a farce this is .
You have not had a government in your own country since June .
Here we have a non-nation trying to abolish our nation .
It truly is an absolute farce but nobody here dares to admit it because you are all in denial .
Belgium is a microcosm of the entire European Union .
Belgium is about to fall to bits and the rest will follow .
Happy Christmas , everybody .
author . - Mr President , here we are again examining the sticking plaster and wondering if it is large enough and strong enough to cover the wound .
Last July I asked when the Commission foresaw the expected legislative proposal for a permanent sovereign debt crisis management mechanism and what would be the legal base .
I asked quite a lot more , such as the relative ranking of the different funds and the proportions in which they would be used .
Events have shown that the answer really was that we do not know and it will be made up as we go along .
I actually have some sympathy for that , in so far as we are in new territory and new plans need to be made .
But I say again that , if there is not fulsome follow-up to statements , whether from the Commission or Council , this negates the benefit of conclusions .
Answers to my July questions only emerged in the Irish rescue , which I think is a matter of regret , not least when the smallest fund , coming from the EU budget , is used for an equal share to the larger funds .
Parliament was not consulted , despite my earlier questions .
Today I stand here to ask further details following the October Council conclusions , in which the Commission was asked to work towards a limited treaty change required to establish a permanent crisis resolution mechanism .
They also said that there would have to be private sector involvement , which spooked the market because there was insufficient explanation .
It also highlights the regulatory problem I mentioned of zero risk weighting for eurozone sovereign debt , which undermined market discipline and created perverse incentives .
Then the Euro Group announced that the permanent mechanism would be based on the European financial stability facility and that it might involve the private sector on a case-by-case basis following IMF practice .
Firstly , can we now have more precise details about the Treaty change and the procedure ?
Parliament needs to know that it will be adequate .
A little more fiddling around with Article 136 is not an answer .
Secondly , is the new instrument to be based on an intergovernmental approach , for that is how the EFSF works , or will it in fact be Community-based , which is how we think it should be done ?
Thirdly , what are the technical options and conditions ?
It is imperative that the mechanism is based on technical realities and is robust , credible and lasting - to which I would also add affordable .
Fourthly , will Member States not yet part of the euro be invited to be part of the mechanism ?
This seems especially relevant for those building debt in euros .
We asked when it would take place and we have been told January 2013 , but what role does the Commission see for Parliament ?
Parliament and my committee are indeed determined to play their role , all the more so when we have been ahead in the thinking all the way along .
If we do not find ourselves properly consulted and informed , where does that leave national parliaments and citizens ?
This issue is inextricably linked to the economic governance package .
The measures to improve the Stability and Growth Pact , surveillance and the European semester all aim at prevention of another crisis and serve to monitor emergence from the current economic crisis .
This mechanism is not a charm that we can put on the wall to ward off market discipline .
Indeed the solution for the euro is to recognise the need for full political discipline in combination with full market discipline .
We have this crisis because both were undermined in the past .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , let me thank Sharon Bowles for her question and also for the draft resolution on the permanent mechanism .
I will try to give you the Commission 's view on the five questions included in the oral question .
The October European Council invited President Van Rompuy to undertake consultations , together with the Commission , on a limited treaty change required to establish a permanent mechanism for crisis resolution .
It is understood that a limited treaty change implies the use of the simplified revision procedure based on Article 48 of the Treaty .
The constraints of this procedure are that , firstly , it allows only treaty changes of the kind that do not increase the competences conferred on the Union and , secondly , it is limited to changes to Part Three of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which relates to Union policies and internal actions .
It seems that the Member States have a preference for a very limited treaty change which will presumably be placed under Article 136 , whose provisions are specific to the euro-area Member States .
The issue will be discussed of course in the European Council this week .
Whatever change is suggested , Parliament will be formally consulted on it .
Following the European Council decision in October , the Eurogroup agreed at its extraordinary meeting in November on the main principles of a European Stability Mechanism , or ESM .
According to the Euro Group agreement the ESM will be an intergovernmental mechanism whose governance will be based on the model of the European Financial Stability Facility .
The concrete details of the financial mechanism have yet to be decided and should be worked out during the first quarter of next year .
Funding will of course be a key issue .
The future instrument will need to be sufficiently robust and must enjoy strong credibility in the markets .
Any support from the ESM will be based on strict conditionality .
Assistance provided to a euro-area Member State should be based on a rigorous programme of economic and fiscal assessment and a thorough analysis of debt sustainability conducted by the Commission together with the IMF , and in liaison with the European Central Bank .
Despite the intergovernmental nature of the financing arm of the mechanism , the policy conditions will remain firmly grounded in the Treaty so as to ensure full consistency with the common multilateral surveillance framework on which the whole Economic and Monetary Union is in fact based .
To answer one of Mrs Bowles ' five questions , no decision as to whether Member States that are not members of the euro area could take part in the mechanism has been taken yet .
It seems , nevertheless , that most Member States have a preference for a transparent and clear framework where non-euro-area Member States would be covered by the balance of payments mechanism while euro-area Member States would be covered by the European Stability Mechanism .
Having said that , it should still be possible to have some non-euro-area Member States associated in a support operation via bilateral contributions , as already applies today , in the case of Ireland , to the United Kingdom , Sweden and Denmark .
Let me also comment on the discussion on the eurobonds .
Let us recall that , in the context of establishing the financial backstops last 9 May - Schuman Day - and the following night , the Commission made a proposal for a European Financial Stability Mechanism , a Community instrument , which in fact was adopted up to EUR 60 billion , based on loan guarantees by the Union budget under the own-resources decision .
Beyond the Union budget we proposed that this mechanism should be based on loan guarantees provided by the Member States , which would be channelled through this mechanism for countries that were in need of financial assistance because of financial instability over the euro area as a whole .
This was rejected by the Ecofin Council on 9 and 10 May .
Why ?
Because many Member States considered that this proposal resembled too closely the Eurobond .
This then led to the creation of the European Financial Stability Facility , which is an intergovernmental arrangement , and now we are using both the mechanism and the facility in the context of Ireland .
So while the issue of eurobonds is certainly a very important matter , we also have to take into account that this proposal was recently rejected by the Council in the May discussions concerning the European Financial Stability Mechanism .
To conclude , let me underline that the future European Stability Mechanism will be part of a comprehensive response to contain the crisis and stabilise the European economy , and the ESM will complement the new framework of reinforced economic governance which will focus first of all on prevention and will substantially reduce the probability of a crisis arising in the future .
That is the whole essential purpose of the new system of economic governance and I am very grateful for your support for the Commission 's proposals in this regard .
( DE ) Mr President , if you listened to the first round of speakers , you would have gained an idea of who was responsible for the crisis of confidence , and it is true that this is what it has now become .
Firstly it was the Commission , secondly the speculators and thirdly the Council and , in particular , Mrs Merkel .
It is all quite simple .
Fortunately , someone pointed out - it was the chair of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament - that the euro is stable , not only externally , but also internally , with the lowest rates of inflation .
Speculation cannot be the cause of the problem .
The euro is a stable currency .
It was the basic terms of the treaty and the uproar in the Ecofin Council .
There is new turmoil in every Ecofin meeting .
Mr Rehn has just pointed out that the Commission has proposed the use of a European mechanism , but that the Council was not prepared to participate .
We are now saying that the Commission did not act .
I am not one of those who are constantly worshipping the Commission , but it was the right thing for the Commission to do in 2008 to draw up an accurate inventory , after the euro had been in existence for 10 years .
It referred to four points that needed to be resolved : firstly , a consistent European supervisory mechanism , secondly , consistent economic governance , or whatever you want to call it , thirdly , consistent external representation and , fourthly , a consistent crisis mechanism .
All of these things are now on the table .
I would like to emphasise the fact that it was others who did not take them into account .
If we are looking for people to blame , there is one guilty party we must not forget and that is the Member States , which have got themselves up to their necks in debt and which have not made use of the benefits of introducing the euro to implement reforms and to reduce their debt levels , but instead have lived above their means .
I would also like to emphasise that there is a recurring theme among all these Member States .
Regardless of who it was , they have all had social-democratic governments for a long period , some of them up until today .
That includes Portugal , Spain , the UK , Hungary and Latvia .
In Greece they have been doing the same stupid things for four years .
This is the result .
If we do not talk openly about the main cause of the excessive levels of debt in the Member States , we will not be able to resolve the problems .
( The speaker agreed to take a question under the ' blue card ' procedure ( Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) ) .
( DE ) Mr Langen , you can sit down again now .
You have spoken very eloquently and you have said your piece .
I have one question for you .
Ireland is not a southern European country , as far as I know .
It is in northern Europe . Ireland has huge debts .
Can you explain to us where the Irish debts come from ?
Would you be so kind as to tell us which party has been in government in Ireland for the last 30 years ?
( DE ) Mr President , I am happy to answer that question .
The Irish Government made the mistake of giving guarantees without demanding reform of the banking sector .
That was irresponsible and that is why it now has a budget deficit of 32 % .
We know that .
However , you should not confuse the problems of other states with those of Ireland .
Ireland is a completely different case , because it concerns the second level of the banking crisis and not a structural problem , as in other countries .
Mr Schulz , you know that as well as I do .
Please do not attempt to distract our attention .
( The speaker agreed to take a question under the ' blue card ' procedure ( Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) ) .
( RO ) Mr President , to err is human .
To persevere is diabolical .
Do you know who the Greek prime minister was under whose government all those excessive debts accumulated , causing the crisis in Greece ?
It was definitely not Mr Papandreou .
Do you remember which political family that prime minister belonged to ?
It was Karamanlis .
( DE ) Mr President , after four years of the Karamanlis government ...
( Uproar ) .
No , the structural problems in Greece go back further than that .
In 2000 , this Parliament debated whether Greece should join the euro area .
The social-democrats , the German Government , had been calling for this .
With your help there was a two-thirds majority in Parliament in favour of Greece joining the euro area .
That is a fact and it has nothing to do with nationalism .
I would like to answer the question from Mr Schulz about debts in Germany and in Spain .
Of course , Spain 's national debt level is lower than that of Germany .
Spain did not have to finance a reunification process .
However , the Zapatero government in Spain has other problems .
It has allowed 6 million people into the country and given 2 million of them Spanish citizenship and now unemployment is running at over 20 % .
This is a structural problem and it is caused by one person : Mr Zapatero .
Mr President , in the Council and the Commission there are many who believe that we can only succeed in the global economy if we downgrade workers ' rights , our collective bargaining systems and our pensions .
In other words we must dilute , we are told , our social model .
Public finances are to be reorganised with the single focus of bringing public debt down to an arbitrary 60 % of GDP , and deficits are basically to be ruled out .
That is the same Council which , if I remember well , agreed on a Europe 2020 Strategy , but it does not seem to care where the money to fulfil that strategy will come from .
If we have to significantly cut our public debt year on year , if we have to avoid deficits above 1 % , which the Commission proposes , and if we have to do all of this in a low-growth environment with high unemployment , how can we possibly deliver on the 2020 Strategy ?
This is a wrong-headed economic strategy of cost competitiveness and extreme fiscal austerity and it will set Europe on a declining path at a crucial moment in its history .
President Barroso is not here at the moment , but I think he needs to tell the Council that it needs to redefine the political agenda in at least three areas .
First , we must complete Economic and Monetary Union by creating a European stability agency for common eurobonds and I am glad that President Barroso did not rule out the idea of eurobonds today .
This will end speculative attacks , bring liquidity to the market for government debt and cut the overall cost of debt for the eurozone .
Second , we must rebalance the proposed legislation on economic governance .
We agree that fiscal discipline will require strong rules and strong implementation , but we must also align this with the proper implementation of the Europe 2020 objectives in each country , and that must be reflected in the legislation .
Finally , we need new public financing sources .
The crisis has wiped out years of budgetary efforts .
A financial transactions tax is well overdue , and it is a scandal that the Council seems to be frozen in the headlights and unable to make a decision on this tax .
These are the reforms we need urgently .
- ( FR ) Mr President , in the history of parliaments , rarely have powers been given to them .
When parliaments were offered more powers , they generally took them .
This morning 's debate leads me to believe that we - the rapporteurs of the economic governance package - are right to go further than what is being proposed , because , Commissioner , in substance , the Commission is telling us ' We tried but we did not succeed . '
The Council , for its part , is telling us ' We do not want to go any further . '
Well , as it happens , there 's Parliament .
Furthermore , it is the Council that wanted to increase the rights of Parliament , it is not Parliament that is exercising powers unduly .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , we are colegislators .
So , I simply have the pleasure of announcing that the report I am tabling this morning also covers eurobonds , because the debate must take place here , in plenary .
I do not accept it when Mr Barroso tells us ' Oh la la , it 's all very complicated ; we have already done a lot of stupid things in the Council , so now you really do have to shut up . '
We are going to do exactly the opposite .
We are going to talk about it within the context of democracy .
Secondly , there is also the idea of a European Monetary Fund , because , in fact , all these solutions which , as Martin Schulz said , are transitional , are not necessarily what our citizens expect .
You can watch the trains go by or you can work .
This Parliament is going to try to work .
We do not have a blueprint , we do not claim to have the absolute truth , but I think it is totally unacceptable that the debate is taking place in the Financial Times or in the Zeit and not in the European Parliament .
So we will do our work .
( Applause )

( FR ) Mr President , I very much welcome the call made by Martin Schulz that we try to re-establish the confidence of our citizens and that means telling the truth and not resorting to oversimplification .
The first oversimplification consists in saying that eurobonds take responsibility away from the Member States .
This is patently false , because no-one has ever asked that the Member States pool 100 % of their debts .
In any case , under a eurobond scheme , the Member States will still have to go directly to the markets for some of their debts , and there they will be able to judge the quality of their signature , which will be reflected in the interest rates they will have to pay .
This is an oversimplification that must be avoided .
The second oversimplification consists in saying ' We are bailing out these Greeks , these feckless Irish . '
I would , however , point out that what we are doing is lending money , and lending money at rates that are particularly favourable to the lenders .
We are doing good business on the back of this .
And so , there are two possibilities : either we consider that , with our loans , Greece and Ireland no longer present a risk and that we should lend to them at a rate corresponding to zero risk or at least an extremely limited risk , or that there is a risk that they will default . So , the boil needs to be lanced , these debts need to be restructured and we must put an end to uncertainty .
I would like to end with a word to our German friends , especially the CDU .
Mr Langen , you talked about reunification and you are right .
When Germany was reunified , the entire deutschmark area , to which Belgium belonged and to which , in the end , France was very loyal , paid for it in the form of very high interest rates .
It was the right thing to do .
It was right both historically , because the reunification of Germany represented the reunification of Europe as we know it , and economically , because , in the end , everyone would benefit from the faster pace of growth this would lead to .
So , today I say to the CDU ' Bear this in mind ' and we ask that Germany does the same .
( Applause )
Mr President , it seems somewhat ironically appropriate that the European Council should be discussing a permanent crisis mechanism , as the euro certainly seems to be lurching from crisis to crisis at the moment .
Although many of us in the UK always thought that the euro was a historic mistake , both for our own country and for Europe as a whole , we of course take no satisfaction in seeing this situation .
We want to see it resolved at a European level by a decisive return to fiscal discipline across the Union .
It will not be solved by more borrowing either at an EU or at a local level .
But let us be clear where the responsibility for this situation for the euro lies .
It is the duty of every Member State within the eurozone to fulfil its commitments to that zone and it is the job of other participating states to ensure that they do so .
This is one of the key reasons why they have a separate meeting of eurozone ministers .
To put it bluntly , the stable management of the eurozone is primarily the responsibility of the members of the eurozone .
The rest of us can provide political support , but that is as far as it should go .
There cannot be any justification for further burdens or any sanctions being imposed on those Member States who chose not to make the mistake of joining the eurozone in the first place .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is exactly a year since the Greek economy started to collapse and Greece got involved in the disastrous memorandum and support mechanism .
One year on , Mr Langen , the country is on the verge of bankruptcy : firstly , social bankruptcy , given that unemployment is set to reach 15 % next year , while just yesterday the government passed a bill abolishing collective agreements and today the whole country is on strike and , secondly , economic bankruptcy and , this time the deficit and debt have not been increased by the ' lying Greeks ' in PASOK and New Democracy ; they have been increased by alchemist Commissioners using Eurostat statistics as they so choose so as to increase the debts of the weak and reduce the debts of the strong .
If , therefore , a mechanism is adopted like the one used for Greece , we are certainly heading for bankruptcy .
If the Council is preparing such a mechanism , it will plunge countries into recession , leading to unemployment and favours for banks and big business .
I wonder : is this the European vision that Mr Barroso , who is not here to explain , spoke of at the beginning .
( FI ) Mr President , in my opinion , each country is responsible for its own economy .
Countries are not liable for each other 's debts .
This is also contained in Article 125 of the Treaty .
When it suits people the Treaty is adhered to , but when it does not , the Treaty is ignored .
This has been seen in referenda : France says no , the Netherlands says no , and Ireland says no .
Two of these results were dealt with by Parliament and one by means of another referendum .
The interpretation of the Articles in the Treaty seems to depend on which way the wind is blowing .
The Finnish Government has imposed on Finnish taxpayers the sort of unfair guarantor liabilities that we will eventually have to pay .
We do not understand why Finnish workers and small entrepreneurs should sweat blood working to pay the debts of gamblers and liars .
It is simply not right .
When there were problems in the Soviet Union they called for more socialism .
People congregated in Moscow : more socialism .
When there are problems in Europe , people congregate in Brussels : more integration .
The end result will be exactly the same .
This will not work .
Healthy societies are built from the bottom upwards .
Democracy is built from the bottom upwards : not downwards from some ivory tower up above .
That is just the way it goes .
A common economic policy for Europe will not work .
Europe can only work as an economic and free trade area , the like of which it should become once again .
I would just like to say a few words about eurobonds .
I went to Mellunmäki in Helsinki to talk about eurobonds , and when I said what they were the women clutched their handbags tightly and the men wondered whether they still had their wallets on them .
This will not work .
( DE ) Mr President , we have just seen a tragic accusation being made against Germany .
It is an ominous reminder of the late 1920s .
As an enthusiastic pro-European and stubborn supporter of the Euro , I would like to ask you : Have you not noticed that you are driving the European Union , this great project for peace and economic prosperity , into the ground ?
Mr Cohn-Bendit has rightly said that we always react too late and always in retrospect .
Now we must look to the future .
Have you not noticed what is going on outside ?
People are no longer interested in the squabbling between the socialists and the conservatives , either in my home country or here in the European Parliament .
They are interested in solutions and in whether their money is still safe .
We have to say honestly to them that this is no longer the case .
We must bring forward the next step and admit that we need the courage to write off debts , we must finally make the banks pay , even if it affects our life insurance policies , and we must establish a new European political project which is not burdened with the problems of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are caught in a trap .
If we amend this article , we will find that Ireland will vote no in a referendum .
We can expect the same thing to happen in my home country .
In addition , we have a huge problem in the United Kingdom .
Ladies and gentlemen , you must wake up to what is happening .
( NL ) Mr President , in this time of crisis we should not lose sight of the fact that , over the past ten years , the euro has brought us a great deal of prosperity and stability , as well as many jobs .
The euro is therefore well worth strongly defending .
However , this will require a decisive European summit and a whole lot more in the way of unity .
Unity is in desperately short supply , not only when it comes to the permanent crisis mechanism , but also when it comes to robust financial governance .
In this debate , Mr President , ' eurobonds ' seems to be the magic word , as if it will make public debt problems disappear like snow melting in the sun .
However , those in this House who are calling for eurobonds should also be aware that these entail significant obligations and a rigorous budgetary discipline which goes much further than the proposals for strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact that are now before us .
President Trichet said ' a fiscal union ' .
Are those of you in this House who are calling for eurobonds prepared for that ?
I have my doubts about that .
Mr President , we must put our energy into the proposals now before us in order to strengthen the foundation under the euro .
That is urgent and we in this House are working hard to achieve it .
We also need a more rule-based approach in the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact , because prevention is better than cure .
We must also ensure a greater level of joint responsibility amongst Member States , not just for the benefits , but also for the obligations and commitment which stem from the Stability and Growth Pact .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in critical situations , Europe has always found a way out of a crisis .
Not because different interests have been played off against one another , but because we have combined our interests , which has allowed us to take new paths .
I would have liked to ask Mr Barroso a question , but unfortunately he is no longer here .
There will , of course , soon be important press conferences on the subject of how we can rescue Europe using the lowest common denominator , but Mr Rehn may be able to pass my question on .
I do not understand why we are not taking the following route .
Eurobonds are a sensible solution .
Mr Schulz has said that on behalf of our group and , in Germany , where this is a critical issue , my party is saying the same thing .
The German Government in particular has reservations and there are also reservations in other countries which are paying less interest .
Why do we not proceed as follows ?
We are saying that these problems can be solved .
We are now planning to launch eurobonds , but we are putting together a sensible package .
What do we need to enable Europe to act ?
How can we put money into the coffers ?
How can we create more taxation potential for a sensible , long-term economy ?
We are launching eurobonds and we are linking this launch with the introduction of the financial transaction tax in the European Union .
This package could result in a win-win situation , which would enable everyone to benefit .
Ask Mrs Merkel at the European summit if she is prepared to do this .
Why is it not possible ?
Why does the Commission not make a proposal of this kind ?
It would help everyone and enable a major new project for Europe to emerge from the crisis .
I am waiting for the Commission to make this proposal .
You must stop trying to talk your way out of it .
It is time for you to act in the interest of the citizens of Europe and in the interest of the Member States , so that we can find our way back to a sensible path of growth .
Our fate is in your hands , but you must have the courage to take the initiative now .
( SV ) Mr President , I think the past year demonstrates that a common currency requires clear , common ground rules , and it is evident that we do not currently have such rules .
It is also clear that the euro area is suffering from a definite lack of credibility in the eyes of both the people and the financial market .
I do not agree with Mr Bullman .
Rather , I believe that the Commission has done a good job and has put forward ambitious proposals .
As regards the challenges that we are currently facing , I think the problem does not lie with the Commission , but with the Council .
Of course , the Council has a rather difficult meeting ahead of it over the next few days .
I would like to say how pleased I am that the Commission has now also tabled a proposal that will enable us to correct macroeconomic imbalances in future .
Up to now , we have focused solely on finances and deficits of the cities , and that is completely inadequate , as the case of Ireland quite clearly shows .
What I am less pleased about is the way the Council works , as exemplified by the horse-trading between Mr Sarkozy and Mrs Merkel with a view to making the Commission 's sound proposals less binding , which will mean that the proposal will not lead to any improvements .
We ought to remember what happened in 2005 when the Stability and Growth Pact was watered down .
It was the same countries that created a situation at that point which , in the long term , was able to lead to what has now happened in Greece .
I hope that the Council will get a grip on itself and realise what type of decision we need - otherwise we will not get ourselves out of this situation .
( DE ) Mr President , the Flemish politician Bart De Wever , in an interview in Der Spiegel magazine , said that Belgium had become a transfer society .
This fact lay at the heart of the problem in Belgium and not the language issue .
Solidarity had become a one-way street .
The EU is in the process of doing just the same thing .
We are turning a service society into a transfer society and the euro is one means of achieving this .
It is opening up the path to cheap money in a number of states .
As the President of the EU Council , Mr Van Rompuy , has said , it has become a sleeping tablet .
It is undermining the competitive ability of the various countries .
Now many European politicians are calling for the introduction of another sleeping tablet : Eurobonds .
This will simply make the gap wider .
If we continue in this way , within a few years the EU will be in the same position as Belgium is now : a transfer society whose political foundations are crumbling .
Over Christmas I will be reading the book ' Save our Money ' by Mr Henkel , former president of the Federation of German Industry .
Perhaps you should do the same thing , so that you can find out what people in Germany are thinking .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after the New York Times revelations , investigations are ongoing in the United States into the secret club of nine banks - one of which is European - whose executives meet every Wednesday to agree what action to take on derivatives .
The Crisis Committee was completely unaware and Europe is a mere spectator .
The Federal Reserve had to account for the USD 13 trillion spent to bail out the banks .
Would you mind telling us what the Fed asked for the European bank rescue packages ?
Is it not the critical situation in the banks - and not state budgets - that requires the sum in the European rescue fund to be doubled and the preparation of a EUR 2 000 billion bail-out ?
What is stopping us calling on the European Central Bank to account transparently and in detail for its actions as was done in the United States for the Fed ?
This would put paid to suspicions that it acted and continues to act discretionally and not in the common interest of the citizens and taxpayers of the European Union 's Member States .
Why on earth have discussions never been held over the adoption of measures to impose a genuine and effective separation between commercial banks and speculative banks , as in the Glass-Steagall Act ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree on the need to create an instrument that is able to intervene in the event of a crisis .
This instrument must necessarily be linked to rigorous and careful budgetary policies in the Member States .
I hope this will mean that crises like the one we are experiencing in these months will not be repeated .
Today 's debate hinges on the best way to finance this instrument .
As we are all aware , the private sector was partly responsibile for the crisis in some countries , and in such cases it is right that they should shoulder some responsibility , though their share should be assessed on a case-by-case basis .
However , I think we need to find new and innovative ways to finance the anti-crisis instrument .
One example could be eurobonds , which some see as a new burden on national budgets .
However , this is not the case .
On the contrary , by issuing eurobonds the anti-crisis instrument could be financed through the market , drawing on foreign capital and people looking to invest .
A mechanism based solely on pro-rata contributions made by simply appropriating reserves would amount to a great burden for the Member States , which would have to find resources and capital to deposit that would not , however , bring any yield or return .
In a situation like the present , in which Member States are asked to implement severe budget policies to reduce deficits and debts as well as to pay contributions to participate in the anti-crisis fund , there is a real risk of collapse .
The European economy cannot be revitalised unless , at the same time , we use the strength of the euro on international markets and the resulting improved credit rating to heal it .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have heard a very clear message from this Parliament , a request for the Commission to act , to intervene .
The Commission is requested to refrain from limiting itself to rubber-stamping the minimum possible consent between States , which is the same as saying that the Commission needs to stop being limited by the will of the most powerful .
The Commission needs to shoulder its duty and obligation to take the initiative .
I regret to say that the conclusions that we anticipate for the next summit meeting will not produce a solution , above all because the anticipated mechanism for intervening must be adopted unanimously by all Member States , and we need a European dimension , rather than a dimension that allows for all kinds of distortions and some countries to control others .
On the other hand , reviewing the Treaty at this time will open up a Pandora 's box , and in any case , I would have liked an answer to one question : will the new mechanism be able to buy government bonds ?
Commissioner , an in-depth review is required , and the Commission cannot ignore the current debate on eurobonds , and provide no response to the initiatives that various actors are taking in the meantime , namely Juncker , Mário Monti , some elements within this Parliament and think tanks .
The Commission needs to table a proposal and needs to be able to defend it .
Lastly , one final note : the euro area does not have a global problem - well , it does have global problem , but one concentrated on its insufficient growth rather than unequal growth within it .
Where are the means that need to be in place alongside economic governance and penalisation in order effectively to promote and bring the 2020 Strategy to fruition ?
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Schulz is right .
We are in the midst of a huge crisis of confidence and the members of the Council are pulling the wool over the citizens ' eyes .
They are telling them that everything is under control , we just need to make small changes to the treaty by introducing a permanent stability mechanism and then the problem will be resolved .
In fact , the situation is not under control .
The Member States are reacting rather than actually taking action .
They are desperately firefighting , but they cannot put out the flames .
The markets are asking themselves : Who is actually in control in Europe and in the euro area ?
The EU has reached a critical turning point .
If we do not choose the right path now , we will not even be able to maintain the status quo .
Instead we will take a step backwards .
What we need are further moves towards integration .
We need more Europe .
We must finish establishing the internal market , including the service sector .
Alongside the monetary union , we need an economic , budgetary and fiscal union .
We also need a strong Commission which has the right and the power to control and monitor this economic union and to impose sanctions automatically , in cases where this is justified .
If we take these steps towards more integration , then we can talk about the introduction of eurobonds .
Then we will have laid the foundations for them .
However , during all of this we must ensure that we have the long-term investment funding that we need , despite all of the justifiable austerity measures , to secure the European Union 's competitive ability in the medium and long term .
We must finally tell the citizens the truth .
We need solutions without blinkers , we must discuss the issues without bringing in ideologies and we must stop trying to muddle through .
What we require is action for the long term , rather than short-term reactions .
Madam President , let us start with the good news .
Yes , there are signs of some recovery in parts of Europe 's wider economy .
But this is being threatened by the prolonged uncertainly which risks drying up funding and stalling investments .
Everyone in Europe , including the UK , has a vested interest in the strength of the euro area 's economy .
Robust and transparent economic planning to control profligate government spending and unsustainable debt levels is a vital part of this for all 27 countries .
The eurozone countries have realised the need for a permanent crisis resolution , but there are many questions , some of which are addressed in this Parliament 's resolution .
Firstly , what should be the nature of private sector involvement ?
I welcome the suggestion of following the IMF precedent to protect public money with preferred creditor status .
Secondly what treaty changes are you talking about ?
This issue needs to be clarified .
And finally the permanent crisis mechanism has been described as a tool to strengthen the eurozone .
Those countries who seek to join the euro should be given the option to participate but those of us who have elected not to join should not be forced to contribute .
( FR ) Madam President , what worries the citizens of Europe as much as the financial markets is doubt .
Now that Europeans have a united destiny are they capable of facing it in a spirit of solidarity ?
Today , solidarity is manifesting itself in the depth of the crisis .
That is fine , but it is not enough .
United in adversity , Europeans must also show that they are acting in solidarity when mapping out the way ahead because , if the crisis affected Europe longer than other continents , it is because our economy had already been weakened by ten years of sluggish growth , just l % per year on average .
The ten years of the Lisbon strategy were a lost decade .
In Agenda 2020 , European leaders came up with a plan to revive our economy , but they did not say how it was going to be financed and controlled or what the incentives or possible sanctions would be .
That is why the time has come to supplement the Stability and Growth Pact with a solidarity pact , as has already been said here , in plenary .
The word ' solidarity ' appears 23 times in the Treaty : let us translate the word into action .
A procedure for the coordination of fiscal policies is being set up to guarantee stability by preventing deficits .
Well , let us broaden its scope , let us coordinate with one another to guarantee future financing .
We need to spend less , but spend better , not each one of us alone at home , under the threat of sanctions , but all together .
If they want to avoid the worst , Europeans must be united to prepare the best .
( SL ) Madam President , we Europeans are living with an interesting paradox .
On the one hand , during its 12-year existence , the euro has proved to be the most stable of the global currencies .
According to official figures provided by the European Central Bank in Frankfurt , average inflation during this period has been 1.97 % , which is only 3 percentage points below the 2 % target .
The euro 's value against the US dollar has , throughout , to all practical purposes , remained higher than it was when the European currency was established .
On the other hand , though , we have been hearing stories lately that the euro might even be at the risk of collapse .
How could we have got into such a situation ?
Grotesque and irresponsible behaviour caused by the populist policies of both the left and the right has brought us to this point .
However , in defending our currency , are we really going to allow democracy to prove weaker than relatively authoritarian regimes ?
We need responsible behaviour , we need five golden rules of responsible behaviour to be enshrined in our policies .
Let us adopt them here in Parliament , let us decide how we are going to measure the level of responsible behaviour and behaviour which benefits the common good promoted by the policies in our Member States .
The tax on financial transactions and eurobonds should therefore be the cornerstone .
That is our duty today , to adopt such policies , in defence of our common currency .
( ES ) Madam President , what we need right now are clear rules , and what we are doing is precisely the opposite .
I am therefore going to make a few proposals in order to re-establish clarity .
In the European semester , Parliament wants to focus on a series of discussions , which are currently unfocused and do not fit with public opinion .
We want the political responses to the recommendations made to the Member States over the next six months to be taken into account when establishing the penalties provided for in the legislative package on governance .
My group would like to make it clear that there are no magic solutions in the legislative package for getting us out of the crisis .
There are the well-known methods of budgetary discipline and structural reforms in order to maintain competitiveness .
With regard to the crisis mechanism , as you said yesterday , Commissioner , President Barroso promised us here that it was going to be a European mechanism .
Today the Council is proposing an intergovernmental mechanism .
Is this European - in Mr Barroso 's terms - because it appears that the fund will be based in Europe rather than in the Cayman Islands , or does the Commission intend to help us to create a mechanism following EU procedure in which Parliament has a contribution to make ?
With regard to eurobonds , the Commission , the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) , and the experts say that it is a good idea , but that it is a premature idea , therefore we are late .
What I propose to the Commission is that we begin a debate to shape a system of eurobonds that gives reasonable financing to the countries that do the right thing and punishes those that do not by forcing them to go to the markets at rates that are genuine deterrents .
That is the only workable way of combining fiscal discipline and economic growth .
Do not come back to me with discussions about whether it is too early or too late , because what we know now is that we have always been too late .
Let us see if , for once , by changing the rules , we can be early .
( FR ) Madam President , the euro is our common asset and , today , the trade unions told Parliament that they were concerned that employees themselves were paying the price for the crisis through a weak euro , a euro under attack and not through a growth-promoting , job-creating euro .
It is therefore essential that we do not pursue a simple technical revision of the treaties and that the two major dysfunctions of the euro area revealed by the crisis are addressed .
The first approach is to introduce eurobonds , as we have heard .
Eurobonds will not only stabilise the level of the euro , they will also immediately counter the speculative attack .
The second approach to introducing fiscal justice and to making the financial market pay the price for the crisis is precisely to introduce a tax on financial transactions so that it is not employees who , as a result of fiscal injustice , pay the price for this crisis .
Finally , a European debt agency must be established , which must be able to pool some of the sovereign debt of the Member States .
Finally , I would also like to support Mr Juncker and to say that increasing the stability fund , which was proposed by Dominique Strauss-Kahn , Director-General of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , is a good idea .
Early intervention - as we have heard - not being late and choosing to become strong and not weak would enable us to perform an act of governance that would re-introduce the confidence called for by our President , Martin Schultz .
( Applause )
( PT ) Madam President , the first point that I would like to make clear here , and which is important that we reinforce in this Parliament , is that , contrary to what we sometimes read in the press and in the pronouncements of some European leaders , the euro as a currency has been crucial in our response to the current crisis .
Without the euro , we would be in an extremely difficult situation , with the currencies of weaker countries facing enormous devaluation and the resulting deutschmark facing an impossible increase in value in order to sustain the German and European economies .
The euro was therefore a stabilising factor , not only for countries within the euro area , but also for the currencies of the countries that have not wanted to belong to the euro area .
Again , because we need to defend this Community that has succeeded in responding to a crisis like never before , and given that we will see , for example , what happens to the dollar and the United States in the future , we will also see how the euro does in fact have its advantages .
We now have the responsibility , within this Council , to do everything we can to defend the euro , namely to create a stabilisation fund that follows community methodology and is able to introduce responsibility within countries that are in the most fragile situation , and solidarity within those that have met their obligations and have not always shown themselves , at least through their external declarations , able to adopt a position of solidarity within the context of the euro area .
( ES ) Madam President , the year that is coming to an end - 2010 - has been described more than once as the year in which we lived dangerously .
I think , therefore , that this debate ought to be useful in highlighting the lessons of 2010 , so that we can draw conclusions for 2011 .
The first conclusion concerns the unsustainable imbalances in the financial sector of the European economy and the distortions in its real economy .
The second is the unsustainable imbalance in the single currency and the need for coordination of economic , fiscal and budgetary policies , which are still in a fragile state .
The third , and main conclusion concerns the imbalance between the speed of the crisis and the slowness of response times .
From an economic point of view , this means that the European Central Bank needs to be more active in response to speculative assaults on sovereign debt , and in 2011 we need to lay the foundations for a European debt agency that can issue eurobonds .
Likewise , with regard to the Stability and Growth Pact , there needs to be a debate regarding the necessary taxation , the banking tax and the tax on speculation , that is short-term speculative transactions , and on the need for own resources in the European Union .
However , the debate that is important to Parliament is the debate regarding the political consequences of the crisis , because the European Union 's motto is - I stress once again - ' United in diversity ' , and under no circumstances is it ' split by adversity ' .
Parliament therefore needs to confront those that seek to stigmatise some Member States in relation to others , dividing European public opinion and pitting Europeans against each other .
Parliament represents 500 million Europeans from a Union that has 27 Member States , and as on Orwell 's farm , there are none more equal than others .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about the summit on 16 December .
It would be good if the Council could say to us after the summit : We are aware of the gaps and the mistakes , we know where we have failed and we understand the limits of the treaty .
Self-satisfaction and accusations of guilt , attempts to gloss over mistakes and a superficial approach will not solve any problems or create any confidence .
Let us stop playing with Europe .
This really is all about Europe .
I endorse everything that Mr Klinz has said .
As it is now only a few days before Christmas , I would like to say : Light a candle of determination and common interest , a candle representing the new seriousness , honesty and confidence in the future of the Europe Union .
Light a candle for a change of political course in Europe , a move from the crisis to competitiveness , from the spirit of Deauville to the political union , from saving to investment and reform , from the monetary union to the political union .
Because of Germany 's constitutional problems , the addition to the treaty is simply a political crutch for the further development of the rescue package , nothing more and nothing less .
It does not represent a solution .
Do not try to make it more important than it really is .
Stop the day-by-day policymaking and put forward a complete concept in response to the crisis which will move us towards political union .
Put an end to the discord .
It is enough , it is not enough and , actually , we do not know where things are going .
We must call on the Commission to produce a concept for an economic , social and financial union , so that we can take the next step towards integration at the end of next year and really do the job properly .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , tomorrow sees the start of one of the most crucial European Councils in the history of the European Union as a whole and EMU in particular and the question is whether the Heads of State or Government will be up to the job .
We very much doubt it , because the philosophy that certain heads have introduced into the European Council is not a philosophy of overcoming the crisis on the basis of solidarity and , of course , responsibility . It is a crisis management philosophy , a philosophy that focuses on and is confined to the details of a permanent mechanism .
The European Council will not be up to the job , because it will not send out the message of economic and political cohesion that needs to be sent out , not only to convince the markets , but to convince , first and foremost , the entrenched European public , who are viewing each other with suspicion and who have again started to become xenophobic ; to convince them of the value of the European vision and to remind them that there are more things that unite than divide us .
Madam President , I cannot understand why the Socialists are trying to escape from the responsibility of Socialist policies .
It is true that the reasons for the deficits we see in Europe are different .
It is also true that Socialist governments have entered into budget deficit problems because of a deliberate policy of increased spending and increased deficits .
We had this debate in Parliament in the spring of 2009 and we had it in a number of Member States .
I remember the Swedish Social Democrats criticised the Swedish Government for not increasing the deficit and the spending .
Then we have seen what has happened .
This is for me a reason why we need stable rules regarding the Stability and Growth Pact but also stable rules regarding the consequences .
We cannot have a situation where Member States which are causing problems for financial systems and causing increased interest rates are allowed to escape from the consequences by letting other citizens pay for those interest rates .
We need to have stability , and eurobonds will not be a solution to that problem .
We can have eurobonds for other reasons. maybe .
As for the financial mechanism , it must be financed and based upon the risks that Member States are creating .
If you take a bigger risk , run a bigger deficit , then you also need to finance the financial mechanism a little bit more .
That is a way of taking responsibility for deliberate policies .
Do not forget that the consequences we see in a number of countries are the consequences of the debates we had in national parliaments , and in this Parliament , when some of us argued for increased spending .
Now we see the bitter results .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Madam President , I can understand , Mr Hökmark , that you need to give a nice speech for the people at home in Sweden .
However , would you please answer the following question for me : Which country in the European Union has the highest long-term level of national debt and which party is in government in this country ?
( Mr Schulz continued speaking , with his microphone turned off ) Madam President , I hope I can proceed without further interventions .
First of all my message is very much to you , Mr Schulz , because I want you to remember what you argued here in this Parliament two years ago .
You argued that the Union and the Member States should increase their spending .
The problem is that some of the Member States have had Socialist governments , and in all these governments , in all these countries , we have seen the deficit going up a result of the policies you advocated .
Mr Schulz , can you deny that ?
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , as my fellow Member has not answered the question , I will answer it on his behalf .
The country is Italy and its prime minister is Mr Berlusconi .
The Christian Democrats have been in power in Italy almost uninterruptedly since 1946 .
( FI ) Madam President , I too would like to ask our fellow Member how the Socialists in Ireland and Greece might have caused their countries to run into debt .
Since you are now the leading political party at present in Europe and the Commission is inclined to the right , is it not now the job of the right also to show the way out of this crisis and not blame previous governments or the governments that came before them ?

Madam President , I want to remind colleagues here that I said there are a number of different reasons for the deficit problems we have , but I also said it is true - and neither Mr Schulz nor his colleagues have denied this - that we have seen these problems coming up in all Socialist governments because it was a deliberate policy .
I absolutely agree if we are talking about Ireland for example , that there were huge mistakes , but the interesting thing is that it was a deliberate policy to increase spending and deficits in order to meet the crisis and the problems , and now we see the results .
That is the message to Mr Schulz and others .
( The speaker agreed to take three blue-card questions under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Colleagues , just to let the speaker and everybody know what is happening , we now have three more people who want to ask a blue-card question .
As this possibility has been introduced by the working group on parliamentary reform , I am very sympathetic to that and we have enough time , but nevertheless I have to ask the speaker if he will take all those questions .
Then I would ask everybody whether we can take the questions in turn and then ask Mr Hökmark to answer .
We will then finalise that part of the speaking time .

Madam President , I want to say to Mr Hökmark , the point that you are making about Socialist governments may be true to some extent , but right-wing governments basically choose to do the same thing by piling up private debt instead of public debt .
This is no better for the economy and is really a different way of doing exactly the same thing which is unsustainable .

( DE ) Madam President , I wanted to ask Mr Hökmark , as he has been here for some time , whether he remembers that Belgium , Greece and Italy had debts amounting to more than 130 % of their national product at the start of the monetary union and that the figure in Greece has risen , while in Belgium and Italy it has fallen by more than 30 % and more than 25 % respectively .
Does he remember this ?


( EL ) Madam President , I have a simple question to ask Mr Langen and Mr Hökmark , who like to idealise the debt crisis and obviously target socialist governments collectively :
Have you ever questioned your colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) who were governing my country up to a year ago about the fact that they gave you and the European Commission - you can ask Mr Rehn - official statistics that Greece 's deficit for 2009 was 6.9 % , not the 15 % recently confirmed by Eurostat ?
Madam President , this discussion has clarified some of the things that we need to remember .
Let us not forget my first point , which is - and it is interesting to note that none of my Socialist colleagues have denied this - that all the Socialist governments which implemented Socialist policies have run into deep deficit crisis .
We now see the crisis coming to country after country because of a deliberate policy that Mr Schulz and others defended in this Parliament two years ago .
We can look at the records of this Parliament and see that this was exactly what was said in the debate here by you , Mr Schulz , and by your colleagues .
Now you can see the bitter result .
I wanted to underline that .
I note that all you have to say is , ' yes , you are right but other countries also have problems ' .
However , you are not arguing against my main point , that your policies created the problems .
That is worth remembering .
I think it should be put on the record .
Mr Lamberts also draws attention to these problems .
But the interesting thing is that , while it is true that a number of countries have problems because of the financial crisis , it is also true - as I think Mr Lamberts will recognise and appreciate - that in most of the countries which are taking a stable view on public finances , the governments are non-Socialist .
I do not think that you , or anyone else in this Chamber , can point to a Socialist government that has not run into deficit problems .
Madam President , what matters are policies and not who applied them .
Let him cast the first stone ...
The crisis of the euro may not end with Ireland and we may have not seen the worst yet .
The market predators will never endlessly attack any vulnerable opening , despite the painful austerity measures taken by all Member States .
But if the EU wins this battle , and succeeds in adversity by demonstrating determination to do whatever it takes in solidarity and concerted effort to thwart regulators and convince the markets , then this would be the triumph of European integration and a great victory .
This will be achieved as a result of collective wisdom .
Let us prove wrong those who predict the end of the euro and the withdrawal of countries , strong and weak , from the eurozone .
Fiscal discipline , economic governance and the rescue of the euro will be incomplete without a mutually agreed plan at European level to stimulate growth .
In the past , an American Marshall Plan saved the economy of Europe .
The challenge today is an equivalent from Europeans for Europeans .
Madam President , today the Irish House of Representatives , the Dáil , will vote on the EU-IMF financial assistance package .
These have been very difficult times for Ireland , with tax increases and cuts in expenditure .
The last week 's budget was only a mere reflection of the difficulties so many Irish people are going through at the moment .
This follows 14 % pay cuts in the public and private sectors .
However , I strongly believe that the EU-IMF financial package will help Ireland restore confidence by getting the banks capitalised and lending again , and by repairing the public finances .
I do not necessarily share in accepting the detail of the plan , but overall figures are supported by Fine Gael .
The underlying economic trends in Ireland are quite good .
It will require good government and Dáil oversight to ensure our finances never again get out of hand .
It will also require some thought at EU and ECB level on the contribution made by low interest rates to property inflation .
I was a lone voice in this Chamber for two and half years questioning Mr Trichet on this particular difficulty .
With the establishment of a permanent successor to the European Financial Stability Mechanism , from which Ireland will be receiving EUR 22.5 billion in loans if it draws them down , the EU-IMF package is a positive move for the eurozone .
May I say also in conclusion that there are many people here who consider themselves federalists and yet want to see some sort of harmonisation in taxation .
In the United States over 50 % of companies in the copyright business register in Delaware .
Why do they do that ?
Because of the tax situation in Delaware .
There are some very ignorant comments made in this Chamber by self-serving people who want to advance their own national causes by making inaccurate statements , and they will be challenged .
Madam President , the financial crisis has indicated that there is an even greater need for more Europe .
The lesson to be learned is that acting predominantly on the basis of national considerations does not help any Member State .
Tomorrow , therefore , is an occasion for joint action , fiscal consolidation and a stability pact with sanctions .
This will also be the time to solve the long-standing paradox of Europe .
The EU is based on a single market but this single market is still not complete .
Now is the time to start the single digital market .
We need to set up a permanent crisis management mechanism , preferably group-based .
Secondly , as action should be led on prevention and early intervention , there is a need to better harmonise conditions for early intervention and for activating the crisis-management mechanisms , whilst avoiding , of course , over-regulation .
Thirdly , the purpose of crisis-management funds should be clearly defined .
Their goal is to ensure macro-financial stability .
They should not be used to solve other current problems .
Fourthly , supervisory rights should be defined more precisely at EU level , such as in the case of possible intervention into the activities of financial institutions , which will include the right to stop paying dividends or stop activities that pose unjustified risks .
( FR ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , I have listened to this long debate as a citizen .
I would say that Mr Barroso 's proposals were very interesting .
We would like to see them acted upon .
A clear and comprehensible political will and a discourse of truth are the necessary conditions for restoring our citizens ' confidence .
It is imperative that we do not mask realities .
There is public spending , which we must cover or reduce .
There are public and private debts , which we must repay .
There are numerous experts who have ideas on everything .
Those who did not see the crisis coming are now full of brilliant solutions .
But in a difficult situation , let us use common sense .
Let us not reproduce in the management of public finances the mistakes and errors of the private sector that led to the financial and banking crisis .
Sophisticated arrangements do not create value and wealth .
They create illusions and often benefit only the speculators .
The fact of the matter is that the Member States have lived beyond their means .
We must have the courage to draw the necessary conclusions and ensure that the burden of recovery is apportioned fairly .
Madam President , firstly a complaint .
You said this is an important debate , and it is .
I find it somewhat unacceptable that Mr Barroso and many of the political leaders have departed the Chamber as soon as they have given their speeches .
In fairness to Mr Schulz , he has stayed here from the beginning to the end and I would like to compliment him on that .
Secondly , I want to say that , when all is said and done , one of the main reasons for the financial crisis is that governments failed to govern and political leaders failed to lead .
Thankfully , we are now bringing that situation under control with the new supervisory architecture which should be coming in on 1 January , the credit rating agencies report which we dealt with last night , and today 's permanent financial stability mechanism .
They are all to be welcomed .
If Mr Barroso were here , I would like to ask him if he can guarantee that a referendum will not be required in Ireland and elsewhere to make the minimum treaty changes he spoke of .
Finally , I want to say to those who have asked that a written declaration be signed by Members that this is a direct attack on corporation tax in Ireland .
That should not be done .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , an ideological debate has unfolded here , even though we could give several examples of how the Schröder government implemented a very serious reform policy , or how in Hungary the right-wing government currently in power used all means to hinder the then left-wing government in imposing fiscal discipline after 2006 .
Debates such as this lead nowhere .
What is important is that the European Union should finally engage in proactive , rather than reactive politics .
It would be welcome if the summit this weekend could reach an agreement concerning the European Stability Mechanism .
The Hungarian presidency , the Hungarian Government , which will take over the rotating presidency of the EU in January , will do its best to speed up the ratification process and to ensure that the European Union can deal with substantive issues , such as making Europe more dynamic .
( HU ) Madam President , honourable Council , honourable Commission , Member States attempt to react to the crisis they find themselves in through individual solutions and their own responses .
After setting a strategic direction , the Council and the Commission should consolidate and coordinate Member State solutions .
This means that sanctioning Member States is not enough when it comes to economic governance .
Of course it would have been good to see the consistency and strictness demonstrated today also exercised by certain Commissioners when they turned a blind eye to the doctoring of data .
I am convinced that the responsibility for the failure to comply with the Stability and Growth Pact does not lie solely with the Member States , as it was the Commission itself that softened its control mechanisms .
We must acknowledge that the austerity policy that has been practiced so far has not been successful anywhere .
Thus , new and clear answers will be required of you .
Innovative and motivating solutions .
I can assure you , fellow Members , that the upcoming Hungarian presidency will fulfil this coordinating role .
Madam President , Ireland has been mentioned many times in this debate .
I would like to start by making it clear that I support deeper economic governance in a European social market economy .
We should thank Ireland 's partners in Europe for their solidarity at this time of crisis - a crisis created largely by incompetent Conservative governments over many years .
You will not be surprised that solidarity is being presented by Eurosceptics as a loss of Ireland 's independence .
That distortion is heightened by the failure of the Commission and the Council to engage with this Parliament on the Memorandum of Understanding with Ireland .
When , Mr Rehn , will that Memorandum of Understanding be brought before this Parliament ?
Commissioner Rehn , one of the meanest conditions and obligations in the Memorandum of Understanding is the obligation to cut the minimum wage in Ireland by EUR 2 000 per year .
The Irish Government is claiming that you demanded that cut , Mr Rehn .
Can you clarify that matter for this House ?
A second incomprehensible aspect of this agreement is the 3 % margin which you have demanded ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Madam President , it is not acceptable that essential measures should continue to be put off , measures that disregard the increase in unemployment , poverty , inequality , disparity and economic recession that these austerity plans will cause , while economic and financial groups continue to make ever larger profits .
This just leads to more questions :
Why have the statutes and the guidelines of the European Central Bank not been changed with regard to their loans made directly to Member States at a rate of 1 % , the same as for private banks , who then charge rates three , four or five times higher , thus aggravating sovereign debt ?
Why has it not been decided to apply a tax on movements of capital , and not take the necessary measures to put an end to tax havens and derivative markets , ending speculation on sovereign debt ?
Why not decide to increase the community budget for a real policy of economic and social cohesion that aims to increase production and create jobs with rights ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( SK ) Madam President , we are debating a proposed financial stability instrument for the eurozone - an instrument which should help our friends from countries which are currently unable to pay their debts .
Everyone here is talking about creating a common financial stability mechanism guaranteed by all eurozone countries , and we expect those who have managed to keep their debts under control to show solidarity with those who have not yet managed to do that .
After experiencing the solutions to date for assisting Greece and the one-off protective bulwark erected last time , I wonder what would happen if the financial wizards from the markets picked up their calculators and began working out the actual worth of the solution and discovered that not even this was reliable enough to make them willing to risk investing their money in the area ?
I wonder if we have any subsequent solutions and subsequent steps prepared ?
The credibility of the solution at this point in time , according to this scenario , is very low .
Madam President , most ordinary people see crises as tragedies .
Eurocrats see them as opportunities to extend their tentacles of power .
The European Council is to decide on a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area as a whole , backed up of course by treaty amendments .
We are reliably informed that these controls , and of course these treaty changes , will apply to non-eurozone countries too .
The coalition government in the United Kingdom has promised a referendum in the event of any further transfer of power to the European Union .
However , this promise will be as reliable and as honestly followed as the Conservative pledge to hold a referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon .
For Conservatives , promises are tactics , not obligations .
( PL ) Madam President , the end of the year is approaching .
It would be a good idea to take a closer look at what we have done .
Let us look at what we have decided and what we have said , and let us answer this question : what have we done about it ?
Each of us should look carefully at our own decisions in areas where we have had responsibility .
It is good that we want to add to the Treaty certain provisions which will impose discipline on what we do .
However , we do still have , after all , the Stability and Growth Pact , which continues to be in force .
Why did we not adhere to its provisions ?
Why did the Commission and its services not react earlier in the case of Greece or Ireland ?
The European Union is a democratic institution which comprises many Member States .
It is not , therefore , able to act unilaterally in the way that individual states do - I am thinking , here , for example , of China , the United States and other countries .
This is why there was a lack of decisive action to protect the euro .
Therefore , it is necessary to develop a new approach to economic governance , to create a true economic union , to improve coordination and to harmonise financial and even fiscal policy .
( RO ) Madam President , as has also been mentioned by previous speakers , the European Union has obviously not made sufficient progress up to now in terms of ensuring the financial stability of its markets .
Against a background where speculators are jeopardising the stability of the single currency on a daily basis by isolating and exerting pressure on Member States , the solution can only be achieved by maintaining solidarity at EU level .
Indeed , creating a permanent mechanism for safeguarding the euro area 's financial stability has become a necessity and will have to be coordinated using the Community method .
Citizens ' interests are best protected when EU institutions are fully involved in the decision-making process and the general good takes precedence over the interests .....
At the same time , we must bear in mind that it is vital for all 27 Member States to be involved in this future mechanism as part of the single market .
The instability of other currencies will always have a considerable impact on the position of the euro .
- ( PT ) Madam President , the next Council meeting is , in fact , very important .
Important in its response to a crisis that is extensive and international , important also in its response to a specific crisis of governments that have not done their homework on time , that have spent too much and that did not carry out the necessary structural reforms .
This is why I have come here to support the need for a stable instrument to defend the euro .
The response cannot and should not be on a case by case basis .
For this very reason I support this being done according to the community method , not according to the intergovernmental method , ultimately rewarding governments for not having done what they should have done in time .
I emphasise the need for a growing role for the European Parliament in the discussion of these matters , with debates like the one we have had here today : spirited , with differences , but defending a stronger European Union and an ever-improved euro .
- ( LT ) Madam President , in truth , I agree with all of the ideas mentioned today on establishing a crisis mechanism and on additional measures that I believe both the European Council and Parliament will debate in the future .
Today we heard many conflicting assessments and perhaps also some accusations over previous mistakes .
These came from all sides .
They came from the Member States , the European Commission and the Council , as well as commercial banks whose activities I believe will also be closely scrutinised in the future .
I would like to talk about another matter .
I liked the idea expressed by President Barroso that in this difficult situation we must work together in unison , shoulder to shoulder , and , Commissioner , I would really like to ask you to make every effort to ensure that all countries can participate in this newly established crisis mechanism , regardless of whether or not they are in the euro area .
As we opened our markets when we joined the European Union we pay the same amount of money into the budget and many other things besides .
( PT ) Madam President , there is no stability mechanism that addresses the greatest causes of instability within the European Union .
The policies that brought us to this crisis are the same ones that they now want to continue with and develop . An Economic and Monetary Union brought about in the interests of some and to the detriment of others , loosening the reins of financial speculation , with priority given to the free , that is to say the unfettered , movement of capital , the imposition of the market on all areas of society , the devaluation of work as a source of the creation of wealth , and by the same token , of rights .
At the start of the second decade of the 21st century , this European Union is not shaking off its association with the greatest social decline that Europe has endured in recent decades , the result of an unparalleled attack on people 's rights and living conditions .
Economic and financial groups continue to accumulate enormous profits , unemployment continues to spread , and millions of workers are becoming poorer as they work .
This is the message that is echoing in the protests across Europe , and it is time to listen to it .
- ( DE ) Madam President , the citizens ' confidence in Europe and in the euro has been seriously damaged by the financial crisis and the political manoeuvring .
The citizens of Europe need easily understandable , clear prospects , which can be relied on in the long term , for the security of their currency .
The Stability and Growth Pact defines the upper limits for deficits and overall debt .
However , it is relatively ineffective .
New rescue packages will only gain the necessary broad acceptance among citizens if they also offer effective controls and sanctions .
In the case of the controls , Eurostat must be further reinforced and the sanction mechanisms must be easily implemented and effective .
The existing system includes sanction options .
Future rescue packages must involve continuous controls , a rapid and coordinated approach and effective sanctions .
- ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , you are going to propose the creation of this permanent mechanism , under Article 136 .
I regret that you have not used Article 122 which would have allowed us to include all Member States , but we are initiating a political debate insofar as Parliament will be consulted pursuant to Article 48 on the simplified review procedures and I should like to put on the table two political issues .
Firstly , the euro area is not enough in itself .
As a minimum , Commissioner , we should include all those States which are obliged , without delay , to have the euro as their currency , and this represents 25 Member States .
The second issue relates to parliamentary political control .
This is not an emergency mechanism , it is a permanent one .
Therefore there should logically be some parliamentary political control under appropriate conditions , ones that you should propose to us because it is the role of parliaments , especially the European Parliament , to exercise control over the executive with regard to this provision .
( PT ) Madam President , making accusations does not solve our problems , and reveals , in some cases , a lack of knowledge of the various situations .
We need measures to halt speculation on sovereign debt .
A lot is spoken about the Portuguese situation , but a report this month by the International Monetary Fund concluded that Portugal has been one of the countries putting the most reforms in place to ensure the sustainability of the public finances and social security .
Before the crisis , in 2007 , Portugal had economic growth of 2.4 % of GDP and a deficit of 2.6 % .
Between 2005 and 2010 , Portugal was one of the countries that most increased its exports ; what we need is more unity , more responsibility and more solidarity so that the markets calm down .
( PL ) Madam President , we are concentrating on the euro area , but 150 million citizens remain outside this zone , which is one in three citizens of the European Union .
This is why it is important for us to have a healthy euro and a healthy euro area .
We want to say this very clearly - less of national governments , more of the Union , more of Parliament .
In Poland , the opinion of the German Chancellor is much more important than that of Mr Van Rompuy , and the loudly resounding voice of Mr Cameron is more important than the opinion of Mr Barroso .
What we need , then , is a stabilisation pact , a pact for stable European solidarity .
Mr Schulz is right in wanting more Europe in our thinking and new tools for our work , such as a tax on financial transactions , eurobonds , supervision of banks and coordinated budgetary discipline of Member States .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable members , let me first thank you for a very substantive and responsible debate on the European response to the current crisis .
Indeed this latest stage of the financial crisis is proving increasingly systemic in nature , which calls for an equally systemic response from the European Union .
Therefore Europe 's policy response must be comprehensive , consistent and determined .
It will necessarily have to combine broader measures applying to the entire European Union with specific measures taken by the Member States .
What should be done ?
In the Commission 's view we have five avenues of action .
Firstly , we need a determined , collective effort to deliver on the agreed budgetary commitments .
Every Member State should stick to its fiscal targets .
The best defence against contagion is the ring-fencing of our budgetary positions .
For instance , Spain and Portugal are taking very convincing decisions to this effect now .
Secondly , we need to advance the next round of bank stress tests and do them in an even more comprehensive and rigorous manner than last time by using the new European architecture of financial regulation and supervision which will enter into force as of January next year .
Thirdly , we need effective financial backstops , and that is why in May the Union created the European Financial Stability Mechanism and facility for a temporary three-year lifespan .
Soon the permanent European stabilisation mechanism will be set up , to take effect as of mid-2013 .
To go further and deeper , several initiatives on eurobonds have been floated recently .
As a concept , the Eurobond is a broad church that covers a wide range of possible applications .
The current focus of policy-making is , rightly and reasonably , on making the existing European Financial Stability Facility more effective and agile , to help us in the immediate response to the current stage of the crisis .
But certainly we have to continue analytical discussions on such rational alternatives that can help Europe to overcome the systemic crisis by improving the functioning of the bond markets , by facilitating fiscal consolidation through more reasonable borrowing costs , by providing a basis for enhanced budgetary coordination among Member States and by reinforcing the incentives for fiscal prudence in the Member States .
The fourth element of the comprehensive response has to be structural measures , as outlined in the strategy for Europe 2020 .
These are indeed necessary for increasing our potential growth and for creating sustainable employment .
We must make the most of our single market , especially in services and energy , make the tax and benefits systems more conducive to employment growth , make more focused investment in knowledge and innovation and simplify our regulatory environment .
Fifthly , an essential element of our systemic response , which is very much in your hands , honourable Members , is the rapid and ambitious adoption of the legislative package on reinforced economic governance which the Commission proposed in September .
I am glad that Parliament and the Council have agreed to finalise this package by next summer .
This is a matter of the credibility of the economic and monetary union of the European Union as a whole .
It is also a most effective crisis prevention mechanism , as it reinforces long and short-term confidence in the European economy , as well as confidence in the immediate future .
Moreover , in response to Mr Karas , it is also an essential stepping stone for completing the Economic and Monetary Union by finally complementing the strong monetary union with a true and functional economic union .
It is indeed high time for the ' E ' in the EMU to be infused with life through the creation of a real and effective economic union as the final step in European economic policy integration .
Commissioner . - ( FI ) Madam President , I would still like to make a couple of comments in Finnish because of the speech by Mr Soini .
Perhaps he has now managed to get back here , as he left this meeting a short while ago .
We have been able to , and should , approach Mr Soini 's speeches with a sense of humour , but , as in recent times he has gained a certain amount of support , they obviously need to start to be taken seriously .
First of all , I do not believe that belittling the Greeks in the manner that Mr Soini did is very useful , or even professionally appropriate .
Greece is at present introducing important , actually epochmaking reforms , which deserve our respect and not our contempt .
I think that Mr Soini should recall the old Finnish saying that teaches us to be aware of our own situation , while respecting others .
That is a far better way to build a peaceful Europe based on cooperation .
Secondly , I do not think it professional either to compare the European Union with the Soviet Union , as Mr Soini did .
Someone with no sense of humour might even think it was insulting .
Freedom , democracy and the rule of law were not the Soviet Union 's trademarks , but they are the basic values of the European Union , which the Finns have defended throughout history , Mr Soini .
The powers of comprehension on the part of the Finns should not be underestimated either , not even those of the supporters of the True Finns Party .
The people certainly know that the EU is not the Soviet Union .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , I assume that you agree with me that it is very rude of some Members to ask questions and then to leave .
I would like to apologise to Mr Rehn , because it really is outrageous for him to give detailed answers after some of the Members have already disappeared .
I believe that we should work together to ensure that this no longer happens in future or at least not as often .
Mr Swoboda , I fully support what you have said .
It is very rude and lacking in respect .
Mr De Rossa , a point of order ?
Madam President , on the other hand , Commissioner Rehn has not answered the questions that I put and I am still here .
- That only touched on a point of order .
Mr Rehn , you do not have to respond to this .
You can , of course , but this is not question time with the Commission .
The next speaker is Mr Chastel on behalf of the Council .
Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I personally find that the Commission has contributed a great number of responses to this extremely instructive debate , all the more so given that Parliament is closely involved in the response to this crisis .
In addition to the Commission , I should like to address two issues relating to what is at stake tomorrow and the day after during this summit .
Firstly , I would like to make a point about economic governance and the involvement of the European Parliament .
As you know , the Presidency has already made contact with the European Parliament , with those responsible for the matter of economic governance within this Parliament .
Furthermore , the Presidency wishes to achieve the best possible collaboration with this Parliament , especially through informal consultation , before the formal stage of negotiations begins .
In light of the importance of this issue and potential repercussions on the markets , the Presidency , as has been said , has made a commitment to fast-track it , in line with the European Council 's wishes .
Furthermore , in order to expedite the work , the Presidency has set up a working group to deal with this issue alone .
This group started its deliberations at the end of November , following on from the attention paid to the issue by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The second element on which our Heads of State or Government will focus tomorrow and the day after , is the future permanent crisis management mechanism .
I do understand a number of questions about this mechanism , on the extent of the response to be made to the crisis .
Yesterday at midday , in the company of President Van Rompuy , in the General Affairs Council , many of us still had unanswered questions .
I can testify to you how much the Member States want to respond to this crisis , how aware they are that what is at stake today are the overall European market and the euro , and that it is not simply a question of one country after another .
The response must be a comprehensive one and we must do all we can to reduce the uncertainties hanging over this market .
However , in my mind , we must also avoid arousing or creating expectations that cannot be satisfied at this time .
Therefore , everyone contributed their own new idea about how we should respond to the crisis .
When we know that we have to get agreement from a number of Member States for any new idea , this does not appear today to be the best possible solution .
I must tell you that what will be important tomorrow , the day after tomorrow , Friday , at the conclusion of this European Council , is firstly that we can give a clear signal to the markets about the will of the Member States to respond to the financial crisis , to the euro crisis today ; secondly , to affirm our will to set up a simple mechanism for amending treaties .
You know precisely why this must be a simple mechanism on account of the ratifications which must take place in the different Member States ; and , finally , to set up this future permanent crisis management mechanism which must also be transparent because it must be unassailable , especially before the Court of Karlsruhe .
I have received one motion for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 16 December 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
At the forthcoming European Council summit , decisions will probably be made concerning the form of the permanent anti-crisis mechanism which is to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area after 2013 , and the process of making changes to the founding treaties will begin .
While I understand the need for exceptional measures which has been brought about by the economic crisis , I do , however , have concerns over the speed of the changes and the way in which some Member States are trying to impose certain solutions on others .
Some of the ideas - such as eurobonds , for example - are being rejected without careful consideration .
I think that in spite of the exceptional situation , decisions which are important for the European Union should be made calmly and with respect for the principle of solidarity and the equal rights of all Member States .
I would also like to endorse the position of the Polish Government on the changes to the way in which the level of public debt is calculated .
Poland and 10 other EU Member States have undertaken reforms of their pension systems , and these reforms are currently generating significant costs for national budgets .
In Poland 's case , the introduction of reforms was made necessary by the growing inefficiency of the old system , which was a source of ever greater costs .
The current debt is not , therefore , indicative of a lack of prudence , but is the effect of changes whose long-term objective is the reduction of budgetary expenses allocated to making pension payments .
I hope the Member States ' representatives will agree to the changes suggested by Poland . Thank you for your attention .
in writing . - The establishment of a permanent crisis mechanism for the EU to strengthen financial stability is a step in the right direction .
Together with stronger and more coordinated economic governance , the permanent crisis mechanism could , and would , guarantee the stability of the euro area .
The specific situation in the new Member States should also be kept in mind while establishing this mechanism .
These countries should be actively involved in the debate and given the possibility to participate in the mechanism if they are willing to do so .
At the same time , Member States should keep their national tax policies .
It is important to keep tax competition as a tool to facilitate cohesion and boost EU economic growth .
Shifting policies towards tax harmonisation or a common consolidated tax base will only further aggravate the gaps in economic development and hamper cohesion .
Member States that create a greater risk by their deficits and debt burden should contribute more to the assets of the crisis mechanism .
This would definitely encourage strict fiscal discipline and enhance the added value of having a proper economic and fiscal policy .
While events of recent months demanded that governments take emergency measures and decisions that could be applied directly , the establishment of a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area must be founded on unquestionable legal bases .
Consequently , it is evident that the European Parliament must intervene as colegislator to implement the fundamental reforms that have become necessary to stabilise the economic and monetary union .
A purely intergovernmental solution cannot be the right answer .
The reform of the Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) is a crucial task and one with considerable implications .
We are all aware of the value of the single currency to the European project .
However , the current fragility of the EMU requires courageous and innovative solutions .
In a context such as this , recourse to ' eurobonds ' is a course of action which deserves to be explored and debated and not be treated as a no-go area .
Nonetheless , at the present time there are many obstacles .
We must be aware of the significance , on an institutional , legal and financial level , of the introduction of such an instrument , which changes the nature of the European Union .
Counter to what some of its advocates believe , it would mean even greater discipline and rigour .
in writing . - ( DE ) I would like to draw the attention of the Council to a problem which is threatening to paralyse the cooperation between the two institutions on the subject of fisheries policy .
This is about the regulations for long-term management plans .
These regulations lie at the heart of the common fisheries policy .
The Council and a majority of the Member States do not accept that the Treaty of Lisbon has given the European Parliament the right of codecision on these regulations .
The ministers are acting in opposition to the Council and the Council 's legal service , in opposition to the opinion of the Commission and in opposition , of course , to the will of the European Parliament .
The Council currently has two management plans which cannot be adopted .
The Commission cannot submit further plans , which are urgently needed in the interests of our fishermen and our seas and which have long since been completed and are lying in a drawer .
This situation is unacceptable .
I am calling on the Belgian Presidency and the future Hungarian Presidency to start negotiations with Parliament immediately , so that we can find a solution .
We are ready to begin discussions . Thank you very much .
in writing . - Let us remind ourselves that the eurozone crisis is mainly a sovereign debt crisis which has been exacerbated by two significant events .
One is the bail-out of private financial institutions , whereby private debts were taken over by sovereign debt , and the other is the stimulus packages used by governments to slow down the economic decline .
We ignore these two events and treat all countries as if they were a reckless happy-go-lucky group lazing in the Mediterranean sun .
Any mechanism we put in place to deal with crisis prevention and recovery should bear in mind that , in normal times , countries were duly following plans to reduce their deficits and subsequently their debts .
Errant countries were the exception and not the rule .
By all means , let us increase the surveillance mechanism and put some reasonable sanctions in place , but we should not lose sight of what we want to achieve in the medium term : growth and employment .
These goals are not achieved by sanctions and imposed austerity measures .
They come about when we understand how imbalances are created and reduced , and we work together to achieve these goals .
This is what the citizens of the EU expect from us .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Council meeting due to take place on 16-17 December will debate and adopt the measures required to reinforce the economic pillar of the Economic and Monetary Union and consolidate the EU 's financial stability .
In this context , we must also examine the measures required to ensure that the European banking system can finance the European economy , especially small and medium-sized enterprises .
Europe 's citizens expect more robust measures from the EU institutions aimed at not only bringing financial stability but also , in particular , at returning to sustainable economic growth .
In 2008 , 116 million European citizens were exposed to the risk of poverty and social exclusion .
This number rose due to the economic and financial crisis , with young people and the elderly being the groups most exposed to the risk of poverty and social exclusion .
European citizens ' main concern is still about keeping their jobs and ensuring a decent living .
The economic and financial crisis has had a major impact on national budgets and caused a decline in education , healthcare and social protection systems It is time for the EU to adopt the measures required to ensure sustainable economic growth through investment in an industrial policy which creates jobs and guarantees competitiveness , as well as through adequate investment in research , education and health .
Citizens ' initiative ( debate )
The next item is the report by Zita Gurmai and Alain Lamassoure , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the citizens ' initiative - C7-0089 / 2010 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , the European citizens ' initiative is a unique opportunity .
It is the first time that European citizens can get together and let us know , with one strong voice , if they think that we , the European decision-makers , are not doing our job properly or missing out important issues .
We badly need this .
In a time when only 42 % of the people who are entitled to vote in European elections take the time to actually vote , every new European instrument - especially an instrument like the ECI - is of great importance .
However , we realise that the high expectations that surround the ECI may lead to disappointment and frustration .
We can avoid this with a regulation that provides for its safe and efficient use , and we can help to bridge the famous gap between ourselves and European citizens .
I would like to welcome the citizens here as well .
Mr Lamassoure , Ms Wallis , Mr Häfner and I were all conscious of the huge responsibility on our shoulders .
Many points were raised during the discussions and we had to base our work on everyone 's strong sense of compromise .
We were lucky to have good partners in this who showed reasonable flexibility and had the same goal as Parliament 's rapporteurs , namely to reach an agreement as soon as possible , while maintaining the quality of our work and making sure that one year after the Treaty of Lisbon we have a regulation for the most citizen-based provision of the Treaty .
I would like to thank Commissioner Šefčovič and the Belgian Presidency , particularly Mr Chastel , and their teams .
We should also not forget the Spanish Presidency who contributed to advancing the dossier right at the beginning of the process .
Today we are presenting to you a compromise text which is supported by the Commission and has also been adopted by the Coreper .
If we decide to support it and the Council adopts it - which we hope - the regulation can enter into force on 1 January and be applicable 12 months later in 2012 .
We are pleased to say that Parliament 's key demands were accepted in the discussions .
The admissibility check on an initiative will be based on clear criteria at the point of registration , not after many signatures have already been collected .
To ensure the initiatives are well founded and have a European dimension , a citizens ' committee of at least seven members from seven Member States should be set up to register an initiative .
Apart from reducing the risk of unserious initiatives , the citizens ' committee offers incontestable advantages for organisers as well .
If the initiators of an ECI are disorganised at the beginning of the process , they have a network and have many language versions of their initiative .
They would have significantly less difficulty in collecting one million signatures .
It is clear that , even though the requirement for the citizens ' committee initially seems to be a constraint , it would in reality streamline the rest of the procedure .
The Commission will help organisers of an initiative by providing a user-friendly guide and setting up a point of contact .
If an initiative manages to collect one million signatures , a proper follow-up will be guaranteed , including a public hearing at Parliament .
The review of the regulation is of crucial importance as this tool is the first of its kind .
As per our suggestions , it is extremely useful with regard to the difficult issue of how to verify the signatures .
It is up to Member States to do this , but we urged them to demand as little personal information as possible .
Member States will have some flexibility in choosing what information is required in each country , but I am glad to say that many of them are going for less data than originally planned .
We believe that the regulation reflected in the compromise text is citizen-friendly and does not create cumbersome obligations for , and frustration amongst , the organisers .
Madam President , today the European Union is opening up to participatory democracy .
It is not yet direct democracy , citizens will not take the decisions themselves , but they do win the right to question directly , publicly , in huge numbers , those who take the decisions in Europe , over the head of their government and their elected representatives .
From now on , the citizens will enjoy the same power of political initiative as that enjoyed here by the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament .
We have benefited , as Mrs Gurmai has said , from the excellent preparatory work carried out by Commissioner Šefčovič and his teams , and from the intelligent and efficient support by the Belgian Presidency .
On the part of Parliament , the text is the result of the work of four rapporteurs , a gang of four , including you , Madam President .
We are honoured by your presence .
We wanted to come up with the simplest , most citizen-friendly procedure for the public .
Who might participate ?
Citizens , that is to say natural persons , all citizens , including , possibly , elected representatives , but only European citizens .
The Treaty leaves no doubt on the subject .
The right to participate in the citizens ' initiative is now yet one more of the privileges enjoyed by citizens throughout Europe .
Who might launch the initiative ?
It only needs seven citizens in an organising committee , not 300 000 as the Commission proposed , nor 100 000 as the Council envisaged , seven citizens from seven different countries , that is a quarter of the Member States .
Who should be contacted for information if one wants to launch an initiative ?
The Commission itself will publish a guide to the citizens ' initiative and will set up a specialised point of contact .
What is the procedure ?
Extraordinarily simple .
A single request to register the initiative and check its admissibility .
The criteria for admissibility ?
The Treaty , the whole Treaty and nothing but the Treaty , including the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
What support can be used for an initiative ?
Any kind of support : political , financial , local , national , European , international , lobbies , NGOs , churches , and so on .
Just one condition : total transparency .
Those who are invited to sign must know what lies behind the initiative .
So it is up to the citizens to assume their responsibilities .
What are the formalities for collecting the signatures ?
Incredibly simple .
Signatures on paper but also through the Internet .
Of course , it is only the Member States that can monitor them , but we have been careful , as Mrs Gurmai has said , to ensure that the forms are harmonised to the greatest possible extent .
In the long term , it is a veritable single European system which will have to be adopted in all 27 countries and a third of Member States are already prepared for it .
Finally , what will the political outcomes be ?
This is a point on which Parliament has been very insistent .
Indeed , in accordance with the Treaty , the Commission will be the only judge of whether or not to provide legislative follow-up to a successful initiative .
Therefore the Commission must be protected against political pressure seeking to make legislation proliferate at a time when the Union already regulates too much .
However , at the same time , the citizens must be protected against the risk that there is no political follow-up in cases where the Commission deems supplementary legislation inappropriate .
Hence the creation of two new rights to benefit authors of successful initiatives : the right to be received by the Commission to present their motion and the right to a public hearing , which can take place before the European Parliament itself .
In short , here we have a simple , innovative , democratic procedure .
It is now the citizens ' turn to take the floor .
( Applause )
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Petitions . - ( DE ) Madam President , like all policy , European policy must not exclude the citizens , go over their heads or take place behind their backs .
European policy must be made by the citizens , for the citizens and through the citizens .
We want to close the divide between the citizens and policy and between the citizens and the institutions .
To achieve this , we need procedures which allow citizens to become involved in decision-making and to express their opinions .
We have succeeding in creating more democracy within the European Union , but we have not done enough to enable citizens to participate more effectively in decisions and in European debates .
Today 's decision on the introduction of the European citizens ' initiative will bring this about .
We have held tough negotiations and we have achieved many substantial improvements .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you look at the document which we are voting on today , you will see that wherever there is bold text , and Mr Lamassoure has also just referred to this , this is the text that we have proposed which replaces the results of the negotiations , the original draft from the Commission .
You will notice that we have rewritten around two thirds of the text and introduced significant improvements to the document which the Commission enthusiastically submitted to us .
I will only mention the most important points .
We have significantly lowered the barriers .
In particular , signatures will only need to be collected in at least a quarter of the Member States and not one third .
Of course , we would prefer signatures to be collected all over Europe , but we are talking here about minimum levels .
Most importantly , we have succeeded in almost completely removing the barrier which , right from the beginning , threatened to be extremely unsuccessful and which required an admissibility check to take place after 300 000 signatures , before the citizens could continue collecting more signatures .
' Almost completely ' means that we have proposed the idea of involving a committee of initiators at the start which will ensure that not every mail which the Commission receives and which has the words citizens ' initiative on its subject line will undergo the full administrative procedure .
The initiatives must be reasonably serious .
In other words , anyone who wants to collect one million signatures must first involve at least seven countries in his proposal .
We have introduced greater transparency and mandatory hearings at the end of the process .
These hearings will take place in the European Parliament in the presence of Parliament and the Commission .
They will give citizens the opportunity to explain their concerns .
This represents a major step forward .
We have fought for this not on our own behalf , but - and we must never forget this - on behalf of the citizens of Europe , their rights and a more effective and simpler process for citizens to become involved in Europe .
There are some things which we have not achieved and many of these are now in the amendments tabled by those on the left .
In any case , the negotiations have now been completed .
We have reached an agreement with the Council and the Commission .
We have had to give in on some points , but the other side has also made huge concessions and we know that the amendments are more about appearance and less about substance .
This means that there will be no opportunity to change the results .
However , we will be able to do this during the review in three years ' time .
I would like to thank everyone involved , including the employees , the secretariats , the co-rapporteurs , the Commission and the Council , for working together so effectively .
I believe that this type of cooperation across committee and group boundaries could be a model for the future .
Overall I would like to see a Europe for citizens in which citizens regard themselves as part of Europe and become more actively involved than they have in the past .
I would just like to say that it was a huge privilege for me to be involved in Parliament 's team in what I regard as a hugely impressive piece of work on behalf of Europe 's citizens .
Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , rapporteurs especially , one of the most important promises of the Treaty of Lisbon was to bring Europe closer to its citizens .
I do not believe that I need to list here the examples which have shown us , before and after the signature of the Treaty of Lisbon in December 2009 , the extent to which a rapprochement of this nature is necessary .
Therefore it is not surprising that any measure that furthers the objective of interesting and involving citizens in European integration is a priority for all the institutions including the Council .
I am therefore particularly keen to be able to address you about the regulation that implements the citizens ' initiative , this flagship innovation of the Treaty of Lisbon as regards improved citizen participation in decisions at European level .
This regulation was , of course , one of the priorities of the Belgian Presidency of the Council as it may be that this citizens ' initiative is the most fitting symbol for the new post-Lisbon role of the citizen in the Union .
Through a citizens ' initiative , as the rapporteurs have already said , a million European citizens will be able to submit to the Commission a legislative proposal with the obligation incumbent on the Commission to examine it and express its opinion on it .
We should stop for a moment to appreciate this innovation that we are implementing today which is only the first element , as Mr Lamassoure has said , of participatory democracy at supranational level .
Therefore it is not only a first at European level , it is quite simply a first at world level .
Lets us return to the legislative issue we are debating today .
I am delighted with the compromise reached on this regulation in the course of the negotiations between the three institutions and , obviously , I too welcome the spirit of cooperation and the will for compromise that prevailed in the three institutions throughout the entire negotiations .
I would , of course , like to thank personally the rapporteurs for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ( AFCO ) and the Committee on Petitions ( PETI ) , Mrs Gurmai of course , Mr Lamassoure , Mrs Wallis and Mr Häfner for their efforts and constructive contributions to drafting this regulation .

I am therefore particularly delighted with the vote on Monday in the AFCO Committee , which confirmed the text approved by the institutions .
If the up-coming vote confirms the same text ratified by the AFCO Committee , we shall be able to consider this agreement at first reading as a model of fast and efficient legislation at European level .
How could we fail , in this respect , to extend our praise also to Commissioner Šefčovič for his availability and pro-activeness .
In short , I feel that , on this matter , we have all benefited from the many opinions expressed at the negotiation table .
The European citizen has emerged the winner from this trialogue and from this agreement .
I am convinced that the compromise reached between the institutions is a good one , not only insofar as each institution has managed to win what was dear to it , as we just recalled , but also insofar as it will result in a good regulation which will allow citizens ' initiatives to be organised flexibly and efficiently .
On behalf of the Council , I welcome the will of the other two institutions to take account of the needs and the constraints hanging over the Member States in accomplishing the task that has fallen to them , that of checking the signatures which must obviously be genuine signatures , and ensuring that there is no fraud or manipulation when they are collected .
Furthermore , Member States had to be given enough time to adopt those measures of national law necessary for the regulation to be applied .
I obviously understand Parliament 's concern to see the citizens ' initiative implemented as soon as possible and it is one that I share .
On the other hand , it is clear that there must be national measures if this initiative is to develop along the right lines and therefore enough time must be left for them to be adopted according to the existing regulatory framework .
Indeed , the Council has always considered that the citizens ' initiative , as an element of citizen participation in European decisions , should go hand-in-hand with the other element , that is , the election of the European Parliament .
Finally , to sum up , I am delighted with the compromise reached in the negotiations and I obviously cannot but recommend that you adopt it at today 's vote and I wish the citizens ' initiative all the success that it is predicted to have .
I note that the first initiatives are already under preparation and I hope that a great number of initiatives will give fresh impetus and new ideas to European integration .
I would just like to say another big thank you to everyone for your collaboration on this issue .
( Applause )
Thank you so much for your leadership during the presidency to get this through .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I am also very happy to be here with you this morning because we have accomplished very good things together .
Just one year after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we are holding a discussion on the forthcoming adoption of the regulation on the citizens ' initiative .
As Mr Lamassoure said , we are introducing a totally new layer of participatory democracy which will complement the representative democracy in which we operate in the European Union .
But for the first time we are offering citizens an innovative way of expressing their wishes , interacting with the institutions and shaping the agenda of the European Union .
I believe it is a very important as a means of widening the European space .
It is very important in terms of bringing more European topics to the national capitals and creating European-wide debate .
We all know that the European Union needs this very much .
To achieve the potential benefits the Treaty of Lisbon and the citizens ' initiative can bring us , we need to establish a clear procedure .
It was very clear , from the public consultations and the consultations with the European Parliament , that we needed a procedure which would be easy , understandable , user-friendly and well-balanced .
I think we have achieved this goal .
That was really thanks to the in-depth discussions we had , very often here in the European Parliament .
I would like to thank all of you for organising a number of hearings , not only in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ( AFCO ) and the Committee on Petitions ( PETI ) but also in most of the political groups , because these hearings have been very important for all of us .
I can assure you that they served as a very important source of inspiration and new creative ideas which , in the end , helped us improve the initial Commission proposal .
I appreciate also the innovative way in which the European Parliament dealt with this initiative .
We had four rapporteurs from two different committees .
Alain Lamassoure called them the gang of four .
I must say it was a very nice gang .
It was a pleasure working with all of you .
It was a pleasure for me to receive your new creative input into our common thinking , because each of you approached the subject from a different angle and brought your own experience to bear on how to improve the initial proposal of the Commission .
I really appreciate it .
Thanks to this new innovative approach we achieved broad consensus within the European Parliament .
I am particularly pleased about the very clear vote in AFCO .
One of the important ideas which came from the rapporteurs was what kind of follow-up we should give to the citizens ' initiative .
I believe the idea that an appropriately high-level Commission representative should receive the organisers of the initiative after its successful completion came from the European Parliament .
The idea of organising hearings as a compulsory stage during which we could discuss the goals of the initiative more broadly also came from this Chamber .
I would like to stress that we are very pleased and satisfied that these public hearings will be organised on neutral ground , here at the European Parliament , because this will ensure that the Commission will not be in the uncomfortable position of being judge and jury at the same time .
The Commission will be represented at those hearings at an appropriately high level , where possible by the Commissioner or Director-General with responsibility for the subject , and will carefully follow the debate .
I would like to assure you , and through you all European citizens , that we in the Commission are absolutely conscious of the importance and the value of one million citizens supporting a particular proposal .
We will treat it with respect and great care .
The only regret I have in this debate is that we will need to wait a little while before the citizens ' initiative can be fully used .
But we have to recognise that , if we want to offer our citizens an improved service , we need to change some internal rules in the Member States and we have to develop the software for the online collection system .
I am sure we will do it in the prescribed time , however , and European citizens will have a chance to use this initiative as soon as possible .
I greatly appreciate , therefore , the fact that we are aiming at agreement on the first reading , because this will allow our citizens to use this new instrument much faster than initially expected .
Let me thank you once again for the excellent cooperation with all the rapporteurs , with Ms Gurmai , with our Chair , Ms Wallis , with Mr Häfner and Mr Lamassoure .
As I said , all of them brought very new and very important ideas to make this proposal better than the initial proposal from the Commission .
I would also like to thank personally Olivier Chastel , because he demonstrated his enormous ability for consensus building .
I know how difficult it was in the Council , how many divergences he had to overcome , and thanks to his efforts and thanks to the excellent work of the Belgian Presidency we now have this wide consensus also in the Council .
Madam President , I would like to convey my sincere thanks to the rapporteurs for drafting the text on which we are going to vote , today .
I hope that we will put this mechanism in the hands of the citizens , today , and that it will be further developed by the Commission .
I do , of course , agree .
It has been made as simple as possible .
What we are going to vote on , today , is the result of a compromise - sometimes a difficult compromise - and I do understand that Mr Lamassoure and the other rapporteurs have achieved , on our behalf , a result which is practicable and feasible .
Personally , I regret to have to give up the provision which gives 16-year-olds the right to sign an initiative , but I will support the text in the negotiated form , because I am certain that there should be no further delay and that the initiative should be handed over to the citizens .
I am sure we are , in fact , creating this next part of the system , today , in order to act upon something which was said many times in this Chamber by the late Bronisław Geremek - Europe is united , and the time has come for Europeans to be active .
Today , we are taking a constructive step in this direction .
We are not writing the Bible , here .
In three years ' time , the procedures being proposed , today , can be looked at and improved , on condition that they are being used , which is something I strongly encourage people to do .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( HU ) Madam President , as one of the representatives of the LIBE Committee , I would like to join those congratulating the rapporteurs , and would like to thank the Commission for its work , as well as Mr Šefčovič and Mr Chastel for their work in the Council , as they contributed considerably to the creation of a sound and viable text which truly represents a step towards simplification , and which I believe will gain extensive support .
There were intense debates , and a multitude of good proposals were tabled .
The large number of good proposals also meant that they had to be consolidated , to make the final proposal as user-friendly as possible .
Collecting one million signatures is an enormous achievement and requires an enormous amount of work .
We would also like to reach out to those who cannot contribute online , but would rather express their opinions on paper .
We would be pleased if we could receive feedback , and we would be pleased if we could resolve any problems arising in the process as early as possible .
It is certain that Europe will benefit considerably from this instrument .
Madam President , prior to the decision to adopt the Treaty of Lisbon , politicians spoke warmly of the opportunity that citizens ' initiatives would bring .
We must now ensure that this becomes a powerful reform for democracy and not a paper tiger .
I was the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and I was pleased to table proposals that would make things easier for citizens . For example , we wanted to get young people involved and therefore proposed an age limit of 16 for raising an initiative .
An age limit of 18 was decided on , which I may regret , but these are still young people we are talking about .
We also extended the time frame to 24 months .
Now it has become 12 months , but I am nevertheless pleased to have a compromise , because I am essentially a positive person .
On the other hand , we note that a large amount of work will be necessary on the part of those who submit an initiative , but I hope that we will take up the challenge to ensure that citizens ' initiatives are received with respect and in a constructive and positive spirit in the institutions of the EU .
Finally , I would like to thank all my fellow Members for their excellent cooperation on this important initiative .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is going to vote enthusiastically in favour of this report , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , the Commission and the Council on this agreement .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the 1980s we coined the phrase ' democratic deficit ' .
By this we meant that in the European Union decisions were taken only by the Council of Ministers , based on Commission proposals , and that Parliament was only consulted .
Parliament has been battling since the 1980s , through the Treaties of Maastricht , Amsterdam and Nice , the Constitutional Treaty and the Treaty of Lisbon , to close that democratic deficit , and I believe that through the Treaty of Lisbon , with Parliament 's new powers and the participation of national parliaments , we have achieved that objective .
We are adding to that achievement today through this citizens ' initiative , which in the work of the Convention was due to the sound cooperation between the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
I would like to recall the following names here today : Jürgen Meyer , our German Social Democrat colleague , and Alain Lamassoure , who were responsible for bringing this initiative to the plenary of the Convention and getting it approved .
I therefore believe that we have completed the circle , Madam President .
I believe that today , when we adopt this initiative , we will have signed the death warrant of the idea of a ' democratic deficit ' .
Now it is up to us to act responsibly , ladies and gentlemen , and today we also have the opportunity to do so .
By adopting the Union budget we will be fulfilling the role that is expected of us : as a responsible Parliament with codecision powers .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think that this is a good day for Europe .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Democracy : The Unfinished Journey is the title of a book by a recognised analyst of the theoretical and practical changes that contemporary democracies are undergoing .
We are indeed in the middle of an unfinished journey in which many stages have been completed , but we are in a period of risks , uncertainty and many doubts .
However , among those doubts , we do have a few certainties .
The first is that the structure that has endured has been representative democracy : our institutions ; without free parliaments based on the will of the people , democracy has never survived .
It is , however , also true that democracy now needs innovation , reforms and changes to improve its quality , while maintaining the structures that have served us so far and the strength of their foundations .
What type of changes do we need ?
We need to move towards a style of democracy that expands the participatory forum , so that citizens are more than just voters every four or five years .
We need a democracy that increases the space for debate , in which citizens discuss , reason and exchange views , and one which increases social capital , in which citizens are no longer isolated and can integrate into the community .
We also need a European dimension for this style of democracy .
I think we have achieved that by bringing in legislation for this citizens ' initiative .
There are now no longer two types of legitimacy , rather there are two voices for citizens : one is here in Parliament and the other is in the citizens ' initiative .
This will give us a stronger , more participatory and more legitimate democracy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , I wish to thank everyone for their cooperation .
This has been a splendidly straightforward process of cooperation .
The citizens ' initiative is a welcome addition to active citizenship .
I hope that it will be important for provoking political debate .
Not all initiatives gain sufficient support , but they can bring new perspectives to the debate .
Parliament wanted to make the citizens ' initiative as userfriendly as possible , and it has mainly succeeded in this .
I am especially pleased that the Commission and Parliament will have to organise a public hearing when a million signatures have been collected .
This will compel the EU institutions actually to listen to what the signatories have to propose .
At the same time , the Commission will have to justify thoroughly to them its possible negative stance .
I would have been pleased if this citizens ' initiative could have been signed not just by these citizens but also by the people who live in each country , but there was not enough support for this .
The significance of the citizens ' initiative will not be seen until it enters into force .
I hope that it will some day provoke a wider debate on EU affairs than has been the case today .
Madam President , I am very happy that this dispute , which not long ago seemed to be a never-ending story , has now found a solution .
Like the foxtrot with our beloved European External Action Service , this has taken too long .
A slow foxtrot makes your back ache , and your partner may end up disappointed .
The partner here , however , is none other than our citizens .
I hope that this new form of democracy succeeds , and that we do not betray our citizens ' expectations .
For me , the saddest thing in the whole debate was that too often we saw distrust towards the citizens , the fear that citizens would come out with brainless ideas .
This fear is unfounded , as we will indeed see .
Mr Šefčovič , I would also like the Commission to start to trust its own citizens more .
As a representative of Estonia , I want to thank the Council too , which has retained the option of a digital signature , because this is essential for my people .
Europe is eagerly awaiting the creative ideas of its citizens . Thank you .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , the European citizens ' initiative ( ECI ) is a much needed sign of engagement by the EU , and is a great opportunity to increase democratic participation in Europe and to strengthen the links between citizens and politicians .
Although the obstacle of the obligation to provide passport numbers remains applicable in two-thirds of the Member States , I and other members of the ECR Group have helped make this citizens ' initiative more user-friendly by deleting the terribly bureaucratic double admissibility check proposed by the Commission and ensuring that the ECI was made available to popular movements and not just large organised interest groups .
Now , truly grassroots initiatives stand a change of succeeding , even if they do not follow the spirit of European federalism .
Most importantly , the Commission will be obliged to indicate the exact reasons for refusal of an ECI , as well as indicating exactly how it intends to follow up on a successful initiative .
Transparency in this process is key .
It is about time that the European Union began to properly acknowledge the views of European citizens and listen to the voice of the people .
I am hopeful that this scheme will engender a greater sense of democracy and of the democratic accountability of the European Commission , and inspire discussion on the future course of the EU .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Šefčovič , ladies and gentlemen , it has already become clear this morning during the debate on the forthcoming European Council meeting that we have a problem of legitimacy within the European Union .
Its roots lie primarily in the fact that policy all too often bypasses the day-to-day interests of the citizens .
They rightly expect to be more involved in policymaking .
The protests taking place in numerous EU countries are an eloquent expression of this .
The introduction of the European citizens ' initiative , which we are voting on today , means that for the first time in the history of the EU there will be an instrument that allows the citizens of Europe to express their expectations and requirements directly , to launch initiatives immediately , to follow them up and to participate directly in policymaking .
The current regulation is good , but my group is of the opinion that it could and should have been even better .
Whether the citizens and residents of Europe will really use the citizens ' initiative will ultimately depend on us here in Parliament .
How seriously are we taking our self-imposed commitment to support the necessary open approach ?
Will we be prepared and in a position in three years ' time to stand up to the Council and the Commission about the further development of the initiative ?
The subjects are already laid down in the current regulation and we want to vote on these points again today .
The value of the citizens ' initiative will not be measured in terms of the interinstitutional compromise reached between the Council and the Commission , but in terms of whether it is really used .
The fact that today 's result is significantly better - and I would like to thank specifically Mrs Gurmai , Mrs Wallis , Mr Lamassoure and Mr Häfner for working closely together and making such good progress on refining this regulation - is also due to the many members of civil society who have subjected our considerations and our debates to repeated reality and practicability checks .
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank them .
I am calling on the citizens of Europe to take the initiative .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , since the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force a year ago , an unprecedented amount of power has been transferred to the EU 's institutions , and throughout the past year we have seen how the European Parliament in particular has been in a position to exploit this situation - divesting the Member States of an enormous amount of power .
There were two glimmers of light when the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force .
One of these was the citizens ' initiative .
That is also why - on behalf of both my party in Denmark and my group here in the European Parliament - I entered into the negotiations precisely with a view to getting the citizens ' initiative in place , which , in spite of everything , was a tiny glimmer of light in an otherwise very dark and very federal EU .
There have been areas where we have disagreed .
Several rapporteurs have already mentioned that someone wants to extend the right to submit a citizens ' initiative to people who are not citizens and someone else wants to be able to decide on the voting age in other Member States and so on - something that we have not been able to agree on .
However , the framework that we have now agreed on nevertheless contains positive elements and therefore , in the spirit of democracy and in order to promote the positive elements that , in spite of everything , are contained in the Treaty of Lisbon , my group will also support this initiative .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the citizens ' initiative , as proposed by the treaties and laid down by this regulation , is a parody of democracy .
Firstly , it leads citizens to believe that their voice can be heard by the Eurocracy , despite the fact that the latter systematically refused to listen to them when they made it clear , by means of referendum , that they did not want the construction of a European super-state .
Therefore start by listening to the public when they say ' no ' or when they tell you to call a halt .
It is also a parody of democracy in terms of the restrictions on admissibility .
Citizens ' initiatives must be in accordance with the treaties and the so-called principles that underlie them .
Therefore , in the name of the principles of freedom of movement included in the treaties , there will be a pitiless refusal of any request to protect our economies , a refusal to put any brake on the financialised globalisation whose devastating effects we are now suffering , to reverse in any way migratory flows .
Any initiative seeking to halt negotiations with Turkey is likely to suffer the same fate , insofar as we can request the Commission to act but cannot request it to stop acting .
If an initiative receives enough signatures , the Commission is not obliged to put it into effect , merely to justify its decision .
This is a veritable parody of democracy .
- ( FR ) Madam President , firstly I should like to pay tribute to the huge amount of work done by the rapporteurs .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are some unprecedented moments in the European Parliament .
Today is one of them .
We wanted to provide citizens with a clear , simple and effective instrument in order to bring them closer to the institutions .
Firstly , we must emphasise the efforts that have been made to simplify the procedure .
The registration phase is now quick and clear .
It is our duty to disseminate the criteria that an initiative must meet in order to be registered : respect for the values of the Union , respect for the powers of the Commission , in relation to the application of the treaties .
Secondly , I would draw your attention to the one-year deadline for the Member States .
The fact that they are meeting this deadline and guaranteeing data protection will send a strong signal to our citizens .
Thirdly , I would like to express my satisfaction over the three-month deadline , over the political and legal arguments and the procedure that the Commission must follow for organising public hearings jointly with Parliament .
Certainly , with these three points , it can be said that an instrument will shortly be in the hands of the European citizen that is simpler than expected , clearer than it appears at first sight and supposedly more effective .
Finally , I shall remain alert to the possible perverse effects of political parties financing the initiative and this is something for which I still believe that the citizens will perhaps be in a position to reproach us .
Having said that , I count on all of us to sound the alarm at the first signs of it being used for party political purposes because , first and foremost , that is our commitment and we shall vote for an instrument of participatory democracy that belongs to the citizens alone .
Madam President , may I start by congratulating you on your contribution as the co-rapporteur of our Committee on Petitions .
As you may know , the citizens ' initiative was a major priority for our S & D Group .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate all four co-rapporteurs from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Petitions on their joint work in delivering this remarkable report , as well as on the way in which they negotiated with the Council and the Commission to achieve such a good result .
I would also like to mention the very special role played by the Vice-President of the European Commission , Commissioner Šefčovič , and his readiness , openness and commitment to negotiate with both the Council and Parliament .
I am glad to be voting today only a few months after the beginning of the procedure on this unique and key instrument for participatory democracy in the European Union .
The European Parliament has contributed a great deal to this text .
Two-thirds of the text comes from Parliament , showing once again its constant commitment to involving European citizens in the political debate and bringing the European Union closer to them .
I consider this document to be well-balanced and to contribute to our common goal , which is to give the citizens ' initiative an important role in the practice of European democracy and enhance the capacity of European citizens to make an impact on European policies .
Indeed , this instrument is designed to promote in-depth debate throughout civil society .
As our group has emphasised from the beginning , this instrument is accessible and simply designed , as well as being clear and detailed in order to avoid creating frustration .
I would like to thank you very much and to wish you success after this remarkable beginning .
Madam President , contrary to the assumptions of some speakers , my belief is that the citizens ' initiative was always intended to be able to be used by citizens to request the Commission to propose an amendment to the treaties .
I am very pleased that the final wording of Article 2 of the regulation faithfully repeats the wording of Article 11 ( 4 ) of the Treaty itself .
A Commission proposal to change the treaties is certainly the Commission functioning legally within the framework of its powers , and we all know from experience that it is frequently necessary to change the treaties in order that their objectives can be fully achieved .
So citizens should be bold and fully exploit this great new experiment in post-national democracy .
( PL ) Madam President , as Mrs McClarkin has said , our political group will support this scheme , because it is a good one , and it should be endorsed when the vote is taken .
I am pleased that during work on the scheme it was possible to eliminate several features which were a cause for concern .
Amongst other things , protection of personal data has been increased and the minimum age for supporting an initiative has been raised from 16 to 18 years .
This is a good result .
However , I do have several critical remarks .
Firstly , as my colleague Mrs McClarkin has said , it is , in fact , the Commission which is going to decide whether or not an initiative is accepted , and so the voice of the people is still going to be dependent on officials , even if they are acting in good faith .
Another matter is that it should be considered whether the 300 000 votes needed for an initiative and the one quarter of the Member States which have to be represented is not too low a threshold .
In Poland , an initiative of this kind requires the signatures of 100 000 people .
On the much larger scale of the entire European Union - Poles constitute only 8 % of the population - I think this is questionable .
However , in spite of these doubts , the scheme is worth supporting and the European Conservatives and Reformists will certainly endorse it .
( GA ) Madam President , I would first of all like to thank both you and the rapporteurs .
The work of the rapporteurs represents a significant improvement on the Commission 's proposal .
However , I am disappointed that some aspects of the proposal will lead to people who should be involved being excluded .
I would ask Parliament to give serious consideration to the amendments adopted by large majorities in the Committee on Petitions and which we have yet again tabled to the plenary - Amendments 71 , 72 , 73 and 74 .
We should ensure in particular that we do not suggest to people resident in the EU who have not attained citizenship that their views are not necessary or not welcome .
Similarly , young people should be encouraged to participate in the issues related to EU policies .
In the current situation , not all EU residents - including long-term residents - will be able to sign the citizens ' initiative .
Participation will only be open to those with EU citizenship .
The purpose of Amendments 72 and 73 , therefore , which we have tabled once more to the plenary , is to ensure that residents ' signatures will be included in the 1 million signatures requesting the Commission to take action .
( NL ) Madam President , I am not sure what to make of this citizens ' initiative .
Involving citizens more in decision-making sounds nice enough , although , of course , it would be better to allow the very same citizens to vote on the Treaty of Lisbon in a referendum .
Calling a treaty that has been rammed down our citizens ' throats a dialogue with citizens is , from my point of view , both cynical and ironic .
Madam President , I fear that the citizens ' initiative will merely prove to be a giant piece of window dressing .
The Commission has carte blanche not to consider proposals .
Clearly , the hobbyhorses of the left Europhile elite , who evidently represent a pro-European position , will be accepted .
Or can the Commissioner rid me of these concerns ?
Suppose we had citizens ' initiatives to stop the negotiations with Turkey or to abolish this House - which , of course , would be fantastic .
Will the Commission then take them seriously ?
I would like to hear your thoughts on that .
Madam President , the confidence of citizens in the European Union has already hit rock bottom .
I suspect that this citizens ' initiative will do very little to change that and that does not worry me , actually , because the more people recognise the collapse of the European Union , the better .
Madam President , as shadow rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs I have been fully committed to helping shape this new right to political initiative for the citizens of Europe with a view to really empowering the people .
I support the final compromise and congratulate Mr Lamassoure .
It makes it user-friendly , simple and accessible for citizens .
I welcome especially the transparency as regards both political and financial support .
However I regret that financing from political parties and groups is allowed and national politicians are allowed to be initiators .
I do not want to spoil the party here , colleagues , but let us be realistic .
There is a risk that the democratic process in Europe could not only be boosted but also derailed , and the citizens ' initiative could be exploited , if not hijacked , by extremists and populists .
I think we all have now to take our shared responsibility and make sure it is really used for the citizens .
I call upon elected politicians in Member States to respect the fact that they have representative democracy to express their views and this initiative is for citizens .
I call upon the Commission to properly inform citizens to avoid raising false expectations , and to be tough as regards the admission criteria .
I call upon the media to play their role in giving correct information , and on Member States to respect personal data so that the people will feel enough trust to participate .
I really hope that we will be able to give our citizens the chance to be part of this debate and enjoy using this instrument .
( DE ) Madam President , I am not a member of any of the committees that are directly involved , but nevertheless I have given our rapporteur , Mrs Gurmai , my full support and I would like to thank all the rapporteurs .
I believe that we have taken a significant step forward in the process of democratising the European Union .
I know that many people are concerned about a possible misuse of the instrument .
However , it is up to us to take into consideration the worries and the problems of the citizens in our policies and then they will not be able to misuse the citizens ' initiative .
It is up to us to use our policies to oppose the citizens ' initiatives , if we believe that they are going in the wrong direction .
Opposition is certainly more useful than ignoring them .
In contrast to Mrs Corazza Bildt , I think that a good compromise has been reached .
I believe that political parties should not use the initiative instrument , because that is what the political parties and Parliament are there for .
Of course , it is absolutely right that politicians should not be excluded from the debate .
Therefore , I think that this instrument represents a move in the right direction .
It is now up to the political parties to implement the right policies under the watchful eye of the citizens and the citizens ' initiative , to take up the wishes and concerns of citizens , to bring them into Parliament and to enter into a dialogue with the citizens to a much greater extent .
This instrument also forces politicians to act more sensibly and to shape Europe in such a way that it really is close to the citizens and not remote from them , which is a criticism rightly made by many people .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their hard work .
I believe that this is a major step forward for democracy in Europe and ultimately this is what we in Parliament are fighting for : a democratic Europe .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to add my voice to the expressions of support and approval for this scheme .
On the other hand , the expression of certain doubts and comments does not indicate a lack of support , it just reflects a concern that the scheme will be used in the right way .
I would like to point out , here , that many of the opportunities , hopes and also fears which are being talked about - Mr Migalski , amongst others , has mentioned this - concern the hope that this tool , which is so much needed and which will do so much to strengthen and extend democracy , will not , in practice , be misused .
Paradoxically , this tool might easily be misused in practice , and not only by extremists , but also by very strong and powerful interest groups , and I say this because we think a threshold of 1 000 000 statements of support is not a big threshold when compared to the Union 's demographic potential .
If we point out that a decision to accept or reject an initiative is , however , going to be dependent to a great extent on an arbitrary evaluation , this , too , may attract serious criticism from the citizens themselves .
In summary , I think we should accelerate work on the scheme and make it a priority , but what is also needed is for the scheme to be subjected to a very thorough , prudent and sensible analysis .
Madam President , I stand here as a democrat and someone who believes that greater participation in the democratic process is to be encouraged .
Let us be honest , there is a disconnect between policymakers and citizens .
It is therefore very important that the voice of the ordinary citizen is heard .
The ECI in theory is a sound concept , yet my enthusiasm is tempered with the fact that the Commission still holds considerable power .
We also cannot ignore the fact that the mechanics for gathering the signatures for an ECI , even with the requirement for participation reduced to a quarter of the Member States , may mean that it is very difficult for anyone but large lobby organisations which already operate on a pan-European basis to gather these required signatures .
This truly needs to be a tool of the citizen and not the NGO .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Members of the Council , I wanted to say that this citizens ' initiative represents a very important step towards the recognition of the constitutional nature of the European Union .
Only a constitutional entity , whether or not it has a written constitution , is in a position to provide its citizens with an instrument that has this capacity , and I recognise in our action something of great value : the value of providing the European Union with this constitutional nature .
I also wanted to say that this is a very important step for citizens and for solidarity between citizens .
By having one quarter of the countries as a minimum condition for launching an initiative , we are also creating a trans-European and pan-European movement , because it is much more difficult to be taken over by lobbies or by partisan interests .
Contrary to what is being said here , it is much more difficult when we require the citizens of seven or eight countries to sign up to this initiative , and I am therefore convinced that it will also be a way of strengthening solidarity between European States , solidarity between the citizens of European States , solidarity that at this point in time , two days from this December 's European Council meeting which will be so decisive , solidarity which we need now more than ever .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , procedure is the stuff of democracy and therefore the implementation of the citizens ' initiative was not merely a technical exercise but imposed crucial choices that made it possible to turn the citizens ' initiative into an instrument effectively capable of helping to build a genuine European political space .
Parliament undoubtedly exercised its prerogatives in an exemplary manner , significantly improving the original proposal .
The main results have already mentioned and I do not need to remind you of them .
I would , however , like to emphasise another one , to which our group made a significant contribution : European political parties will also be able to promote a citizens ' initiative .
This is an outcome of great significance because the fate of European democracy lies at its heart , since there can be no genuine international democracy until European political parties take on an effective role in the democratic process .
Today we are taking a step forward in this direction and this is another reason why it is a great day for European democracy .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank all the rapporteurs for the timeliness of the work carried out and the good compromise achieved .
As Chair of the Committee on Petitions , please allow me to offer my particular thanks to Mrs Wallis and Mr Häfner in addition to the shadow rapporteurs who - making up a sizeable team - were able to correctly channel all the feelings that emerged in the debate conducted within the Committee on Petitions .
I think we worked in full awareness of the importance of the task we were carrying out .
Indeed , the citizens ' initiative is a significant goal in the process of building a Europe of the people , a democratic Europe and a truly participative Europe .
We in the Committee on Petitions worked with this in mind , cooperating with the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , applying the procedure laid down in Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure .
As many fellow Members and the rapporteurs have emphasised , we aimed to make the procedure as usable , burden-free , transparent and effective as possible .
We worked with this in mind to impose obligations on the Commission and to limit its scope for evaluation regarding the criteria of admissibility that we have introduced .
I should like to reassure the fellow Members who raised legitimate and understandable concerns , which we covered during the debate and to many of which we sought to provide responses .
Lastly , because this topic is close to my heart , I should like to emphasise the importance of introducing a public hearing for representatives of a citizens ' initiative , which will be organised by the Commission together with the European Parliament .
As Chair of the Committee on Petitions I should like to express my satisfaction because , under an agreement between the parties involved , this task within Parliament is likely to be entrusted to the committee that I chair .
( DE ) Madam President , firstly I would like to thank everyone who has made this possible and , in particular , the former vice-president Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann , who did much of the preliminary work during the previous parliamentary term to ensure that the day would come when the European citizens ' initiative would become reality .
Sometimes the citizens of the EU feel as if Europe and its institutions are very remote .
This instrument , the European citizens ' initiative , will bring the institutions closer to the citizens .
This is an excellent instrument which will strengthen democracy , involve people more and enable them to take the initiative .
I believe that two things will be very important over the next few months .
One is creating access , including digital access , to the citizens ' initiative over the Internet in a way which makes it easy to use but is also secure .
The second is that if a citizens ' initiative is successful , it should be followed by a legal act .
My question to the Commission is therefore as follows : How will we decide in future which initiatives will result in a legal act and which simply in a hearing ?
Perhaps you could explain this , Mr Šefčovič .
I would also like to thank you once again for your work and for the work done by the Council .
Madam President , the launching of the citizens ' initiative is unquestionably one of the most important developments in the process of European integration .
It constitutes a qualitative redistribution of power within the European Union and has the potential to generate significant innovation in European politics .
The placing of citizens at the same level as Parliament and Council , by offering citizens the right to call on the Commission to bring legislation forward , has far-reaching implications .
For one , the new institution creates space to question one of the fundamental features of the way in which the entire integration process has been designed - namely that , from the outset , it has been elite-led .
In many respects , this has been very successful but there is equally little doubt now that , without the active support of the citizens , the integration process runs into obstacles .
Indeed , there is growing evidence that citizens see the EU as remote , complex and impenetrable .
They have had very little reason to engage with the EU because the means of doing so have been absent .
This is what the citizens ' initiative will remedy .
It sets up an instrument that has the capacity to bridge the gap between the EU and the demos .
It is in everyone 's interest that the instrument should now work and should work as effectively as possible .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like firstly to congratulate all the rapporteurs , and especially my colleague and neighbour Mrs Gurmai , for their outstanding work on this issue .
The creation of the citizens ' initiative is one of the most interesting innovations of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In my view , it constitutes a new legislative power within the European institutions placed in the hands of the citizens .
In a context in which the feeling of belonging to the Union is still too weak and where rates of abstention at the European elections , especially , are particularly worrying , this new tool will enable European citizens to become fully-fledged actors in European democracy .
Moreover , this issue gives rise to huge curiosity and undoubted interest .
Therefore to highlight exclusively the risks that citizens ' initiatives might pose would send a bad signal .
While it is , of course , necessary to tackle this provision appropriately , we must not be afraid of the discussions that might arise .
The compromise between Parliament and the Council is perfectly balanced and the question will be , once this text has been adopted , to ensure that this tool comes into force as quickly as possible because the citizens are expecting this of us and this is an important opportunity .
( Applause )

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in my capacity as Chair of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I am speaking above all to thank all the members of my committee for their good work , particularly Mr Lamassoure and Mrs Gurmai , who did a great job in achieving the aim of implementing one of the most important changes in the Treaty of Lisbon .
The committee also listened to the opinion of all national parliaments and experts , working in close contact with the Commission - for which I offer my heartfelt thanks to Commissioner Šefčovič - and with the Council 's willingness to engage in dialogue , for which I should like to thank Mr Chastel .
Applying Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure also worked very well , allowing us to work effectively with the Committee on Petitions .
I personally supported the need for an annual deadline for the entry into force of the regulation and this was certainly not to delay its application but , quite the contrary , to ensure that its initial implementation will be carried out comprehensively and conscientiously so that all Member States , without exception , are able to fulfil the requirement to prepare participation and checking instruments .
I believe that the greatest positive effect of the new scheme is to increase the awareness of EU citizenship , which has now been enriched by the power of participation in the legislative process , including providing the stimulus .
I am also certain that the mechanisms provided will guarantee easy participation for citizens , while also preventing abuse .
Ultimately , I believe that , with the Christmas festivities only a few days away , the adoption of this regulation represents a nice gift for European citizens and Europe itself .
( DE ) Madam President , I am pleased to be able to speak after my successor on the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , because I supported this project for 10 years and the European citizens ' initiative was included in the text of the treaty almost at the last second .
Back then , it was the Members of this Parliament and of the national parliaments who took the initiative in the Convention .
This opens a new chapter in the relationships between the citizens and the European institutions .
All of us hope that this will reduce the distance between people and politics in Europe .
The citizens ' initiative is not the cure for all our ills , but it can be a huge help .
Above all , I would like to see more openness in Europe , in the form of a cross-border debate on current issues which are of interest to citizens .
In my area , the environment , I can think of a number of subjects which could be put on the European Union 's agenda using this instrument and , in particular , on the agenda of the Commission in its role as European government or executive .
I would also like to ask the Commission how it is preparing for these future initiatives .
We must not disappoint the people .
I would like to thank everyone and especially the rapporteurs Mrs Gurmai and Mr Lamassoure for their excellent work .
( LT ) Madam President , this is a really happy and important day for the European Parliament .
I very much hope that we will approve this mechanism which will enable our citizens to participate in creating the European Union 's future , not just electing the European Parliament , but also actively participating in the creation process .
It is very important for citizens ' voices to be heard .
A few years ago I myself had the opportunity to represent tens of thousands of European Union citizens when I presented a petition to the European Parliament and I am very pleased that at the time the European Parliament adopted a resolution based on the petition .
It is a great thing when you feel that your voice , your voice as a citizen , is heard in the European Union 's institutions .
There must be dialogue between the European Commission and citizens , and there must not be any situations that would de-motivate citizens .
This is a step towards closer cooperation not just between institutions and citizens , but among citizens themselves .
This is about recognizing and identifying certain problems and providing a single solution to them , but the process must be safe and transparent and we must apply the principle of subsidiarity .
Madam President , first I want to congratulate Zita Gurmai and Alain Lamassoure for this report .
I strongly welcome the citizens ' initiative mechanism .
It is a very positive grassroots initiative .
It will serve to greatly reduce the democratic deficit between the people and the European Union institutions .
Notably , it gives citizens a platform to express and propose ideas for European legislation .
The need for a minimum of one fourth of all Member States to collect signatures for the initiative ensures that the initiative will represent the need for a legislative proposal by a cross-section of society .
Finally , I would like to stress that it is important to have full transparency regarding the founding of the initiative and sources of financial support for the organisers .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , because their work is going to give European men and women the opportunity to convert their concerns into initiatives in the European Parliament .
Today we are improving democracy , bringing decision-making processes closer to citizens and making them more open and deliberative , always looking towards people .
This regulation is part of the Europe 2020 policy , and is a basic tool for managing the knowledge and talent available in society .
It is also going to require us to learn new skills so that we can be more visible as political leaders in virtual communities , in the digital society , and lead in different way that is closer to the people and more human .
It is a step towards political innovation , which must help us to be more transparent and restore people 's confidence in politics .
Finally , the citizens ' initiative is going to be an opportunity for the regions to overcome the lack of recognition that they have in the current institutional structure of the Union .
I am sure that , with resolve and imagination , the regions will also use this mechanism to bring their proposals directly to this House .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , until the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union was not open to the requests of its citizens , partly because two of its main bodies - the Commission and the Council - are appointed and not elected like Parliament , and also because there was no provision for public participation .
With the entry into force of the new treaty , European citizens can submit proposed initiatives by collecting a sufficient number of signatures .
We are somewhat in favour of the regulation , because it improves on the Commission 's initial text .
The admissibility procedure for the proposal is combined with the registration procedure and is followed by the collection and verification of signatures .
Unfortunately , the report is inadequate due to the lack of any mechanism to verify the authenticity of signatures .
This could lead to the submission of false signatures and therefore detract from the popular democratic value of the initiative .
Madam President , the citizens ' initiative has many guises .
Is it a petition ?
Yes , but not a freely drafted one .
The petitioner is told beforehand what he might ask for , which is something within the competence of the Commission , and what he might not ask for , which is something deemed by the Commission to be lacking in seriousness or contrary to so-called European values .
Is it a referendum ?
Absolutely not .
It has been described wrongly as an example of direct democracy .
However , there will be no popular vote involving all citizens .
Even if a million signatures should be collected , the Commission will not have to act on it .
It will not even truly be a citizens ' initiative .
Ordinary citizens are unlikely to organise themselves autonomously .
Only powerful interests will find it easy to mobilise opinion .
Most of all , it will be a quasi-democratic cosmetic for an undemocratic institution .
Does that mean we are opposed to it ?
No .
I am confident that concerned opponents will use it to undo the European project .
( PL ) Madam President , the European citizens ' initiative is to be a tool which enables the citizens to participate more fully in the life of the Union , and this , in turn , is to strengthen the clearly impaired communication between the European Union and the citizens .
Name , address , nationality and signature - I fully agree that this should be sufficient in order to ensure that the person who signs does exist and has not signed twice .
Dropping the requirement for identification using an identification document - a decision which , unfortunately , has not been made - could be very influential in creating a citizen-friendly tool .
In times when the protection of personal data gives rise to particular concerns , collecting confidential personal data such as identification numbers may discourage many citizens from signing an initiative .
The officials who have been promoting the obligation to present an identification document clearly have not appreciated this matter .
Enabling European citizens to submit proposals for new legislation on a matter of social importance is an invaluable part of democracy , and I feel honoured that I can be part of the process of giving this tool to the residents of Europe .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their excellent work .
We decided to include the right of citizens to request legislative initiatives by the Commission in our European Constitution , the Treaty of Lisbon .
Our citizens have taken that on board and have already set the first initiative in motion by collecting over one million signatures .
The issue they selected is an issue which truly concerns us all , an issue on which , even without the signatures , the Commission should take an initiative .
They have raised the issue of the independence of the EFSA in the face of the interests of biotechnology companies , an issue which Commission Dalli recognised , and have requested a moratorium on crops until reliable control mechanisms can be set up to ascertain the impact of modified organisms on human health , biodiversity and food safety .
I call on the Commission to take this initiative .
( FR ) Madam President , I too would like to thank our four rapporteurs who have carried out some outstanding work and who have brought significant added value from the European Parliament to the text initially proposed by the Commission .
The citizens ' initiative that we , in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , are on the point of enthusiastically adopting is a major step forward from the Treaty of Lisbon .
Let us make no mistake , this instrument can truly change the European political landscape as long as we use it both sensibly and bravely .
It can contribute to enabling European citizens to participate directly in the European political debate .
It can contribute towards eliciting European public opinion , namely the opinion of European men and women who come together to debate , who adopt a common position and who rally together over truly European issues .
However , let us not disappoint our citizens .
Let us urge our Member States to be quick to take the application measures where needed , let us not disappoint our citizens , as the strengthening of European democracy depends on it .
( NL ) Madam President , I , too , would like to congratulate everyone , especially our citizens , and I look forward to us working together constructively .
It is indeed true that we need , in particular , to ensure we maintain a low threshold and that means allowing everyone to participate in a citizens ' initiative .
It is therefore unfortunate that young people under the age of 18 have been denied this possibility , because they are precisely the people that we so badly want to involve in politics .
It is also unfortunate that we have left it to Member States to decide whether or not to set up initiatives online .
Surely , you cannot expect us to still work with paper in this day and age when having a presence online has proved to be a very efficient tool for organising people , both politically and in terms of their interests .
What is it exactly that we expect we will be able to achieve with the citizens ' initiative ?
I do think that the Commission should be able to say , at a very early stage , whether certain proposals , such as those that have been put forward here , like the one about abolishing Parliament , will actually constitute a citizens ' initiative or not .
What can you do about that ?
Who will develop these things and when can we expect a legislative proposal ?
We politicians live in glass houses .
People are allowed to look inside and people will now also be able to drop in and participate .
I look forward to some constructive cooperation .
For those of you in the Chamber who wanted to take part in the debate under catch-the-eye , I will not be able to take any further speakers , but I would remind you that you can , under the Rules , submit a written statement that will be appended to the verbatim report of the debate , so I would urge you to do that if you wish to do so .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , first I would like to thank the honourable Members of this Parliament for their great support for this regulation .
I would also like to thank them for the very positive European energy radiating from this House during this debate .
As we saw this morning , this year is rather challenging for Europe , but I think this debate has shown that today is a very good day for European citizens and a very good day for Europe .
I would like to underline that the Commission wants this important initiative to be a success and we will treat it in a very constructive spirit .
In answer to some questions that have been raised by Members , I would like to assure them that we are going to help the organisers .
We are going to organise the contact points , and we are going to organise the helpdesk through which we will advise organisers about what is possible , what is not , what kinds of regulations are in the pipeline , what kinds of initiatives are being organised or what kinds of competing or opposite proposals we have received from other organising committees .
We will try to be as user-friendly and as citizens ' initiative-friendly as possible .
We take the concerns raised by Ms Corazza Bildt and Mr Casini very seriously .
Therefore , during the whole process we will insist on the importance of preserving the institutional balance in this regulation and preserving the exclusive right of initiative for the Commission , because the Commission is responsible to all citizens - not only to the organisers of the initiative , but also to general European interests .
This is what we have to follow up in this process as well .
In reply to Mr Groote , I would like to assure him that once the European citizens ' initiative is successful we will follow the procedure established by the regulation .
We will receive the organisers at appropriate level - Commissioner or Director-General level - then we will be present at the highest possible level at the hearings organised by the European Parliament .
Within three months we will establish very precise reasons in the communication if we want to follow up with legislative proposals , if we need to study the issue further or , should the initiative be too controversial , if we will not proceed with subsequent proposals .
I hope that this new instrument will help us to have a better European debate in Europe and more European topics in national capitals .
I hope that the ECI will be a very successful project and that we will see this when we review it for the first time .
Thank you for your support .
( Applause )
Madam President , honourable Members , let me say a few words after Commissioner Šefčovič .
As the debate has shown , this is a fascinating subject .
Some questions remain unanswered , not all fears have been dispelled .
This is a true compromise .
Let us bring the citizens ' initiative to life .
Let us judge the regulation in the long term , as this will obviously allow us to develop its mechanism .
Thank you again for your cooperation .
I wish the citizens ' initiative all the best .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank my colleagues for all of their remarks .
I am very glad that the majority among us is favourable to adding a new layer to our European democracy .
It is completely natural and just to be expected that there are fears , but if we try our hand at something completely new we cannot answer all questions and calm all fears beforehand . However , I am confident that the regulation that we present today tackles many of the challenges that we could imagine during the preparation of the regulation .
We should not be afraid of this new facet of democracy .
We shall listen more clearly to European citizens ' voices , and we should not be afraid to do so .
This is one of the long-term goals , is it not ?
We should only be afraid that the ECI is used not in the spirit of the Treaty , not for its intended purpose but abusively or not at all .
We have done our best to reduce this risk in the regulation with the help of Sylvia Kaufmann , who made the first report on the ECI in this Parliament .
I would also like to thank Maroš Šefčovič 's and Alain Lamassoure 's whole teams and our other colleagues .
I would also to thank the team working for the Hungarian Presidency of the European Union for their cooperation .
I would like to underline that the implementation of the regulation is crucially important and , to this end , I would like to offer my help and cooperation to the incoming Hungarian Presidency .
I am confident that the vote in an hour will support the compromise reached between the European institutions .
This is the only way that we can give a nice Christmas present to European citizens : a solid regulation on the European citizens ' initiative .
Let us not make them wait any longer .
Thank you very much for your attention and I would like to wish you , and all of the citizens here who bore witness to this , a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year .
rapporteur . - Madam President , at this time and hour , everything having been said , I am happy to leave you the last say in this matter , which you know as well as I do .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I wish to congratulate the authors of the report for the outcome of the vote achieved in committee .
The citizens ' initiative is of great symbolic value and offers one of the most effective ways of strengthening democracy in the EU .
Citizens must find the new instrument easy to use , accessible and credible .
I should mention that during the negotiations with the Council , Romania managed to achieve a balance between the initiative 's accessibility and stipulating provisions preventing its abuse .
I think that the latest amendments include faster ' admissibility ' for checking proposals , a lower threshold for the number of participating countries and an easier process for signing petitions .
I would like to stress how important it is to regulate this instrument throughout the whole of Europe .
We must look for a solution which will encourage the general public 's involvement .
With this in mind , communication activities and information campaigns play an important role .
The citizens ' initiative is finally to see the light of day .
This incredible democratic innovation will lay the foundations for a new European citizenship .
It will become the instrument which enables the European public to give direct expression to their concerns on subjects which may be crucial to our common future .
The scope for intervention is as important as the extended mandate of the Union .
The European Parliament is encouraging rapid , effective implementation .
This initiative was introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , and it still remained to the European institutions to come to an agreement on practical arrangements .
The conditions for organising an initiative , which Parliament wanted to be flexible ( a million people from at least a quarter of the Member States , which equates to seven countries today ) , will give citizens concerned all they need to request the Commission to propose a new legislative text .
This will become a possibility next year .
With the Treaty of Lisbon , we conferred nationality upon the residents of the EU .
The next step is for the citizens of the EU to be given the citizens ' initiative .
It is a rare moment when a legislative authority or an executive transfers some of its powers to the citizens .
This shows great maturity .
It is our response to the democracy deficit .
Our work is not based only on representative democracy - it is also based on participatory democracy .
Earlier development policy and consultations with citizens in the decision-making process have not always met the expectations of the European Union 's residents .
The citizens ' initiative , which is the result of a difficult compromise , has , firstly , ensured full transparency .
Secondly , we have simplified the whole system .
We have also brought in an innovation in the form of the option to submit statements of support online .
Today , major efforts at promoting the citizens ' initiative await us , and these will have to be undertaken by the Commission and Parliament as well as by the Member States .
We should also consider if openness to the citizens ' initiative might be threatened by demagogic or populist proposals .
I do not think this will happen .
Every initiative put forward by the citizens will of necessity involve increased responsibility on the part of the Commission and Parliament .
The Treaty of Lisbon has laid the foundation for the new European citizens ' initiative , which had so far been lacking in the European Union 's decision-making process .
I personally welcome this new opportunity , which responds to the frequent criticism that the functioning of the EU has a democratic deficit in its decision-making processes .
This new tool enables EU citizens to directly approach the Commission and request that it submit a legislative proposal to address a particular matter .
This deepens the relationship between EU citizens and EU institutions , as it eliminates this often-criticised democratic deficit in decision-making processes , and gets citizens directly involved in decision making .
In my opinion , the ECI brings European institutions closer to the citizens and it thus fulfils the principle of subsidiarity as a basic principle of the decision-making mechanisms of the European Union .
I would also like to mention that the Committee of the Regions has said that local and regional authorities have taken an interest in the ECI .
Such bodies could get involved in the process in the capacity of organisers or supporters ; after all they are closest to the citizens of the EU .
That is just one of many reasons why I support the introduction of the ECI .
in writing . - I was eager for European citizens to benefit from this powerful instrument as soon as possible , and I am delighted to see the end of the legislative procedure one year after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The citizens ' initiative is a major innovation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It provides European citizens with a new right whereby one million citizens may ask the European Commission to propose a new EU law , thus bringing Europe closer to its citizens .
The citizens ' initiative is a valuable tool by which citizens can achieve ambitious results through teamwork - this is the essence of the European project .
This initiative will ensure that the Institutions continue to work on the issues closest to their citizens ' hearts , while encouraging cross-border debate on European issues .
This is a work in progress and the Commission will present a report every three years on the implementation of the initiative .
Today 's vote on the European citizens ' initiative is a milestone for more democracy in Europe .
I welcome the compromise and I will support it , because the report produced by Mr Lamassoure and Mrs Gurmai is the first step in the right direction .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must not be afraid of citizens having more opportunities to express their will .
We must give the citizens of Europe more codecision rights , not just every five years at the European elections .
This needs courage , stamina and strength .
Courage to keep returning to the dialogue .
Stamina , because decisions cannot necessarily be made more quickly and strength because our representative democracy includes , at last , in my opinion , more participative elements .
Our goal must be to increase the dialogue in Europe between the citizens and the politicians .
I am pleased that we are moving one step closer to the Europe of the citizens today with the European citizens ' initiative .
I am convinced that one day we Europeans will take joint European decisions , in the form of citizens ' decisions .
in writing . - How to bring Europe closer to citizens and how to bring citizens closer to Europe is one of the main issues under discussion probably since the beginning of the European Community .
The Convention on the Future of Europe worked out the basis for the current Treaty of Lisbon and also laid the ground for the mechanism for the citizens ' initiative .
We now have this on our tables in concrete form , and in the very near future all citizens in the EU will have the possibility to bring issues important to them to the attention of European decision-makers .
This initiative is one of the strongest measures for uniting citizens in Europe - an initiative which requires joint action , cooperation , coordination and the will to work together for a common European goal .
Every voice in society matters , but only a united voice can make a real difference .
I call upon the Commission and the Member States to promote this initiative and to ensure that it is easily accessible for everyone .
I especially welcome the proposal for joint hearings with the Commission and Parliament .
It is highly important that the directly elected European Parliament is closely involved and follows the concerns and issues of citizens .
It is very important for citizens to have the opportunity to take initiatives in connection with the issues that have the greatest influence on their lives as soon as possible , in a pre-defined manner and within an appropriate framework .
As it is well-known , I am the head of one of the longest-standing representative groups for persons with disabilities in Hungary , the over one hundred year-old Hungarian Association for the Deaf and the Hard of Hearing .
Based on the experience I have gained during my work there , I would venture to say at this point already that the work of Mr Lamassoure and Mrs Gurmai will have tangible results in the form of citizens ' initiatives .
I note with particular regret that the ' million4disability ' initiative launched in 2007 by the community of 80 million persons with disabilities living in the European Union , which produced 1.35 million authentic signatures , remained unsuccessful .
Such an initiative would now have consequences and results , and I thank everyone for their work in this regard .
in writing . - ( FI ) The citizens ' initiative is a welcome addition to active citizenship .
Alongside the actual legal initiative , it will have an important role in provoking political debate .
The scope of the citizens ' initiative , however , is not yet cut and dried .
The European citizens ' initiative should be a way to seek amendments to the EU Treaties .
With the Treaty of Lisbon , even the Commission has the authority to make proposals regarding this .
That is why the citizens ' initiative should also have the potential for formulating initiatives .
One might see initiatives in the area of social issues , for example , justification for which could perhaps be found in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The debate on the need to amend the Treaties should therefore not end with a narrow interpretation of the citizens ' initiative : it must be more flexible and take account of the public viewpoint .
The launch of the European citizens ' initiative proves that bringing the European Union closer to its citizens , which was one of the principal objectives of the process of reviewing the Treaties resulting in the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , is more than just a simple abstract notion .
The European citizens ' initiative will make a significant contribution to making the European political system more democratic , as it establishes a direct link between Member States ' citizens and EU institutions .
Parliament 's text meets the requirements for providing citizens with a simple , easily accessible instrument and the opportunity to gather signatures online demonstrates the ability to adapt to the reality of modern societies .
The initiative will offer Europe 's political parties the chance to change from being structures bringing together national parties into organisations which mobilise the will of citizens in joint projects .
However , the impact made by the European citizens ' initiative must be measured not only on a European , but also on a national scale .
Indeed , the fact that , from now on , a minimum of 24 750 Romanian citizens will be able to join forces to propose such initiatives with other citizens from a minimum of a quarter of Member States cannot be separated from another fact , which is that , according to the Romanian Constitution , a minimum of 100 000 Romanian citizens are required to submit a legislative initiative in a strictly national context .
in writing . - ( LT ) I am delighted that barely a year since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force , an agreement has been reached on the regulation on the citizens ' initiative .
This regulation is a great achievement strengthening the principles of democracy in the European Union .
The right to initiate the legislative process that has been given to a million citizens will stimulate interest in EU policies and participation in them .
It is very important that Parliament managed to simplify the procedures for submitting and organising initiatives .
An initiative will only be successful if it is easily implemented and accessible to all .
It must be clear and understandable and citizens must be able participate in it and want to do so .
On the other hand , it is also necessary to ensure the transparency in the organisation and funding of this initiative , and the initiative must remain an expression of the citizens themselves rather than political or other groups .
I believe that the final text of the regulation on which we will vote today will help ensure this balance .
One of the objectives of the Treaty of Lisbon is to bring citizens closer to Europe , and the citizens ' initiative will help achieve that by establishing this new unique form of citizen participation in politics .
Setting the conditions for the functioning of the European citizens ' initiative was a complex process of negotiation and compromise and involved many debates in the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
The not-for-profit sector was also involved .
During the debate , certain problem areas became apparent , such as how to maintain the European dimension of the initiative , transparency , the method for collecting signatures , and other procedural issues .
However , the most important issue is the general approach to the citizens ' initiative .
If we are to make the most of this new resource , then we must not be afraid to put a stop to the open debate and actually put it into practice .
Yes , there will be populist and thorny issues , but that is why it will be so important to have the registration process for an initiative before any signatures are collected .
This process will assess whether or not proposals meet with the basic values of the European Union .
As shadow rapporteur for the Committee on Culture and Education , I welcome the compromise that has been forged , especially the reduction of the minimum number of countries needed to register an initiative to one quarter of the Member States , and the fact that the European Parliament will play an active role in the public hearing of successful initiative proposals .
Of course , I am of the opinion that elected representatives should also have the opportunity to get involved in the organisation of the initiatives .
I firmly believe that the European citizens ' initiative will , in future , become a true expression of European citizenship .
1 .
Mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument for the Lifelong Learning Programme , for the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme and for Palestine (
2 .
Draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2011 as modified by the Council ( vote )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make the following explanation on behalf of our group about Amendment 13 .
This is an amendment which my colleague Mr Färm tabled to the Committee on Budgets on behalf of our group .
We have not tabled this amendment again , but the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has retabled it with 40 signatures .
We will abstain from voting on this amendment .
However , I have come to an understanding with the Greens about this and we are of exactly the same opinion .
As we have said that we , as a group , will not table any new amendments , we are abstaining .
However , I would like to make it quite clear that we support this point , the financial transaction tax , and we hope that the Members on the other side of the House will support us on votes in the near future .
3 .
Parliament 's position on the new 2011 Draft Budget as modified by the Council (
( PL ) Mr President , I think the Members should be given a word of explanation .
We are voting on the draft presented to us by the Council , with no changes , because this draft is exactly the same as the position which the Committee on Budgets adopted last week .
It is in accord with what we negotiated during the very long negotiations , which lasted for 10 months .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank in particular the specialist rapporteurs from the European Parliament committees .
Thank you for your unceasing confidence and support . Thank you for making it possible for us to adopt the 2011 budget , today , so that it can be put into effect efficiently at the very beginning of January next year .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , honourable Members , Parliament has therefore approved the Council 's position on the 2011 draft budget without amendments .
Clearly I cannot but be pleased , on behalf of the Council , with our common agreement on the 2011 budget .
( Applause )
Please listen to this statement .
It is important .
For the first time in history , we have applied the procedure set down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Last year , we followed a simplified procedure .
This was the first time the full procedure of the Treaty of Lisbon has been followed .
Therefore , I would like to make the following statement .
The European Parliament has adopted the Council 's position of 10 December 2010 on the draft general budget which was presented by the Commission on 26 November 2010 .
The budgetary procedure has been completed in accordance with Article 314 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
In accordance with this article and point 4 ( a ) thereof , I declare that the budget for the year 2011 has been definitively adopted , and I will now sign the document officially .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to intervene under Rules 146 and 148 of our Rules of Procedure , on the subject of multilingualism and the deterioration of multilingualism within the European Parliament .
I am taking advantage of the fact that the resolution on the work programme of the European Commission , plus Amendments 19 to 28 have not , at 12.40 , been translated into French to draw your attention to the unacceptable deterioration of multilingualism in the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Thank you .
We will bear this in mind in future and pay attention to such matters .
This is something which is very important .
Award of the Sakharov Prize ( formal sitting )
Dear President-in-Office Chastel , dear High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission Lady Ashton , dear guests ,
1 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Noord Holland ICT / Netherlands (
2 .
Law applicable to divorce and legal separation (
Mr President , a couple of months ago , the European Parliament gave the Council consent for the first time to set in motion an enhanced cooperation procedure .
For the first time in the history of the European Union .
This is an extremely important step , which opens up a completely new basis for cooperation between a group of Member States of the European Union in situations in which it is not possible to achieve the consent of all 27 Member States .
This is a very important decision .
We have confirmed , today , that this procedure works well .
I would like to express my very sincere thanks to the Council in particular for the position it adopted as part of its work with the European Parliament .
It is an example of perfect interinstitutional cooperation .
During work on this resolution , Parliament featured only as a consultative body , while the frequency of meetings and the inclusion by the Council of all the proposals which were put forward by the European Parliament and voted on by the Committee on Legal Affairs - their inclusion in the final document - is a perfect example which augurs well for the enhanced cooperation procedure for the future .
I also thank the Council for its strong support for our proposal on conducting a rapid review of Brussels IIa , which is essential to find detailed solutions , for example , to questions concerning the need for a forum necessitatis rule , a matter which allows Member States to retain certainty as to the working of their internal legal systems while at the same time giving our citizens the hope that in the future they will be able to make a free choice not only of applicable law , but also of court .
I would also like to thank my shadow rapporteurs from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the rapporteurs from the committees which were asked for opinions .
3 .
Credit rating agencies (
Mr President , this is a purely technical amendment , to take into account the date that the regulation establishing the European Securities and Markets Authority will come into effect and the fact that this regulation can only come into effect at a later date .
We should consequently adapt one recital and one article of the text on which we are going to vote .
In recital 22 , we should cut the second sentence and in article two , I also suggest that we cut the second sentence .
This oral amendment has been the subject of an item of information and an agreement by the different groups that signed the compromise agreement .
This text we will be voting on today completes the regulation of rating agencies and is part of the European Union 's policy to improve the regulation of financial services .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank Commissioner Barnier and the Belgian Presidency for their very strong involvement in this issue .
4 .
Repeal of directives regarding metrology (
5 .
Citizens ' initiative (
6 .
Presentation of the Commission work programme for 2011 (
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :
( DE ) Mr President , I would like the end of this amendment to be reworded .
The wording is very negative and I would like it to read as follows :
The initiative " Youth on the Move ” underlines the importance of the above mentioned programmes .
Mr President , I just want to say that we are withdrawing Amendment 14 .
( DE ) Mr President , this is about the Union for the Mediterranean .
We know that it has currently come to a standstill and that we want to revive it .
The wording does not express this clearly enough , so we would like to insert the following text :
The current stalemate of the Union for the Mediterranean .
( DE ) I know that there is a contradiction here .
Perhaps another wording would be possible , but the wording we are proposing is :
The current stalemate of the Union for the Mediterranean .
7 .
Future of the Africa / EU strategic partnership on the eve of 3rd Africa / EU summit (
- Before the vote on paragraph 8 :
( DE ) Mr President , this is only about the correct name , about what is being referred to .
It should say in the text : Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative .
That was what was wrong in the text .
( DE ) Mr President , could you tell us the name of the person in the secretariat who is responsible for the seating plan and whether he or she happens to be in the Chamber ?
I am informed that the seating is done by the political groups in the plenary .
8 .
Fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2009 ) - Effective implementation after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon (
9 .
Impact of advertising on consumer behaviour (
10 .
Energy Efficiency Action Plan (
Voting time ( continuation )

Mr President , while I send my best wishes to Mr Fariñas and congratulate him on his prize , I would remind Parliament that one year ago we had representatives from Memorial here , who richly deserved the prize also .
Since then , two of them have been arrested and yet Russia has been awarded a prestigious football tournament - the World Cup - in 2018 , over and above five EU countries .
Why did the European Parliament not voice its concern ?
If this prize is to mean anything , you need to stand up against these human rights abuses .
Explanations of vote
Dear colleagues , we have a lot of explanations of votes so we will have to be extremely strict with the time .
I will cut everyone off after one minute .
I apologise for this but that is the way it is going to be .
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I want to explain why I voted against the 2011 budget .
I voted against it because , in a time of austerity , the EU should show restraint .
We should be cutting our expenditure , not increasing it .
In my view it was shameful that the Commission initially proposed a 6 % increase and Parliament supported that .
I believe that my Prime Minister , David Cameron , did a good job in forcing the level of increase down to 2.9 % but we know that this was a compromise .
It is not a compromise that British Conservatives are particularly pleased with and I was proud to vote against EU extravagance .
( FI ) Mr President , it is significant that Parliament for the first time had a chance to approve the budget .
In subsequent budgetary policy I think that Parliament should ensure that the priorities are that the EU is able to increase its own contribution , that the budget supports material efficiency and policy on climate change through its own choice of policies , and that in this way the Europe 2020 Strategy and a greener economy are achieved .

Mr President , like my colleague Mr Fox , I too share the concern , as many British Conservatives did .
At a time of austerity , when governments across the European Union - and in fact governments across the world - are looking to tighten their belt and to rein in spending , how dare we ask for an increase in taxpayers ' money ?
Surely it is a time to tighten our belts and to set an example .
We should not have been asking for an increase , we should not even have been asking for a freeze , we should have been asking for a cut in the EU budget so that taxpayers across the European Union can take their politicians seriously and know that we understand the pain that they are feeling at this time and that we share the pain with them , rather than looking like an elected elite who pay no attention to the people who put us there .
( DE ) Mr President , the right to draw up a budget is the central right of a parliament .
This also applies to the European Parliament .
Responsibility , trust and partnership are the three key aspects of the cooperation between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
The consultation process on the 2011 budget was not a confidence-building measure in this respect .
I call on the Commission and , in particular , the Council to respect the rights of the European Parliament , because , as I have already said , the right to draw up the budget is the central right of the European Parliament .
Mr President , yesterday I wondered whether I had fallen through a kink in the space-time continuum and ended up in the 1970s .
Today I am wondering whether it is the 1770s .
Let me quote an observation that Thomas Jefferson made about remote government .
He said that ' at such distance and from under the eye of their constituents ' , governors must of necessity tend to ' corruption , plunder and waste ' .
What a perfect description of what happens in the EU budget , with its unapproved accounts , the misallocation of resources , and these constantly rising figures , despite the attempts of the 27 Member States to rein in their spending .
It is what happens when you have no link between taxation , representation and expenditure , when the EU expects bouquets for spending money but not brickbats for raising it .
The only way in which we will be able to bring these figures back in line with public opinion is when we restore budgetary responsibility to national parliaments and to national parliamentarians who have to justify themselves to their constituents , who are also their taxpayers .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are in favour of the measure and thank the rapporteur , who was very precise .
We nevertheless believe that this work should force the European institutions to continue to monitor future developments in this new discipline , because in the past unclear situations have unfortunately arisen all too often , which have had a negative impact on the financial system , to the detriment of businesses and savers .
We consider it very important to have a new European system for agencies and to supervise all central banking authorities in order to ensure that ratings respond effectively to the modern financial system and are useful to the public . I therefore thank the rapporteur .
( DE ) Mr President , the question is : Who monitors the monitoring authorities ?
Even football referees have to undergo a monitoring or an approval process .
If this applies to football , then it must surely apply to the financial markets .
Here the process of evaluating the creditworthiness and soundness of financial products , of banks and even of whole countries has been left to the credit rating agencies .
However , when these agencies become a monopoly and manage to avoid any form of supervision , then they take on a godlike status and we find them being worshipped .
We must not allow this to happen .
It says in the Bible : ' Thou shalt have no other gods before me . '
This report is attempting to put the situation right , by introducing supervision of the credit rating agencies .
At the appropriate time , Parliament should ask itself whether these measures really have been successful .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's vote on the 2011 budget confirms the closing of a new procedure , which , however painful it may have been , showed the responsible and steadfast attitude of the budgetary authorities .
Although it is a compromise solution involving sacrifices by both Parliament and the Council , it has prevented the introduction of a system of twelfths that would have had serious consequences for the funding of European Union programmes .
Parliament is satisfied with the goals we have achieved .
However , it points the finger of blame at those who caused the failure of the agreement on the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor programme and on flexibility .
The Union has in fact lost credibility with its international partners and risks not being able to fund its commitments and not being able to fill the new spheres of action deriving from the Treaty of Lisbon .
Starting from January 2011 , we must therefore set priorities and make them financially sustainable for the years to come .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the need to modernise measuring systems while improving regulation prompted us to repeal European directives on metrology .
I too am convinced that this is the first step to starting radical and more precise reform in this area .
There is also no doubt that we need to agree on a sufficient timeframe to allow Member States to assess the effects of repealing these regulations on their own laws and to make any necessary adjustments .
Lastly , the decision to repeal the various directives responds perfectly to the need for greater simplification , which is particularly keenly felt in all sectors ..
We hope , however , that the cure does not turn out to be worse than the disease .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon has introduced a key innovation in the democratic functioning of the European Union by providing this new practical tool for civil participation in European debate and integration .
In fact , the European citizens ' initiative introduces a new concept of international democracy and gives the European Union a new form of participatory democracy .
All our citizens can apply directly to the European Commission to submit a legislative proposal .
We welcome the proposal from the Commission , since the involvement of civil society and the formulation of policies in decision making strengthen the democratic legitimacy of our institutions and bring the European Union closer to its citizens .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to express my satisfaction at the approval of the European citizens ' initiative , for which I was the shadow rapporteur for the Committee on Culture and Education , while complaining that Parliament has failed to vote on two issues that I consider fundamental : the rights of young people over the age of 16 to sign this initiative and votes for residents .
We know that these initiatives are not covered by the Treaty of Lisbon and these are some of the reasons why we are opposed to this treaty .
( DA ) Mr President , the Danish Liberal Party has today voted in favour of the citizens ' initiative , because it encourages participation by citizens and will make the EU much more accessible .
Parliament has succeeded in listing a few standardised conditions to make the citizens ' initiative accessible irrespective of the Member State in question and to ensure that the instrument remains easy to use .
However , as a minimum , citizens must come from quarter of the Member States - the number of citizens from each Member State must be at least equal to the number of Members of the European Parliament from that Member State multiplied by a factor of 750 , and citizens must be old enough to vote in parliamentary elections .
We believe that these conditions are important in order to ensure that the citizens ' initiative also attains the validity that is required for it to be perceived as a serious contribution to the development of democracy .
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to say a few words about the citizens ' initiative .
It is true that the Treaty of Lisbon meant that we availed ourselves of a new initiative which encourages our citizens to participate in democracy .
When a million citizens sign a petition , the Commission agrees to deal with it , but is that all there is to it ?
In my opinion this is an excellent initiative , but we have to consider how it can be taken forward .
The premise is that our citizens would participate in the democratic process mainly by voting in the elections .
That would be a way for us to take forward matters which are important to people .
Consequently , this new initiative will obviously perhaps give a boost to citizen involvement , though , on the other hand , I myself see how it could result in a situation where the Commission only replies to initiatives , with nothing concrete emerging .
That being the case , we need to rethink how we might genuinely encourage people to take part in political decision making .
( DA ) Mr President , just to add to what has already been said in respect of the support of the Danish Liberal Party , I would like to say that , as already mentioned , this is an extremely important initiative .
It is also an experiment , which - and this is what I am calling for - we must monitor very closely and ensure that the three-year period that has now been laid down for this initiative is actually followed up , and we must consider whether it is actually a proper citizens ' initiative or - if I may put it this way - whether it is being used with other interests at heart .
It is important for its success - the success that we all hope this initiative will experience - that it is , quite simply , the citizens who take the initiative .
In this regard , I would also like to say that I personally hope there will be some forward-looking , constructive and positive issues that citizens wish to raise concerning the EU project , so that it does not continually turn out to be the ' no ' camp that always monopolises the use of this sort of initiative .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have been following the legislative procedure for the European citizens ' initiative very closely and I am happy - partly on the basis of the statements by the Council and the Commission - that the first petitions will be launched a year from now .
I am also proud to be able to announce to the European Parliament that in Italy a broad grassroots movement of citizens , associations and committees has sprung up in the wake of the approval of the outrageous directive on animal research .
This movement will not sit on its hands this year , but will work to prepare a proposal for the Commission : a proposal to give the European Union modern and civilised laws and that says ' no ' to animal testing - a cruel and scientifically ineffective practice - while strongly encouraging alternative methods .
Saying ' no ' to vivisection must be an objective of the European Union , since it is a desire of its citizens .
Mr President , I believe that the citizens ' initiative could be useful because it will allow citizens to speak directly to the Commission , but the question remains as to how the Commission will react to proposals it does not like .
I think we can expect a whole host of initiatives asking the Commission to do more , asking for there to be more Europe , and no doubt the Commission will respond enthusiastically to that request .
How will it react , however , to proposals for less Europe , or perhaps for Europe to do things better , or to waste less money , or perhaps a declaration that there would never be any European taxation ?
I wait to see with interest how the Commission reacts to those proposals .
Will it treat those proposals with respect ?
If it only responds to the proposals it likes , then this initiative will be redundant .
( GA ) Mr President , I was happy to vote for these proposals , and I think that the two rapporteurs have done a very good job , not only for the European Union but for our citizens in general .
The citizens ' initiative was a very important part of the Treaty of Lisbon being passed in Ireland a little over a year ago , but it did seem for a while that the whole process would be stymied by complication and regulation .
Thanks to the work of the rapporteurs , simplification has been brought to the process and particularly welcome is the idea that a seven-member panel from seven different countries would initiate the process .
I think this and other measures will ensure that genuine citizens ' concerns can be brought forward while hopefully stopping those of vested interests .
( GA ) I would like to end , therefore , with a proverb from my own language that says that a good start is half the work .
A good start has been made here .
Mr President , this is really a sham of democracy , is it not ?
It is such a shame that you did not actually want to hear the people of Europe before you implemented the Treaty of Lisbon which has brought in this citizens ' initiative .
To answer Mr Fox a few moments ago : after the first phase of this , the Commission could decide that it is not a worthwhile exercise .
That is the problem with this , because it has no binding mandate .
It can just be disregarded by the Commission .
Once again we see the European Union not taking into account the wishes of the people of Europe .
For Christ 's sake , please listen to the people because they do not want this .
Mr President , I welcome and voted for the Commission work programme for 2011 .
The financial crisis is the big challenge , and it has to be met head on .
I wish the Commission well in terms of the goals that it has set out .
As regards the euro , it is absolutely crucial , from the point of view of the integrity and the cohesion of the Union , and from the point of view of solidarity within the European Union , that we have the common currency and that we do everything possible to protect it .
As regards jobs and the economy , I welcome the fact that in January 2011 the Commission will adopt its first annual growth survey .
That annual growth survey will analyse the economic situation of the Union , including potential imbalances and systemic risk .
This is essential to Europe 's transformation into a smart and sustainable economy .
Last , but by no means least , we are a Community of 500 million people .
We have got to punch above our weight on the European stage and the world stage internationally .
I wish the Commission well in the year ahead .
( NL ) I have voted against this motion for numerous reasons , but the most peculiar paragraph is the one which states that , according to this Parliament , Member States should be required to spend 0.7 % of their gross national income on development aid and that the Commission should ensure compliance with that obligation .
Apart from the question as to whether or not development aid makes any sense , this also constitutes a serious breach of the principle of subsidiarity .
Another peculiar thing is paragraph 52 where the Commission is being urged to take advantage of the momentum , as it were , for the enlargement process .
Can somebody tell me which momentum ?
Are you talking there about Turkey 's constant provocations or the massive human rights violations in that country , not to mention the ever-increasing islamisation ?
( NL ) There are certainly a couple of good things in this resolution , such as the condemnation of President Mugabe , who is a criminal , participating in the Lisbon Summit , and the reference to the harmful consequences of brain drain from the African continent .
The resolution also rightly emphasises the crucial role of the development of agricultural capacity .
On the other hand , we really have to get rid of that absurd 0.7 % standard .
The USD 1 billion of development aid that has flown to Africa for 60 years has served only to plunge this continent further into misery .
Instead of granting ever more aid , we need to put our energy into combating illicit capital flight , amongst other things , which is something that this resolution has highlighted anyway .
Neither was I impressed in any way by the paragraph on migration , which is why I ultimately voted against .
Mr President , when we look at the poor state that we see many African nations in , of course we in the EU and in the different Member States of the EU all want to help them out of poverty , but I think we should be more sensible about our use of aid .
When there is a disaster it is absolutely right that aid plays a vital role in the short term but when we are looking at long-term development sometimes our aid is misallocated .
Surely it is not right for our taxpayers in different Member States of the EU to be sending money to governments in Africa who are not governing their country in a decent way and that money does not flow down to those who really need it .
The best way to help development is to help the entrepreneurs in poorer countries who can create wealth in their own communities and take their own friends and neighbours out of poverty .
Let us open up our markets , let us aim our aid at encouraging trade and development rather than just aid money .
Mr President , along with a number of Members of this House I recently attended the ACP Summit in Kinshasa , officially the second worst country in the world .
The UN runs an index of happiness and it places the Democratic Republic of the Congo above only Zimbabwe .
But , of course , the Congolese , unlike the Zimbabweans , cannot tell themselves that things would improve if only there were a change of government : they have had their multi-party elections , their internationally approved constitution , and so on .
The Democratic Republic of the Congo exaggerates and concentrates the tragedy of Africa .
You can , I think , blame the colonial experience there with somewhat more force than in neighbouring countries , without wanting to rehearse the whole tragedy of the Congo Free State .
There is , of course , the curse of natural resources , which breaks the link between taxation and expenditure , and makes politics a scramble for honour and wealth .
But , above all , there is the heterogeneity , the lack of national feeling , the lack of linguistic or ethnic unity of purpose .
' If you love your country , pay your taxes ' said a plaintive sign in Kinshasa .
Of course nobody does .
You can , I am sure , guess why I am mentioning this .
The President of the European Council said that patriotism leads to war .
Well I would love to bring him to a place where there is no patriotism whatsoever , and see what it leads to .
( HU ) Mr President , we all know that as a result of the financial crisis , the state pillar of the pension system , which offers a greater degree of security , is becoming increasingly attractive in several European countries .
Many countries are reviewing their own systems , and are making efforts to reinforce the state pension system .
Although the pension system is a matter that essentially falls within the scope of national competence , the direction that debates take on these issues in Europe is still important .
I therefore welcome the fact that point 30 of the Decision on the Commission work programme , which was adopted now with the support of the three largest popular , social and liberal groups within the European Parliament , highlights that the first , that is to say , the state pillar of the pension system needs to be strengthened .
My home country , Hungary , took an important step in this appropriate direction with the act adopted yesterday .
The pension debate within the EU , concerning the white , and subsequently the green papers , must continue in this spirit , this is what the European Parliament is calling on the Commission to do , and I am therefore very pleased with this proposal .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the new institutional framework introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon stresses that the effective protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms underpin democracy and the rule of law in the European Union .
I supported this report because I am certain of the need for a new internal human rights policy for the Union that is effective and comprehensive , and which ensures effective accountability mechanisms , both at national and EU level , to address the numerous violations we see every day .
We wish to stress that the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has radically changed the face of European Union law .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights now has the same legal force as the Treaties and represents the most modern codification of fundamental rights , offering a good balance between rights and solidarity , and encompassing civil , political , economic , social and cultural rights as well as third-generation rights .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I decided to vote in favour of this report not merely because this was a decision taken by my political group , but also because I am absolutely convinced that this report is of great importance in institutional terms and is necessary at a time when Parliament 's powers are defined but taking time to organise .
We clearly wished to make our first approval of the budget under the terms of the Treaty of Lisbon a significant event .
It was therefore necessary for all of us to establish a common position ; hence the rapporteur 's efforts to find compromise amendments to prevent the decisions that will only mean it takes longer to come to a definitive line on the application of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I therefore thank Mrs Gál for her work and hope that this report will lead to a collective improvement in the activities of European institutions .
( FI ) Mr President , firstly I want to congratulate Mrs Gál on this excellent report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union .
This , however , is just a report .
We have to remember that we still have much to do within the European Union .
Unfortunately , not everyone 's fundamental rights are being implemented in practice , even if in theory people say that they are .
We have an example in the huge Roma minority , whose fundamental rights are not being implemented in all respects .
We also have problems with freedom of opinion .
It is for the sake of freedom of opinion that we awarded the Sakharov Prize to a Cuban dissident , but we also still have problems within Europe .
Not everywhere can people speak freely or make known their opinion .
We have a concrete example of that in one of fellow Members here in the European Parliament , who goes around surrounded by security guards because he has to fear for his own safety .
We must stand up for fundamental rights in Europe and fight to ensure that everyone has freedom of expression in the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is well known that the activities of the Italian Government represent a constant violation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We only need to think of the agreement between Italy and Libya , which succeeded in infringing dozens of articles of the Charter , or the proposed ' bavaglio ' law that set out to gag the press and the legal system .
We are talking about a government supported by a parliament elected in an undemocratic manner , without allowing citizens the chance to express a preference , a government that yesterday won a vote of confidence with votes from the opposition benches from Members of Parliament who publicly admitted that they had been approached with promises of standing at future elections and cash for votes .
( The speaker was interrupted by a heckler )
The facts prove that corruption has taken place .
This is business as usual for the corruptor Mr Berlusconi , as the final judgments handed down in the Mondadori and Mills cases reveal .
( Do not tell me the European Parliament is letting fishwives in now ? )
On 9 December , the European Parliament celebrated International Anti-Corruption Day .
Yesterday , the Italian Parliament launched its first day in favour of legalising the corruption of MPs .
Ms Ronzulli , sit down and stop talking please .
This is not appropriate in the Chamber of the European Parliament .
You do not have the floor and you may not disrupt other speakers in this way .
Please respect this .
Ms Alfano , please continue .
I shall give you another 30 seconds .
( IT ) Mr President , on 9 December , the European Parliament celebrated International Anti-Corruption Day .
Yesterday , the Italian Parliament launched its first day in favour of legalising the corruption of Members of Parliament .
Ms Ronzulli , this is the last time I am going to say this to you .
If you stand up again and interrupt the sitting , I will ask you to leave the Chamber .
Is that clear enough ?
Do not do it again .
( FI ) Mr President , with the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon one of the most crucial new areas for our citizens ' wellbeing is the Charter of Fundamental Rights , now binding on us all .
The next step is for the different EU institutions to focus on the monitoring and promotion of fundamental rights in all the Union 's policy areas and in all Member States , in a way that is binding and effective as possible .
To achieve this , it is important that individuals as well as the different institutions work to ensure that the Directive on equal treatment , which at present has run aground in the Council , is taken forward and that , as a result , we acquire the legally binding means to intervene in cases of discrimination in Member States .
May I also say that it is especially important to intervene in cases of tacit , as well as blatant , discrimination .
Tacit discrimination affects older people , for example .
( NL ) Mr President , I have , obviously , voted against this politically correct report .
As a Flemish nationalist , I find it totally unacceptable that this Parliament should automatically equate nationalism with xenophobia and discrimination .
The proposal to complement infringement procedures against Member States with a procedure that will block certain policy measures , until such time as the Commission decides whether or not to initiate formal infringement proceedings , is downright dangerous .
This boils down to nothing short of keeping tabs on Member States and this situation is unacceptable .
In the future , the European Commission will be able to block an effective deportation policy and , in so doing , it will far overstep its authority .
Implementation and exercise of these tasks should be left to individual Member States , not to the European Commission .
Mr President , in an appendix to 1984 , George Orwell wrote a chapter on ' newspeak ' and he talked about how language could be vitiated and changed , and thereby change our thought .
The example he gave was the word ' free ' .
He could only envisage the word ' free ' being used in newspeak to mean this dog is free from lice , this field is free from weeds ; so the concept of intellectual or political freedom disappeared , because there were no words to express it .
It was an uncannily prescient example , because that is more or less what has happened to the word free in our lifetime .
It used to mean a freedom against state coercion : freedom of speech , freedom of assembly , freedom of worship ; it now means an entitlement .
I have a freedom to work ; I have a freedom to use the national healthcare system or whatever .
This report on human rights has moved from the concept of rights as a guarantee of personal liberty to a right as a claim on everybody else .
Instead of guaranteeing our rights to be treated equally , it asserts our rights to be treated differently .
There is not a crisis of human rights in Europe , there is crisis of democracy ; and we do not tackle that crisis by shifting power from elected representatives to unelected jurists .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I apologise for what happened earlier , but as an Italian I cannot stand a certain type of attitude .
I am fed up because Mrs Alfano continues to use up minutes of the explanations of vote to tell lies and distort what is really happening in Italy .
A vote of confidence took place yesterday in the Italian Parliament on a uninominal basis and under absolutely democratic conditions .
I therefore waive my explanation of vote , declaring that I voted in favour of the report by Mr Juvin .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too am convinced of the important role that advertising can play in stimulating competition and competitiveness between businesses to increase the choice offered to consumers .
Europe must nevertheless succeed in applying tougher regulations to a sector that otherwise risks becoming increasingly invasive , particularly as a result of the use of new technologies It is in fact increasingly common for consumers to provide sensitive data without being aware of the results that may be derived from them .
This is why I welcome the report by Mr Juvin , particularly because of its focus on the most vulnerable individuals , such as children , who are not capable of independently assessing commercial offers presented through increasingly aggressive advertising .
( FI ) Mr President , advertising is often a useful source of information for consumers and helps them to make sensible choices .
The industry has also engaged in excellent self-monitoring procedures as regards codes of ethics , which determine what kind of advertising is permissible and good .
In recent years , however , this practice has fallen by the wayside , as we can see , for example , in how children are used as well as in advertising targeted at children .
It is for that reason that I believe that Parliament should intervene in this matter , and at a later stage use this excellent report as a basis for examining whether the directive needs to be revised and made more stringent .
Mr President , advertising is a crucial part of a well-functioning internal market to foster competition and give choice to consumers .
I voted in favour of the report on advertising .
It does not propose new legislation or regular advertising nor does it control or limit the Internet .
The report contributes to raising awareness on the need for responsible advertising to combat unfair commercial practices in advertising and to respect consumers ' personal data and privacy .
I call on the business community to take their share of responsibility with self-regulation , with voluntary actions to avoid misleading , hidden and intrusive advertising .
I especially appeal for children to be freed from advertising .
Stop using Batman , Spiderman and Bamse against our children .
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome the Bendtsen report , and I voted for it .
We must emphasise energy conservation as a way of reducing energy demand and therefore of achieving energy efficiency throughout the European Union .
We frequently discuss the renewable energy sources , but it is very easy to forget our electricity consumption .
I voted for this report because it is extremely important .
I want to congratulate the rapporteur .
Mr President , we have some interesting aggression from our Italian colleague up here .
Last week a lot of people travelled a long way to Cancún , but they did not move far in the fight against climate change .
With today 's votes on energy efficiency , we actually took a step forward .
As this report rightly points out , energy efficiency is the most cost-effective and fastest way to reduce CO2 emissions .
Yet the measures being undertaken in the Member States are far from enough .
On the basis of our current efforts , we will only make it half way to 20 % by 2020 .
That is why we need the binding target on energy efficiency .
This report contains many of the solutions .
Now they need to be implemented .
I would like to thank Mr Bendtsen and congratulate him on his excellent work on this report .

( LT ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mr Bendtsen on this very important report on Revision of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan .
I voted in favour of it because I believe that it is important not just due to economic considerations , but also in light of the Cancún conference .
We did succeed in reaching some common ground there , and thus the most important thing is to continue the work the European Union had begun at home to reduce CO2 emissions .
Energy efficiency is one of the most appropriate routes .
The Member States must have effective national action plans in this area , including financial mechanisms .
There needs to be agreement between the Member States and the European Commission on specific assistance .
All Europeans would benefit from decisions like today 's , because we are talking about many independent areas - transport , new technologies and the efficiency of buildings , manufacturing and transfer infrastructure .
This document is a collection of measures , aimed not just at protecting the environment , but also assisting national economies .
( FI ) Mr President , I also voted for this report on energy efficiency by Mr Bendtsen .
In the European Union the Europe 2000 programme has also committed us to energy efficiency , energy savings and the use of renewable energy sources .
We have to remember , however , that when we set these sorts of targets for ourselves , everyone has to commit to them .
This has been a problem across Europe : there have been good targets , but Member States have not been committed to them .
Of course , it is to be hoped that when we talk about the efficient use of energy it will not just be confined to Europe but will apply more widely .
Obviously , there is no case where energy efficiency and savings can be allowed to be an obstacle to competitiveness : we must also ensure that we can compete in global markets , thereby ensuring prosperity and competitiveness in Europe .
As I said , it is important to adhere to the commitments that we have made .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the European Union cannot back down from the energy challenge that will decide the fate of the planet .
We must dispel the myth that the economic development of a country is closely tied to an increase in energy consumption .
Europe must pioneer a new sustainable economic model , based on lower use of resources , including energy , with greater productivity .
We must therefore break the link between economic growth and an increase in energy sold to industries and the public and instead link it to an increase in energy services that create employment and energy efficiency .
For these reasons , I believe that energy efficiency represents a priority for the future of the EU , in both economic and environmental terms , and I hope that the Commission will immediately take the necessary measures to implement the binding objectives that Parliament established today .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted for a more binding and ambitious policy in this Energy Efficiency Action Plan , and I am very pleased with Parliament 's final position in this matter .
Climate change will not primarily be prevented just by having international commitments or declarations : we need a practical solution for achieving the emission reduction targets .
Improved energy efficiency is a very crucial major project in this endeavour .
For us to be able to achieve it , we need a very broad and comprehensive policy on improved energy efficiency , one which is binding and , if necessary , financially motivated , and which includes sanctions .
This Action Plan is a good step in that direction .
Mr Silvestris , are you applauding me or are you asking for a point of order during the explanations of votes ?
That is a remarkable thing to do , but go ahead .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you can see I am applauding , while also taking the opportunity to make a point of order .
Mr President , do you also intend to take steps against Members who are in a fortunate enough position to use the time available to them to offend the governments of their country ?
In your presence , a fellow Member has just offended the Italian Government , which yesterday obtained a vote of confidence from the Italian Parliament and also enjoys the confidence of the Italian public .
The Member in question may not like this , but it is her own problem and she can sort it out with her friends .
This Member took advantage of her time here to insult the government of her country , which is also my country , instead of explaining her vote .
Mr President , I would like to ask you if you intend to tolerate these things despite the Rules of Procedure , because if this is the case I will attend all the explanations of vote in the future to speak in favour of the government that leads Italy legitimately , with the consensus of the country and its Parliament .
I hope that you appreciate the fact that I allowed you to speak , although what you raised was not really a point of order .
My job is not to monitor what Members decide to say .
My job is to ensure that they say it when they have the time to say it , as opposed to interrupting each other and doing so , I might add , in a rather rude and loud way .
So thank you for your comment .
I will insist , when I chair at least , that Members conduct themselves in a civil way with each other , and I will try to keep the time as best I can .
What Members say in the room , in a democratic room such as this , is their business , not mine .
( GA ) Mr President , I have a few points to make on this topic .
I think in the fight against climate change , nearly all the emphasis up until now has been put on renewable energy which is obviously very important .
But so much more could be done in the area of energy efficiency and that is why I welcome this report .
In the area of buildings , so much more could be done , particularly in relation to this building itself , the buildings in Brussels and many more public buildings .
It is very important that we should make them more energy efficient .
The same applies to so many modes of transport .
So many huge diesel-guzzling engines .
The manufacturers should be compelled to make them more energy efficient .
One group I want to commend though .
In my own country the schools do fantastic work in the area of the green flag .
That should be recognised and encouraged because through them they are getting to the children and to their parents and creating a positive attitude .
Written explanations of vote
European Union budgetary practice meets a certain number of principles including that of specialisation .
This means that a sum allocated to a particular policy can only be used for that policy .
This principle , along with others , safeguards the good financial management of the Union .
However , it also gives rise to a degree of inflexibility in the budget .
The annual budget and even more so the multiannual financial framework cannot predict all the expenses that the Union will face .
That is why , for some years now , there has been a ' Flexibility Instrument ' . This consists of a financial reserve , the amount of which is included in the budget each year .
It enables the financing of policies and projects , the cost of which it had not been possible to anticipate .
My colleague Mr Böge 's report recommends that this instrument be used to finance the Lifelong Learning Programme , the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme and aid to Palestine .
As these are three areas where I believe in the Union 's positive action , I did not hesitate to vote for this text .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agree with the European Parliament 's decision to allocate additional financial assistance to implement the Lifelong Learning Programme and the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme in 2011 .
The objective provided for in the Lisbon Strategy of turning the European Union into a globally competitive and knowledge-based economy , based on sustainable economic development and new jobs , striving for better social cohesion , could be achieved by implementing these programmes .
In order to increase the global competitiveness of the European Union , particular attention should be paid to small and medium-sized enterprises , providing them with the required assistance and financial support .
Furthermore , investments in green innovations and the development of scientific research would stimulate the use of renewable sources of energy , which would facilitate the creation of new sustainable jobs in various sectors , including energy , manufacturing and transport .
in writing . - The Böge report on the use of the Flexibility Instrument can 't count on my support .
The European Commission 's proposal lacks an appropriate justification as regards the question of why this additional funding is necessary .
Besides , I am in general very critical of the use of the Flexibility Instrument .
It is desirable to decrease other budget lines to enable the financing of budget lines for which justified additional funding needs emerge .
The Flexibility Instrument provides for the possibility of funding specifically identified expenditure that cannot be funded within the maximum limits available under one or more headings of the multiannual financial framework .
Thus , its use within the 2011 budget is linked to the need for funding the " Lifelong Learning ” and " Competitiveness and Innovation ” programmes - within the framework of the EU 2020 Strategy - as well as funding financial assistance to Palestine , the peace process and United Nations Relief and Works Agency ( UNRWA ) .
Because of the importance of these programmes , I intend to vote in favour of the proposal .
Parliament must undoubtedly have a positive view of the report by Mr Böge on the mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument for the Lifelong Learning Programme , the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme , and Palestine .
I agree with the need and consequent allocation of additional expenditure , beyond the ceilings of headings 1 and 4 .
Considering the current economic situation , these expenses are vital from various viewpoints , for combating the crisis and also for our international credibility .
It is unacceptable that the financing of aid to Palestine , European education and training programmes and programmes to benefit competitiveness and free competition should be included in a single text .
The malicious intent is clear to see .
This combination forces me to abstain .
I reiterate my full support to the cause of the Palestinian people .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of this report in order to guarantee the mobilisation of EU funds for a total of around EUR 70 million in commitment and payment appropriations from the European Union Solidarity Fund for the natural disasters in Portugal , which applied for funds in relation to a disaster caused by landslides and floods on the island of Madeira , and also for France , which made an application as following a disaster caused by storm Xynthia .
I feel that we need to show our support for those Member States so that they can tackle and minimise the consequences of those natural phenomena .
The EU Solidarity Fund was created in order to demonstrate the European Union 's solidarity with the populations of regions devastated by disasters .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that it asks for funds to be mobilised for that purpose and that it therefore aims to make correct use of the mechanism available .
in writing . - ( DE ) The amounts referred to in this report are totally unrealistic .
Apart from the fact that the current financial framework would need to be sufficient to cover these objectives , if there were to be an increase , significantly smaller amounts have been planned .
Adapting the financial framework to the proposals in the report would not increase the flexibility of the Union , but would restrict it .
It is for this reason that I have voted against this report .
I would like , most of all , to express my satisfaction at the fact that the European Parliament and the Council have reached agreement on financing the Lifelong Learning Programme and the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme .
I would like to draw particular attention to the Lifelong Learning Programme .
It consists of four sectoral programmes .
Of particular significance , in my opinion , is the Erasmus programme , which facilitates student exchanges on a massive scale .
This is extremely important , both in the area of acquiring new knowledge and skills as well as in making new acquaintances and encountering the cultures of the Member States .
A similar role - in relation to young people of school age - is played by the Comenius programme .
These programmes are not only beneficial to the European economy , but they ensure the creation of a European consciousness based on a supranational network of acquaintances .
These programmes should have a high priority irrespective of the budgetary situation , for they are an investment which will profit the European Union in many areas - not only in the economy , but also in culture and politics .
The decision on assistance for Palestine is significant for other reasons , but I consider it , too , to be justified .
The European Commission has tabled a proposal to mobilise the Flexibility Instrument as part of the new budget ' manoeuvre ' for 2011 , after the failure of conciliation .
I voted in favour , above all because the increase affects two programmes , namely the Lifelong Learning and the Competitiveness and Innovation Programmes ( CIP ) , that deserve the greatest support and the most resources from the European Union .
The Flexibility Instrument is provided for by the Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline .
Following agreement between both arms of the Budgetary Authority ( the European Parliament and the Council ) , it allows financing beyond the ceilings set in the financial perspectives of needs not foreseeable at the time the multiannual financial framework was set , for an annual maximum amount of EUR 200 million .
This is an important result for the European Parliament , because it marks a success in the dialogue with Council over the budget .
in writing . - ( PT ) I would like to applaud the agreement reached during the conciliation , in relation to the use of the Flexibility Instrument to fund , in particular , the Lifelong Learning Programme .
I believe it to be vital for the European Union to invest in the development of quality education and training and the encouragement of high levels of achievement .
Only stringency and quality teaching can make Europe more competitive .
in writing . - The Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 allows for mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument to allow the financing of clearly identified expenditure which could not be financed within the limits of the ceilings available for one or more headings of the multiannual financial framework .
For the 2011 budget , additional expenditure is required above and beyond the ceilings of headings 1a and 4 .
It is therefore proposed to mobilise the Flexibility Instrument in accordance with point 27 of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
The amounts to be mobilised are as follows : EUR 18 million for the Lifelong Learning Programme under heading 1a ; EUR 16 million for the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme under heading 1a ; EUR 71 million for Palestine under heading 4 .
The two arms of the budgetary authority are reminded that publication of the decision on the above in the Official Journal of the European Union shall not take place later than publication of the 2011 budget .
in writing . - ( PT ) The community budget for 2011 represents EUR 141.8 billion on expenditure for authorisations and EUR 126.5 billion on expenditure for payments .
Parliament 's priorities for this budget may be considered to be the affirmation and strengthening of funding for education and innovation .
Thus , under the heading 1a - Competitiveness for growth and employment , there is an increase of EUR 18 million for the Lifelong Learning Programme , and under the heading 3b - Citizenship , there are EUR 3 million more for the youth in action programme .
I am pleased about the commitment by the next four presidencies of the EU ( the governments of Hungary , Poland , Denmark and Cyprus ) towards involving the European Parliament in future conversations and negotiations relating to the next multi-annual financial framework ( MFF ) .
I applaud the commitment by the European Commission to present a formal proposal towards the end of June 2011 , ensuring that the proposals relating to its own resources are discussed at the same time as the MFF .
The involvement of the European Parliament in these matters is also provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon ( Articles 312 , No 5 , 324 and 311 ) .
I hope that the need for unanimity within the Council for the adoption of the next multi-annual financial framework and for the new own resources does not translate into blocking .
An agreement has been reached between the Council and the European Parliament on the budget for 2011 .
I voted for adoption of the budget in view of its underlying political and institutional principles which propose , among other things , strengthening of the role of the European Parliament in negotiations on the new Financial Framework after 2013 and participation in the debate on new sources of income , which includes the Euro tax .
An additional asset of the budget is its greater flexibility in unforeseen circumstances .
We have avoided the danger of operating on the basis of a provisional budget , which would to a significant degree paralyse the working of the Union .
Such a state of affairs would be particularly detrimental at a time when there is a need to fight intensely against the economic crisis and to put the Treaty of Lisbon into effect .
Much credit for this is due to the position of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
Adoption of the 2011 budget testifies to the fact that it is possible to agree a compromise in the European Union .
The draft of the financial plan for 2011 was accepted and voted through thanks to the good will of all the institutions which helped create it .
This compromise should be particularly appreciated because the decision-making procedures following entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon are new ones , and for the first time in history the European Parliament has made a joint decision on expenditure on an equal footing with the Council of the European Union and the European Commission .
It is not an ideal budget , but I do think that outlays have been apportioned in a sensible way and cover all the priorities of the European Union .
In voting for adoption of the 2011 budget , I also expressed my support for further development and for the idea of European integration .
I voted in favour of this report , as the community budget for 2011 , which was presented by the parliamentary Budgets committee during the part-session , strengthens funding for the priorities defined by the European Parliament , such as education , innovation , the peace process in the Middle East and Palestine , the Lifelong Learning Programme , the " People ” research programme , and the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme .
I congratulate Parliament , the Council and the Commission for also having agreed that , if additional funds are needed to comply with EU legal obligations , there will be amending budgets throughout 2011 , given that , legally , the EU budget cannot be in deficit .
In addition to the budget , Parliament had certain political requirements relating to the implementation of the rules laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon , namely with regard to a new system of own resources , and in relation to these it is good to know that the EC has now announced that it will present a formal initiative towards the end of June 2011 , ensuring that proposals relating to the own resources are discussed at the same time as the future Financial Perspective .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution and supported the EU budget for the year 2011 .
I welcome the agreement finally reached between the Council , Commission and European Parliament and I hope it will be a sustainable budget that can be fully and predictably implemented from the beginning of the financial year .
With the adoption of this resolution we , the European Parliament , secure financing and continuity of the budget agreed upon by the Council and the Committee on Budgets .
I am convinced that it was necessary to allocate more funds to education , research and innovation as the EU needs to increase its efficiency and competitiveness to be able to rise from the financial and economic crisis .
In order to reach this goal , the EU has to create a long-term strategy and this budget should be a part of it .
The European Parliament 's approval of the Community budget for 2011 , just a few days after it rejected it , proves that the entire procedure is a poorly set up game of disorientation from the essence of the budget , which is to serve big business better in its effort to shift the burden of the economic crisis and increasing imperialist interventions on to the workers .
At the same time , this well thought out game highlighted the serious competition between the imperialists and the fact that Community bodies are jostling for position as to who can best serve the interests of the plutocracy following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The decision was already taken some time ago to reduce any minimum appropriations that might have been used for poor farmers , workers and the self-employed and to increase the appropriations which are channelled directly to the monopoly groups , into the services and infrastructures of civil-military interventions and into persecution and repression of the working class and grassroots movement .
The political spokesmen of capital will be unable to save themselves from calumny with tricks such as these .
Their role is becoming clearer by the day .
The working and grassroots classes are stepping up their fight against the policies of the EU and the bourgeois governments , thereby creating new prospects for a grassroots economy which will serve their needs , not those of capital .
The preparation of the annual 2011 budget has again given rise to real political negotiation between MEPs and the governments of the Member States .
In the current context of budgetary cuts , the Council of the European Union , which represents the governments of the Member States , wanted to make the Union take a part in the austerity measures that European countries are imposing on themselves .
Despite the fact that the European Parliament , as well as the Commission , wanted , on the contrary , the crisis to be tackled by voluntary policies , it sided with the position of the Council , in a clear display of solidarity with the Member States .
In exchange for this concession , Parliament wanted a debate to take place on the Union 's resources , and in particular on the issue of it being able to have funds of its own , independent of contributions from the Member States .
The Council was initially intransigent but ended up by ceding to our legitimate demands .
That is the reason why other MEPs and I have been able to give our agreement to this budget , the ambition of which is limited to the short term , but yet one which allows future prospects for Union policies to be opened up .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of discharge of the 2011 budget .
This budget was strengthened by new procedures provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon .
These lengthy and difficult negotiations to reach an agreement on the 2011 budget demonstrate that as new budgetary principles become effective , we will be forced to find rational institutional compromises on the most important areas of EU policy .
For the first time since the new treaty came into force , the European Parliament has used the powers it was granted to participate fully in the composition of the European Union budget .
The first unsuccessful attempt to reach an agreement and include the European Parliament 's legitimate demands demonstrates a conflict that is still present among the institutions and that should not actually exist , as it is obstructing effective inter-institutional cooperation .
The objective of all EU institutions is to ensure that agreements which are particularly important for the whole of the EU and its citizens are adopted as smoothly as possible .
Therefore I believe that in future there must be fundamental changes in the operating principles of the institutions themselves and the inclusion of the European Parliament in all stages of negotiations , particularly budgetary , must be considered as particularly important for the implementation of the principle of representative democracy .
The European Union must grant itself a budget equal to its ambitions .
It must not let itself be carried along by the crisis but rise to the challenges it meets .
With the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament now plays on a level playing field with the Council and has made its mark as a proactive force .
I voted for the 2011 budget as it is incumbent on us , as MEPs , to give Europe clear political direction .
In 2011 Europe will keep its priorities on target .
It will be able to revise upwards its financial needs in order to implement its new powers .
Despite difficult economic circumstances , Parliament has managed to win a firm commitment from the Member States .
On the proposal of Parliament , in 2011 the Commission will begin discussions on the different types of own resources , resources which Europe needs to guarantee its financial autonomy in the future .
However , I am deeply concerned that Parliament has not found a consensus on the additional funding that the ' Iter ' project will need from 2012 .
The experimental thermonuclear reactor , a flagship project of international research and European scientific dynamism , could have benefited from an unused and surplus portion of the 2011 budget .
Parliament , after having acquitted itself well in the negotiations with the Council on the 2011 budget , on the conditions for the drawing up of the next multiannual financial framework and the question of the Union 's own resources , has lost the battle .
By adopting the 2011 budget , during the December part-session , we showed the Council was right .
Our concerns were not about figures but rather about political demands .
We have not forgotten our seven demands adopted during the previous part-session .
The positive thing is that the Commission will also present a proposal in the spring of 2011 on the question of own resources .
Parliament will be included in these discussions as it will in those needed for producing financial perspectives .
But the terms remain to be defined , and therefore the fight for codecision to be respected in this area has only just begun .
The adoption of the EU 's 2011 budget by Parliament indicates that when dialogue is established between the Commission and the legislative , matters can be arranged for their mutual benefit .
The Commission has realised that the European Parliament now has a greater say in the Union 's finances , and has decided , albeit later on , to respect this situation .
In practical terms , the budget remains within the limits set by the Council but , at the same time , it also includes some of the legislative 's priorities .
Before agreement was reached , we were in the odd situation of having all kinds of strategies and programmes which did not feature at all in the budget forecasts for next year .
These strategies and programmes cannot just remain on paper because they would only serve to highlight inconsistency and a lack of confidence in the acts adopted by the European Union itself .
It is obvious that you cannot develop programmes supporting young people , innovation and research and you cannot claim to be an active player in global foreign policy without the funds designed to finance all these plans .
Parliament has argued successfully with the Council for the need to carry out regular evaluations of the benefits of new legislation and its funding .
As representatives elected directly by the European Union 's citizens , it is important for taxpayers to see that their money is being well spent .
I am pleased with the budget approved today , as it retains the priority lines adopted by Parliament in October , which strengthen key areas such as education , youth , research and innovation .
It is essential to provide the EU with a sustainable budget that may be implemented in a full and foreseeable manner from the start of the financial year , in contrast to a system of provisional twelfths that would put the implementation of its policies at risk .
It is equally important to strive for a budget that is visionary in times of crisis and which strengthens areas that contribute to economic growth and to more and better jobs , such as science and innovation .
Only through an ambitious budget will economic recovery be possible in Europe .
in writing . - ( FR ) The 2011 budget was voted with responsibility , bitterness and conviction .
Responsibility : the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats and Parliament assumed their responsibility by voting in favour of this budget to avoid an institutional impasse and recourse to the provisional twelfths system .
Bitterness : codecision in budgetary matters is a losing battle .
Despite the concessions made by Parliament , some Member States who , unlike me , do not believe in the added value of the European budget , have remained inflexible .
Conviction : the future of the Union depends on new own resources and a tax on financial transactions .
We need the Commission and we need it to be committed to this , if we are to make this fundamental objective a reality .
We need a Trade and Transport Facilitation ( TTF ) , and also a 2011 budget and therefore I abstained on the amendment retabled by the Greens on this issue , which was symbolic but irresponsible .
The TTF is a topic which is too important to be trifled with , within the political strategies of tabling amendments for which one is not the original author , with a budget line at zero .
What was originally a socialist amendment was intended to move this debate forward during the budgetary procedure , but had it been adopted today it would have meant choosing a Union with no budget .
I voted in favour of a budget with a near zero increase on 2010 , to show that Parliament could display maturity and responsibility in the context of an economic crisis that is crippling national governments .
It is not right to start increasing the 2011 budget at a time when most Member States are entering a period of tight budgetary control .
I am delighted that the tough negotiations that took place between the various institutions on this matter led to a compromise and that we have avoided budgetary crisis for 2011 .
I voted in favour of the report relating to the new draft budget for 2011 because it strengthens funding in areas that have been defined as priorities by the European Parliament , such as education , innovation , competitiveness and cohesion for growth and employment , as well as the conservation and management of natural resources .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2011 .
It is a restrained budget , but it also contains important investments in research , initiatives for young people and necessary aid initiatives for Palestine , and it enables the establishment of the EU 's new External Action Service and new authorities for financial supervision .
However , we abstained from voting on both the text and the proposed budget lines relating to new own resources for the EU .
We are in favour of a review of the EU 's own resources system and an examination of a tax on financial transactions , but believe that we currently have too little information to be able to take a detailed position on this matter .
Irrespective of the form that a new system for the EU 's revenue might take , we would like to emphasise that it must be budget-neutral and respect the Member States ' competence in the sphere of taxation .
The 2011 budget will be the first Union budget to be agreed following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Although this agreement , arrived at within the framework of the new codecision procedure , does not address all of the concerns of the European Parliament , it is the basis of a common understanding with regard to the budgetary priorities for the Union .
In the light of the new challenges facing the Union , it has become crucial for a facility to be in place that enables the Commission to introduce changes to the budget when the funding set aside is insufficient to reach the strategic objectives , namely within the framework of the priorities established within the EU 2020 Strategy .
In the same way , it will be the task of the European Parliament and the Council to find common ground for a rapid and effective response , creating the conditions for a more egalitarian and competitive Union , able to face up to the new challenges .
The outcome of the budget debate for 2011 was foreseeable , taking into account the responsibilities of the Council and the main political groups within this Parliament , whether in the definition and acceptance of the current multi-annual financial framework , or in the approval of subsequent budgets which this will have to cover .
But what this agreement does not remove , indeed it reinforces them , are the many reasons to be critical of this budget that we have left out here .
In view of the worsening of the economic and social crisis , unemployment and the living conditions of millions of people - to which the plans for real social terrorism that the EU intends to impose on Member States contribute a great deal - we are all going to find out once again what the true meaning of the much vaunted European solidarity is : a budget that does not go beyond 1 % of community ( Gross National Income ) GNI , unable to perform its function to redistribute wealth , unable to ensure economic and social cohesion , and that , without a doubt , will accentuate the harmful effects of the policies that the EU is pursuing .
Once again we reiterate that there is an alternative to this budget , and that is not only possible , but also truly necessary .
An alternative that would involve a significant strengthening of the community budget , based on fair contributions from Member States , in line with their GNI .
I welcome the agreement between the European Parliament and the governments of the 27 Member States , especially , because in the absence of this agreement the payments which Irish farmers will receive next year would be delayed .
The threat of the introduction of a provisional budget for 2011 mobilised the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union to intensify discussions , the result of which - the draft budget which was voted on today - can be considered a pragmatic compromise .
The negotiations held between the institutions led to inclusion of most of the proposals being advocated by Parliament .
We have obtained the Council 's assurance that it is willing to cooperate during establishment of the Financial Framework for 2014-2020 , which will be a practical fulfilment of the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament has also reached agreement on this matter with the Prime Ministers of Hungary , Poland , Denmark and Cyprus , in other words with those Member States which in the next two years will hold the Presidency of the EU Council .
We are also pleased with the Council 's decision to maintain the flexibility mechanism in the European Union budget at a level of 0.03 % of EU GDP .
These funds will allow the financing of crucial expenditures which were not foreseen during negotiations over the previous Financial Framework , such as the European External Action Service and the Galileo system , for example .
A concession on the part of Parliament is postponement of the debate on future sources of finance for the European Union , something for which the European Commission has also called .
The idea of relieving national contributions to the Union budget fell in the face of determined opposition from a group of Member States which was afraid of the reaction of public opinion .
We will undoubtedly return to this debate in the summer of 2011 , when the Commission will present several new options for financing the EU .
in writing . - ( on behalf of the UK Conservative delegation ) The UK Conservatives today voted against the 2.9 % increase in the budget because we believe that , as national capitals look for ways of cutting their own deficits or improving their fiscal situation , it is not appropriate for MEPs to demand an increase in European spending .
The EU budget cannot , as some MEPs argue , be used as a supplement to national budgets in a time of austerity ; rather , it should reflect the difficult situation in which EU Member States find themselves .
That is why the Conservatives originally tabled an amendment calling for a long-term freeze in payments at 2010 levels , a move that would do much to assure citizens that the EU is doing its bit to bring long-term public spending under control and onto a more sustainable footing .
Today 's adoption of the 2011 budget has highlighted the European Parliament 's double failure .
The budget that it adopted is too small : + 2.91 % , which falls far short of its first reading ( + 6 % ) and of the Commission 's initial proposal ( + 5.8 % ) .
The amounts adopted are exactly the same as those proposed with no real room for the Council to negotiate , hardly reassuring in terms of the negotiability of future budgets .
Ever since the Treaty of Lisbon was implemented , Parliament has acted with the Council in codecision on budgetary matters : by not getting any precise commitment to date on the role that we , as MEPs , will have in preparing the next financial framework and on providing the necessary reflection on new own resources , we run the risk of allowing the Council to become lord and master over the future of the European project .
So , given the positioning of certain Member States , there is a real risk that this project will flounder .
What dismays me the most is the attitude displayed by the European right as they were more than determined at the start of negotiations to drop out the minute the telephones began ringing from Heads of State or Government .
Everyone will make their own mind up about the political consistency of such a reversal .
I welcome the adoption , by a clear majority of votes , of the EU budget for 2011 .
The agreement reached between the European Parliament and the EU Council has allowed the use of a provisional budget to be avoided - something which could undermine pursuit of EU cohesion and agricultural policy .
This is particularly good news for Polish local governments , farmers and business people , who in increasing numbers are making use of Union funds , because despite the economic crisis payments will rise by 2.91 % compared to 2010 .
I am also pleased by the increase in resources for the priority areas adopted by Parliament , including youth , education , research and innovation .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the new budget and I am delighted that the European institutions have finally found some common ground .
Through this vote , the European Parliament aims to provide the European Union with a stable budget , which can be introduced immediately in early 2011 , thus avoiding having to use the system of provisional twelfths which would have threatened the implementation of many European policies .
However , I do deplore the lack of flexibility that this new budget imposes as well as the choice made by certain political groups , especially the Socialists , to jeopardise ITER , the only fundamental long-term research project in which the European Union plays a leading role , by deferring the vote on its funding .
By foregoing EUR 600 million of credits available to finance ITER against a backdrop of crisis where European public money is scarce , the Socialists have displayed their irresponsibility and inconsistency and are jeopardising a strategic project that creates jobs .
I am pleased that despite the many complications , it has been possible to agree and adopt the EU budget for 2011 after the modifications made by the Council .
This is very important , not only in view of the fact that a provisional budget has been avoided , but principally in view of the fact that we can be sure of the programming of expenditures related to cohesion policy , which is extremely important for the residents of the EU , and above all for the beneficiaries of Union funds .
In addition , I would like to emphasise that resources for cohesion policy have been increased by 10 % .
It is important that we have reached a political agreement .
In doing so we have demonstrated European solidarity , and this now gives us financial stability in 2011 .
Today I voted in favour of the 2011 budget .
After lengthy negotiations , we have managed to reach an agreement that satisfies Parliament .
Indeed , Parliament is waiting for the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon to be implemented .
The treaty makes provision for our institution to be involved in negotiations on the next long-term budget and this change should be accepted at every level .
Furthermore , Parliament wanted to maintain some reserves in the 2011 budget .
A case in point is the sum of EUR 425 000 , set aside in the 2011 budget for the European Police College ( CEPOL ) , which can now only be released under certain conditions .
The agency will therefore have to implement MEPs ' recommendations following Parliament 's refusal to endorse implementation of the agency 's budget , so that a decision can be made on full allocation of the CEPOL budget in 2011 .
The 2011 budget , the first that Parliament has been entitled to scrutinise , has only gone to show what little power our assembly has .
Not content with validating neoliberal counter-reforms and with working for the financial markets instead of for the citizens who elected them , it even goes so far as to capitulate in the name of urgency .
I will not facilitate this despicable exercise with my vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) After intense negotiations , it was finally possible to reach an agreement for the 2011 budget ; it was not the ideal budget , but it is nevertheless a document that will enable the objectives proposed by the EU to be achieved .
This community budget for 2011 , adopted today in part-session , strengthens funding for the priorities defined by the European Parliament , such as education , innovation , and the peace process in the Middle East and Palestine .
in writing . - Taking into account the countless number of bureaucrats in the European Parliament , as well as in the European Commission , this resolution brings the European Community closer to the well-considered and effective distribution of EC resources in the course of time .
I have carefully examined other statements in the report and am glad to discover that certain persons in Parliament understand the need to use money in time , not when it is too late .
I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( DE ) As was the case with the last proposal to increase the budget for 2011 , I have also had to oppose this one in the interests of the citizens of Europe .
It is impossible to understand how the EU can afford to raise its budget when austerity programmes are being introduced all over Europe .
The latest increase is justified on the grounds of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the new institutions that it has created , such as the European External Action Service .
With great foresight the Freedom Party of Austria voted against the Treaty of Lisbon , which , while it brought a few benefits , primarily resulted in an increase in red tape and in costs for the citizens .
Therefore , I have opposed the budget for 2011 .
I support the European Parliament 's vote on Wednesday 15 December 2010 , which adopted the 2011 budget during its sitting in Strasbourg following on from the debate which took place on Tuesday .
The budget adopted includes increased funding for most of the priorities set out by Parliament , whilst respecting the global limits set by the Council .
During this year 's budgetary negotiations , my fellow Members of the European Parliament also entered into agreements with the Council and the Commission on a number of political demands concerning the budget .
in writing . - ( IT ) The draft budget amended by the European Council does not fully reflect the needs and requirements outlined by Parliament , but the European Union cannot be left without an approved budget during the first few months of 2011 .
This is why , during the trilogue held on 6 December , the Commission , the Council and Parliament found the right compromise for a budget that may be implemented in full from the very beginning of the 2011 financial year .
I voted in favour , because the responsible stance is consistent with Parliament 's efforts to give citizens of the Union adequate financial resources , as confirmed by the approval of the joint statement on payment appropriations .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution as I considered that , despite the draft budget amended by the Council not entirely satisfying the real need for a Union budget that is sustainable , coherent and effective , Parliament 's objective of providing the Union with a budget that is able to be implemented in a full and predictable manner starting from the beginning of the financial year was achieved .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution as I agreed that , although the draft budget amended by the Council does not entirely satisfy the real need for a Union budget that is sustainable , coherent and effective , Parliament 's objective was to provide the Union with a budget that can be implemented in a full and predictable manner starting from the beginning of the financial year .
It was a very special moment , last month , when all the political groups stepped up to the plate to achieve a political agreement , beyond the 2011 budget , on the future financing of the EU .
So , after all the hullabaloo they caused during the negotiations , the three main political groups gave in on the final straight .
The European Parliament , despite drawing on its new powers , has just passed up on the chance to impose itself in its role as a decision-maker on budgetary matters .
The Belgian Prime Minister 's letter shown to us by the Belgian Presidency and which guarantees that the Treaty will be respected ( sic ) and that Parliament will be involved with future discussions does not offer any guarantee for a good political outcome .
Our vote against reflects this missed opportunity and the rendezvous clause that will follow .
The best instrument for achieving this is , using the same method as the Convention , to bring together European and national parliaments , national governments and the European Commission .
As for the ITER mega project , which requires and will continue to require extortionate levels of funds , we are not sorry that it has been deferred .
We will again try and demonstrate the financial waste that it represents as soon as it is back on the table of the EP Committee on Budgets .
We are about to approve the European Union budget for 2011 , which is being done , for the first time , in accordance with the new regime of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am pleased with the affirmation of the role of the European Parliament in this matter , and support the main priorities highlighted in the document that we are voting on today .
In 2011 , special attention needs to be paid to the theme of Youth , Education and Mobility , a priority that has been taken into account in all sections of the budget .
We need to invest in our young people and in training for all European citizens , namely through the Lifelong Learning , Erasmus Mundus and Eures programmes .
It is also essential to promote investment in research and innovation , and the role of SMEs as an engine for making our economy more dynamic .
Considering the importance of the policy of cohesion as an overarching element of all European policies , I welcome its planned inclusion in the document that is key to the successful implementation of this policy .
Because of the reasons set out and because I believe that the European Union is going through a period that requires more effort in terms of making Europe stronger and more competitive , while retaining the need to strengthen inter-institutional dialogue , I am voting in favour of this draft presented by Parliament .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted in favour of the report .
In its negotiations with the Council , Parliament has shown its teeth .
Last year , in the context of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Council made significant concessions to Parliament .
In this decision on the budget , Parliament has moved towards the Council 's position .
This compromise seems to be workable .
in writing . - The 2011 budget has been decided in challenging and unstable times .
At a time when we are seeing severe cuts being made to budgets in member states , it is now more important than ever to make sure Europe is providing the resources to deal with the effects of the crisis .
The benefits of EU funding can be seen across my constituency , and provide help for those who will suffer because of the current ' slash and burn ' policy being implemented in the UK .
However , there are parts of this budget I cannot agree with .
For example I do not think it is appropriate to vote in favour of wasteful agricultural subsidies and an increase in entertainment expenses .
I believe it is important in these uncertain economic times to show restraint in spending .
It is for this reason I chose to abstain on budget 2011 .
in writing . - Labour MEPs have voted against the budget package because , at a time when such severe cuts are being made to domestic public spending , we do not believe it is appropriate for the EU budget to increase .
We certainly don 't support the way that many governments are risking their economies by slashing public spending .
But that does not mean we should automatically support an increase in overall spending by the European Union .
The EU will be doing a lot of important work next year , in many cases providing support to those areas that will be hardest hit by domestic cuts .
However , where new expenditure is required , we believe it would have been possible to find savings to free up money for important projects .
Given the current pressure on domestic economies , these budget negotiations could have been an opportunity to persuade EU leaders to tackle wasteful EU expenditure in areas such as agricultural subsidies , which often undermine the economies of the very countries that the EU 's international aid budget sets out to help .
However , this budget package leaves those subsidies virtually untouched .
Against this background , Labour MEPs could not support an increase in the EU budget .
Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of 613 cases of redundancy that have occurred in two companies operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 46 ( wholesale trade , except of motor vehicles and motorcycles ) in the NUTS Level 2 region of Northern Holland in the Netherlands , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the European Commission 's proposal and with the respective amendments made by the European Parliament .
I also agree that the functioning and added value of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the Inter-Institutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 , within the framework of the 2007-2013 multi-annual financial framework mid-term review process .
in writing . - ( PT ) Assistance to workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation should be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
In the light of structural changes in international trade , it is important that the European economy is quickly able to implement instruments for supporting workers affected by such changes whilst also giving them the skills required to return swiftly to the labour market .
Financial assistance should therefore be provided on an individual basis .
It is also important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities that normally lies with the companies , nor is it intended for the financing and restructuring of companies .
Bearing in mind that the Netherlands submitted a request for assistance in relation to 613 cases of redundancy that have occurred in two companies within Division 18 ( wholesale trade , except of motor vehicles and motorcycles ) of NACE Rev. 2 in the region of Northern Holland , I am voting in favour of this Report or , to put it another way , in favour of mobilising the EGF to support the Netherlands .
The financial and economic crisis that we are going through , combined with the constant changes on the labour market caused by alterations to the structure of international trade , have resulted in countless victims of unemployment which , in many cases , is long term .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was created to respond to situations like these .
In this case we are talking about the mobilisation of little more than two million , five hundred thousand euros for the Netherlands to support 613 cases of redundancy in two commercial and retail companies between 1 May 2009 and 31 January 2010 .
Given that the Commission believed this application to be appropriate when it considered it and to meet the requirements laid down , and therefore recommends that the request be approved , I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( PT ) Given the social impact of the world economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , the proper use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European citizens and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while at the same time providing new resources that meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
It is in this context that this intervention plan for the Netherlands is being put forward , in relation to 613 redundancies that have occurred within two companies operating within division 46 of NACE Rev. 2 ( wholesale trade , except motor vehicles and motorcycles ) within the NUTS Level 2 region of North Holland , in the Netherlands .
I therefore hope that the European institutions will strengthen their commitment to implementing measures to speed up and improve the rates for use of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the 500 million euros available has been requested .
in writing . - ( PT ) The EU is an area of solidarity and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a part of this .
This support is essential in helping the unemployed and victims of the relocation of firms that occurs in an era of globalisation .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of lower labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with a damaging effect on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF aims to help workers who are victims of the relocation of businesses and it is crucial in facilitating access to new employment .
The EGF has been used in the past by other EU countries , so it is appropriate to provide aid to the Netherlands , which has submitted a request for mobilisation of the EGF in respect of 613 redundancies that have occurred within two companies operating within division 46 of NACE Rev. 2 ( wholesale trade , except of motor vehicles and motorcycles ) within the NUTS Level 2 region of North Holland , in the Netherlands .
in writing . - ( DE ) Employees who have lost their jobs as a result of the financial and economic crisis should be given the opportunity to return quickly to the world of work .
The Member States are obliged to take appropriate measures to support these people .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund provides funding for this purpose which the Member States can apply for .
I am voting in favour of the report , as the mobilisation of the fund by the Netherlands is fully justified and all the criteria have been met .
in writing . - ( PT ) Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of 613 cases of redundancy that have occurred in two companies operating within division 46 of NACE Rev. 2 ( wholesale trade , except of motor vehicles and motorcycles ) in the NUTS Level 2 region of Northern Holland in the Netherlands , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the European Commission 's proposal and with the respective amendments to it tabled by the European Parliament .
I also agree that :
the EGF should support the individual reintegration of redundant workers into employment , and I would like to reiterate that assistance from the EGF should not replace measures which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor should it finance the restructuring of companies or sectors ;
the operation and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the Inter-Institutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 ;
I welcome the proposal of the European Commission to establish a source of funds other than unused ESF resources , in order to respond to the repeated statements by the European Parliament that it is necessary to identify appropriate budgetary mechanisms for the transfer of funds given that the EGF was set up to be a specific and separate instrument with its own aims and funding periods .
I fully agree with the rapporteur Mrs Matera , who is pleased to observe that the Commission keeps identifying alternative sources of payment appropriations to unused European Social Fund resources , in accordance with the frequent requests in the past from the European Parliament .
I also agree with the rapporteur that the alternatives chosen in the last cases ( budgets line dedicated to the support of entrepreneurship and innovation ) are not satisfactory given the severe shortcomings that the Commission encounters when implementing the programmes on competitiveness and innovation .
In a period of economic crisis these appropriations should be in fact rather increased .
The rapporteur invites therefore the Commission to continue in her effort to identify more appropriate budget lines for payments in the future .
in writing . - ( PT ) The request submitted by the Netherlands for assistance under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in relation to 613 redundancies that occurred within two companies operating within division 46 ( wholesale trade , except of motor vehicles and motorcycles ) of NACE Rev. 2 within the NUTS II region of North Holland fulfils all the legally established eligibility criteria .
Indeed , under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and Council , of 18 June 2009 , which amended Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 of the European Parliament and Council on 20 December 2006 and established the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the scope of the EGF was temporarily widened as it was expected to be able intervene in situations like this if , as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , within a level 2 division of NACE in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS Level 2 ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , and I hope that the mobilisation of the EGF will contribute to the successful integration of these workers into the labour market .
in writing . - With this vote , the EP : ( 1 ) calls on the institutions involved to take the necessary action to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF ; ( 2 ) recalls the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have suffered redundancies as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis and emphasises the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market ; ( 3 ) stresses that , in accordance with Article 6 of the EGF Regulation , it should be ensured that the EGF supports the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment and reiterates that assistance from the EGF must not replace either actions which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , or measures restructuring companies or sectors .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on the mobilisation of the European Global Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the workers in the information and communications technology ( ICT ) sector , made redundant in the Noord Holland region of the Netherlands .
Europe 's ICT sector has been hit by both the global financial and economic crisis and the structural changes in the global IT market , especially due to the relocation of production to China and India , also reflected by the ICT 5 indicator .
The ICT 5 indicator is a summary of the main research results linked to the business cycle , costs and budgets allocated to the ICT sector .
This indicator for Western Europe has fallen from a value of approximately 160 in August 2008 to approximately 30 in April 2009 .

The Netherlands has prepared a coordinated package of personalised services for the 613 workers made redundant from two businesses belonging to the company Randstad , such as offering guidance on the transition from one job to another , setting up mobility centres , placing staff made redundant , providing professional training and researching employability .
The total budget required is EUR 3 934 055 and the Netherlands submitted an application on 8 April 2010 to obtain a financial contribution of EUR 2 557 135 from the EGF .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted in favour of the draft report .
Once again we are able to help EU citizens , who have been made redundant after their company got into difficulties , to find new jobs .
in writing . - ( DE ) This application is just one of a large number of applications from the Netherlands which we have recently approved in the Committee on Budgets .
Of course , I have voted in favour of Mrs Matera 's report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) to support citizens in Noord Holland who have been made redundant .
The purpose of the EGF is to make funding available to help individual citizens who have lost their jobs as a result of globalisation .
During the budget negotiations over the last few weeks , the Government of the Netherlands has excelled itself with its stubborn response to the legitimate positions taken by the European Parliament , which is always ready to compromise .
At this point , I would like to say that it seems to be compatible with the national perspective on politics to apply for tens of millions of euros in EU aid , on the one hand , and to refuse to have a legitimate discussion on the points put forward by Parliament , on the other hand .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe that in the EU there needs to be enhanced cooperation in the area of the law applicable to divorce or legal separation .
I believe that EU regulation in this field should be universal .
In other words , based on its global rules on conflicts of law , it can be determined that any law is applicable - that of participating Member States , non-participating Member States or non-EU Member States .
The Union has set itself the objective of maintaining and developing an area of freedom , security and justice , in which the free movement of persons is assured , therefore in order to allow the spouses to choose an applicable law with which they have a close connection or , in the absence of such choice , in order that that law might apply to their divorce or legal separation , the law in question should apply even if it is not that of a participating Member State .
Increasing the mobility of citizens calls for more flexibility and greater legal certainty , which the new EU regulation can enhance .
The need to establish a clear , comprehensive legal framework on the law applicable to divorce and legal separation arises out of an urgent need to address the problems that arise in the case of ' international ' divorces .
Until now , the disparities in national rules have not favoured the safeguarding of equal opportunities between spouses and neither have they protected the best interests of the children involved .
On the contrary , they have helped to encourage the so-called ' rush to court ' .
As the European Parliament Mediator for children contested by parents of different nationalities and based on experience gained during the work I have carried out , I support this proposal for a regulation to create legal certainty for the couples concerned and guarantee predictability and flexibility .
One of the innovative ideas contained in the text of the regulation is the possibility of consulting a family mediator before , during and after the divorce proceedings .
This is not only because this individual is of great help in informing the couple about the various forms and conditions of divorce and resolving any differences between them , but also because it protects the rights of children involved , helping them to make appropriate and amicable choices to protect the welfare of their offspring .
When it comes to improving coherence between European rules on matrimonial matters , it is tricky getting 27 to agree on this matter .
Fortunately , since the 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam , Member States which so wish can come together to make progress in a specific field , through ' enhanced cooperation ' , in such a way that a core of leading States can be set up to move the Union forward .
The problems encountered by spouses in having their status recognised across Europe , particularly during a divorce or legal separation , have led certain States to come together to improve the coordination of national regulations .
I am really keen that this enhanced cooperation , in which France wishes to be involved , should be implemented .
In my opinion , this initiative is in the interests of bringing Europeans together , in an area that concerns us all , and in which legal certainty is of the essence .
I have therefore voted for the proposed regulation implementing this enhanced cooperation .
In the future , such enforced cooperation must be used as often as is necessary .
I voted in favour of this report because the purpose of the regulation is to create legal security for couples belonging to different Member States , who wish to separate or divorce , guaranteeing them predictability and flexibility .
In this respect , the initiative adopted has been a step forward , but it is regrettable , firstly , that the opportunity has been lost to extend the scope of application to the recognition of marriages , annulments , custody of children and inheritance .
It also does not cover the existence of other types of unions such as those of homosexual couples , which are recognised in some Member States .
Secondly , it is also regrettable that only 15 out of the 27 Member States are prepared to sign up to this enhanced cooperation , which will be detrimental to the citizens of the countries that do not do so .
It is therefore my hope and wish that , in the future , the scope of application can be extended , and the number of countries subscribing to this enhanced cooperation can be increased : they owe it to the citizens that they represent .
I voted in favour of this European Parliament report on enhanced cooperation in the area of the law applicable to divorce and legal separation , because a clear and explicit legal basis must be established , according to which rules would be applied related to the applicable law .
I would like to point out that one of the European Union 's main objectives is to maintain and develop an area of freedom , security and justice , in which freedom of movement of persons is guaranteed .
The legal situation at European level regarding the law applicable to the divorce and legal separation of spouses of different nationalities is currently very confusing , because it is unclear which law should be applied .
This often leads to a ' rush to court ' where one of the spouses files for divorce before the other one does in order to ensure that the proceeding is governed by a given law which he or she regards as more favourable to his or her own interests .
I would like to stress that the new regulation proposed should create legal certainty for the couples concerned and guarantee predictability and flexibility .
I should like to congratulate Mr Zwiefka for drawing up this report , which I support .
The aim of this measure is to establish a clear , comprehensive legal framework in the legislation applicable to divorce and legal separation , by allowing the parties a certain degree of autonomy .
The diversified nature of these rules in the Member States may , in fact , create problems in the case of ' international ' divorces .
Indeed , as well as the legal uncertainty over the identification of the laws applicable in each individual case , there may also be a ' rush to court ' to ensure that the proceeding is governed by a given law which better protects one of the two spouses .
The European Union must therefore limit these risks and shortcomings by introducing the possibility of choosing the applicable law by mutual agreement between the parties .
I therefore agree with the need to ensure the parties fair and accurate information that allows them to be aware of their choices as soon as possible .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , Member States may now work in enhanced cooperation in the area of freedom , security and justice , and more specifically on matters of divorce and legal separation .
This regulation defines enhanced cooperation between certain Member States ( Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , France , Germany , Hungary , Italy , Latvia , Luxembourg , Malta , Portugal , Romania , Slovenia and Spain ) .
The main objective of this is to rule out any discrimination on the grounds of sex , to guarantee equal opportunities for both spouses , and to give central priority to the welfare of the children .
Spouses often ' compete ' over which one of them is the first to apply for divorce in order to ensure that the divorce proceedings are governed by a law which best protects the interests of the relevant party .
The purpose of this regulation is to improve legal certainty for the couples concerned , and at the same time , to guarantee the predictability and flexibility of the proceedings .
I supported the regulation , even when it does not currently affect the Czech Republic .
On the whole , I believe that the introduction of this regulation will set a good example for other Member States , including the Czech Republic .
In future , other Member States would be able to sign up to the regulation and benefit from the experience of the pioneering Member States .
This proposal does not seek to harmonise the substantive law applicable to divorce and legal separation , but to establish harmonised rules for resolving international jurisdictional conflicts .
What this means is that we need to work within the framework of international private law and not within the substantive framework of family law , wherein each State will continue to have its own laws .
This is why it is important to remember , for example , that the proposed regulation , through the amendment of Article 7.º-A , does not require a State to recognise as a marriage - even if only to ensure its dissolution - an act that is not considered as such by its national legislation , or which would be contrary to the principle of subsidiarity .
However , this will not be able to limit the rights of people whose unions are not recognised within a State , a point on which a compromise solution needs to be found .
In the light of the above , I can only see the provision for greater legal certainty with regard to the resolution of conflicts of international jurisdiction within the context of family law , most especially with regard to the dissolution of marriage and legal separation , as an important step for constructing an environment of freedom and justice , in which the freedom of movement of people is a reality .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am delighted with the adoption of this report , which should enable couples , from different Member States or residing in another country that is not their own , to choose the law that should apply to their divorce .
There were one million divorces granted in the EU during 2007 , 13 % of which involved couples consisting of partners of different nationalities .
During these proceedings , European citizens were faced with legal problems affecting their separation .
I would point out that Portugal is taking part in the process of enhanced cooperation that would enable advances to made on this issue , blocked in the Council .
I would emphasise the need for this report not to result in a Member State being required to recognise as a marriage - even if solely for the purposes of its dissolution - a situation that is not considered as such by the legislation of that State , or which would be contrary to the principle of subsidiarity .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for dealing so thoroughly with such a difficult subject as the issue of the choice of law applicable to divorce and legal separation .
Just how delicate a matter this is can be seen by the fact that Rome III is the first example in the EU 's history of enhanced cooperation conducted in accordance with the procedures laid down in the Treaties .
The territorial range of force of the regulation will , therefore , be restricted to 14 out of the 27 EU Member States .
Poland is not among them .
I think that by introducing a principle which enables parties to choose the law applicable in divorce , Rome III will contribute to greater legal predictability and certainty .
However , taking into account the restricted scope of this regulation - it will concern only the law applicable on the matter of international divorce - it is also essential to answer the question as to which court has jurisdiction to decide in a particular case .
This problem is the subject of another EU regulation - Brussels IIa .
Therefore , like the rapporteur , I think it is essential for this regulation to be revised as quickly as possible in order to introduce the forum necessitatis rule .
This will dispel the fears of many Member States concerning whether their courts will be forced to decide on the divorces of couples whom their legal system does not regard as being married , which in turn will encourage them to adopt general European principles in the field of international divorce , and this will undoubtedly make life easier for many EU citizens .
If two people of different nationalities or simply two people who no longer reside in the same Member State are planning to divorce , they should know which court has jurisdiction and in which country .
From now on , these two divorcing people will soon be in a position to choose which European Union legal system will govern their divorce .
Another very specific step forward in the gradual creation of a ' common European legal space ' , which is directly applicable in the day-to-day lives of each of us .
While I welcome the adoption of this report and the use for the first time of what is called the enhanced cooperation procedure , I do regret that this procedure needed to be used and that no agreement could be reached between all the EU Member States .
I do hope that other Member States will be part of this cooperation soon .
The Czech Republic is represented in the European Parliament .
The Czech Republic did not sign up to the mechanism for enhanced cooperation in the area of compatibility of the rules applicable concerning conflict of laws .
This is because the Czech Republic does not feel that the proposal for a regulation is a necessary measure for the proper functioning of the internal market .
Similarly , the Czech Republic finds the regulation questionable in light of the principle of subsidiarity , since it does not offer any added value that would justify its infringement on the Member States ' national family law provisions .
The Czech Republic also considers the proposal to be questionable in light of the principle of proportionality , since the chosen legal form of the regulation is not a suitable tool for ensuring the compatibility of rules on conflict of laws in the area of international family law .
However , having said that , it is not my intention that my vote should stop those States which have opted for enhanced cooperation as a tool for ensuring the compatibility of rules on conflict of laws , with respect to determining the applicable law in matrimonial matters , from taking this route .
The proposal for a regulation on enhanced cooperation in the area of the law applicable to divorce and legal separation helps to address the commonly occurring complex and sensitive issues that are associated with divorce proceedings for valid marriages , which are entered into by people of different nationalities .
It makes things clearer for the divorcing couple and allows them to choose the applicable law .
It also significantly increases their legal certainty right from the outset .
As the adopted legislation goes beyond the Acquis communautaire , the application of the mechanism for enhanced cooperation is a step which allows participating Member States to deal with some of the legislative problems of international cooperation associated with the break-up of these kinds of marriages .
It gives other Member States , which are not taking part at this stage , sufficient opportunity to evaluate the positive and negative effects of this proposal for a regulation over time and to consider signing up to it .
For several years , and in several duly justified cases , it has been foreign law which has applied in such divorce proceedings in the Czech Republic .
in writing . - ( PT ) The new regulation will enable international couples ( couples with different nationalities , couples who live in different countries or couples who live together in a different country to their country of origin ) to choose the national law to be applicable to their divorce , provided that one of the partners has a connection with the country in question , for example , habitual residence or nationality .
The new rules also clarify the law that is applicable in the case of there being no agreement between the partners .
The new regulation will enable , for example , a Spanish / Portuguese couple living in Belgium to choose whether the law to be applicable to their divorce should be Portuguese , Spanish or Belgian .
in writing . - Divorce is a serious matter . Quite often it involves broken dishes and divided properties .
I sincerely admire the idealism of the rapporteur , Tadeusz Zwiefka .
What happens if the German husband wants to be divorced in Germany , but his wife wants to be divorced in Sicily because her mother is Sicilian ?
How do you divide a vacuum cleaner and a washing machine if there is no agreement ?
The idea is good , but it needs to be polished .
90 % of divorces are tragedy and scandal .
I am ' in favour ' , but let us look at details when considering this kind of document .
We need a law , not rules .
in writing . - ( DE ) Separation and divorce are always difficult matters and involve a whole series of legal consequences .
Everything becomes particularly problematic when the husband and wife come from different countries .
We have been looking for a solution within the European Union , but we have only been able to agree on an enhanced cooperation procedure , which makes the situation only slightly easier for those affected , in other words , the couples from different EU Member States who are divorcing .
The scope of this procedure has not been specified and , therefore , is also not entirely clear .
Of course , cooperation does not mean that judgments , like those in the case of divorce , must be recognised in a Member State where there is no legal provision for doing so .
Equally , the procedure must not offer an opportunity to force Member States to recognise same-sex partnerships via the back door .
Equally little attention has been paid to the rights of parents in the case of cross-border separations .
For this reason , I have abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of the report because I believe it is necessary to establish a clear and comprehensive legal framework on the law applicable to divorce and legal separation .
For the first time , with the introduction of Article 3a , the spouses are given an opportunity to designate the law applicable to the divorce proceedings by mutual agreement .
I also believe that we should ensure that the decision made by the parties is an informed one , in other words that both spouses have been duly informed about the practical consequences of their decision .
In this regard , it is necessary to ensure that the information is accurate and complete .
I think it is important to protect the couple 's relationship so that the act of separation can take place in a clear , transparent and consensual manner between both parties , who thus become decision-makers of equal authority .
Portugal is taking part , together with 13 other EU countries ( Spain , Italy , Hungary , Luxemburg , Austria , Romania , Slovenia , Bulgaria , France , Germany , Belgium , Latvia and Malta ) in the first enhanced cooperation trial in the history of the EU .
This enhanced cooperation is being applied in the area of the law applicable to divorce and the legal separation of people and property .
I voted in favour of this report relating to the Regulation , which establishes clear rules on the procedure for international couples ( where the spouses are of different nationalities ) seeking a divorce or a legal separation of people or property in their countries of origin or residence .
This is a fully consensual issue that will make the lives of a number of Europeans easier .
It is also a symbolic moment , being the first time that enhanced cooperation between EU Member States has been applied .
The aim of these provisions is to strengthen legal certainty and predictability with regard to divorce and the legal separation of people and property .
The agreement only provides for the harmonisation of conflict situations , and not for the harmonisation of basic national rules .
One of the European Union 's main objectives is to maintain and develop an area of freedom , security and justice , in which freedom of movement of persons is guaranteed .
The legal situation at European level regarding the law applicable to the divorce and legal separation of spouses of different nationalities is currently very confusing .
This often leads to a ' rush to court ' where one of the spouses applies for divorce before the other one does in order to ensure that the proceeding is governed by a given law which he or she regards as more favourable to his or her own interests .
The purpose of the proposal for a regulation is to create legal certainty for the couples concerned and guarantee predictability and flexibility .
I am therefore bound to agree with the rapporteur , Mr Zwiefka , who supports the substance of the rules for determining the law applicable to divorce and legal separation .
in writing . - ( RO ) Belgium , Bulgaria , Germany , Greece ( withdrew its request on 3 March 2010 ) , Spain , France , Italy , Latvia , Luxembourg , Hungary , Malta , Austria , Portugal , Romania and Slovenia submitted a request to the Commission indicating that they intended to establish enhanced cooperation between themselves in the area of applicable law in matrimonial matters and invited the Commission to present a proposal on this to the Council .
Citizens ' ever-increasing mobility requires , on the one hand , more flexibility and , on the other hand , greater legal certainty In order to achieve this objective , this regulation must enhance the parties ' autonomy in the areas of divorce and legal separation by giving spouses the opportunity to choose the law applicable to their divorce or legal separation .
The regulation will apply only to the dissolution of the marriage or cessation of marital obligations ( legal separation ) and will not apply to matters relating to the legal capacity of natural persons , the existence , validity or recognition of a marriage , the annulment of a marriage , the name of the spouses , the property consequences of the marriage , parental responsibility , maintenance obligations , trusts or successions , even if they arise merely as a preliminary question within the context of divorce or legal separation proceedings .
in writing . - ( PT ) The development of an area of freedom , security and justice , in which the free movement of people is guaranteed , represents one of the most fundamental objectives of the European Union .
I therefore welcome this proposal , which introduces greater legal security with regard to identifying the law applicable to national divorces and separations , and would like to see other Member States join efforts to achieve compatibility in the national rules on legal conflicts in this area .
in writing . - This text sets out to solve problems such as the following .
A and B are nationals of different Member States who entered into a same-sex marriage in one of the Member States which have introduced legislation to permit such marriages .
They have been habitually resident for three years in a Member State which does not permit same-sex marriages but participated in the adoption of the regulation on applicable law under the enhanced cooperation procedure .
A and B wish to dissolve their marriage .
Under the rules of Regulation No 2201 / 2003 on jurisdiction , the only courts having jurisdiction in those circumstances are the courts of the Member State in which they are habitually resident .
This is patently not fair on the couple concerned , who would be put to a considerable amount of inconvenience and loss of time in order to bring their divorce proceedings within the jurisdiction of another court .
in writing . - ( SV ) When the European Parliament voted today on the proposal for a Council regulation implementing enhanced cooperation in the area of the law applicable to divorce and legal separation , I chose to abstain from the vote .
In my opinion , family law , such as the regulation of divorces , is an area where the principle of subsidiarity should be upheld and where every Member State should make its own decisions .
The cooperation that the report discusses is voluntary for the Member States of the EU and , as things currently stand , there are 14 countries taking part .
Sweden is not one of them .
In my opinion , it is not entirely appropriate for me , as a Swedish MEP , to adopt a position on legislation that relates solely to a form of cooperation that Sweden is not involved in .
in writing . - ( DE ) With 16 million marriages between partners of different nationalities in the EU , of which an estimated 140 000 end in divorce every year , negotiations and an agreement on this question are essential in order to guarantee the necessary legal certainty for citizens .
After numerous initiatives in this area have been vetoed by individual Member States , the enhanced cooperation procedure has now given at least 14 countries the opportunity to put in place the necessary criteria .
I voted in favour of this report because the world financial crisis , to which the credit rating agencies contributed in part , has demonstrated the need to introduce a mechanism for the classification and supervision of credit rating agencies .
I agree with this report in its encouragement of the creation , at a European level , of a system for the registration and supervision of credit rating agencies that issue ratings used within the EU , and its consideration of conditions for the use within the EU of ratings issued by agencies in third countries .
The agreement reached on the European supervisory architecture , which will come into force on 1 January 2011 , now makes the effective application of supervision to these agencies possible .
It is essential that , from its inception , the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) is in a position to exercise its powers so as to ensure the vigorous supervision of credit rating agencies active within the EU , as well as those from third countries whose ratings are authorised within the EU , in full cooperation with their national authorities .
I also welcome the fact that the US has also decided to draw up stricter supervision rules in this area , given that the Commission is also considering working towards further international harmonisation .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe that there is a need to set up a mechanism for monitoring and supervising credit rating agencies .
The global financial crisis , to which the credit rating agencies made their contribution , had an influence on this initiative .
I agree with the European Commission 's proposal to organise the accreditation and supervision of credit rating agencies by the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) .
However , it is vital for the ESMA , as soon as it is established , to be in a position to exercise its remit to ensure sound supervision of credit rating agencies operating in the European Union and also third-country agencies whose ratings will be authorised in the European Union .
In principle , credit rating agencies issue independent opinions on the creditworthiness of an entity , a debt , a financial obligation or a finance instrument .
However , these agencies ' opinions can sometimes seriously impact the economy of the country whose financial regularity they are rating .
In 2009 , the Union adopted Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 which aims to regulate the activities of agencies to protect investors and European financial markets against the risk of malpractice .
It sets the conditions for issuing credit ratings as well as the rules governing the registration and supervision of credit rating agencies .
Meanwhile , a report issued by an expert panel concluded that the framework for supervision needs to be improved to reduce the risk of future financial crises and their severity .
The European Securities and Markets Authority ( ' ESMA ' ) regulation established the European Supervisory Authority .
To ensure that this authority runs smoothly and is properly integrated into the overall framework of financial regulation , it became necessary to amend Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 .
I voted for this report , as it improves control over credit rating agencies .
Based on the report by my excellent colleague and friend Jean-Paul Gauzès from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I voted for the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the 2009 regulation on credit rating agencies and granting the all-new European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) supervisory powers over these entities .
I support the improvements offered by the rapporteur , particularly the transfer of new powers to ESMA which the Commission intended to keep for itself in particular with regard to penalties .
I believe it is important that ESMA can delegate part of its functions to the national authorities .
I regret that no mention is made ( albeit this regulatory amendment is probably not the right medium ) on the matter of rating States and the specific supervision which ought to be in place when rating States .
I propose the creation of a European public agency for rating States which would guarantee the necessary technicality and independence .
in writing . - ( LT ) The global financial crisis showed the need to set up a mechanism for monitoring and supervising credit rating agencies .
There is a need for EU-wide joint oversight of credit rating agencies and integrated supervision of them .
I approved of this important document .
2009 saw the adoption of Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 on credit rating agencies .
It made it possible to establish a European system for registering and supervising credit rating agencies which issue ratings used in the European Union .
It also lays down the conditions for the use in the European Union of ratings issued by third-country agencies .
There needs to be a reliable supervisory and control system and I therefore support the proposed amendments which will strengthen the European Securities and Markets Authority .
This institution must be introduced into the supervision of credit rating agencies operating in the EU and effectively exercise its remit .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report because the economic and financial crisis that has affected the whole world showed the need to set up a mechanism for monitoring and supervising credit rating agencies .
For this reason the European Commission presented a proposal to organise the accreditation and supervision of credit rating agencies by the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) .
Importantly , this authority will be endowed with its own supervisory powers , but also investigatory powers , and it will be able to punish failure to apply this Regulation .
I agree with the European Parliament 's position that there is a need for EU-wide joint oversight of credit rating agencies ' products and integrated supervision of them .
Furthermore , Parliament suggests focusing on the introduction of the ESMA into the supervision of agencies and on the definition of its new tasks and new powers .
It is vital for the ESMA , as soon as it is established , to be in a position to exercise its remit to ensure sound supervision of credit rating agencies operating in the European Union and also third-country agencies whose ratings will be authorised in the European Union .
I abstained in the vote on the report on credit rating agencies .
These rating agencies openly serve the interests of international speculators .
They have played a negative role since the beginning of the crisis and they continue to do so .
Their targeted and arbitrary downgrading of countries ' credit ratings , both inside and outside the EU , send those countries into a vicious circle of speculation and borrowing .
The increase in spreads increases countries ' financial problems and enriches the markets at their expense .
In the euro area in particular , the role and practices of credit rating agencies also has a negative effect on the stability of the euro .
The EU bears serious political responsibility , having granted them the right to rate both companies and the economies of the Member States .
I believe that effective measures need to be taken immediately to put an end to the speculative nature of rating agencies and , consequently , to radically amend Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 .
The report contains some positive but , unfortunately , weak proposals and only takes timid steps in this direction .
in writing . - ( PT ) The need to move towards this change derives from the need to adapt Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 to the new European supervisory architecture , and from the introduction of a new mechanism for the centralisation of the operations of rating agencies .
To this end , the European Supervisory Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority - ESMA ) will be given its own powers of supervision , investigation and for the application of sanctions .
We must now ensure that ESMA is in a position to exercise its powers and to ensure the vigorous supervision of credit rating agencies active within the European Union , as well as those from third countries whose ratings are authorised within the European Union .
This report is a technical amendment to the existing directive , and it will confer powers on the new supervisory authority , EMSA , from January 2011 onwards .
We must remember that it is expected that there will be a more comprehensive improvement of the credit rating agencies in the spring of 2011 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the activity of credit rating agencies is , in theory , already supervised and regulated at European level .
But has this called into question the domination of the three American agencies which call all the shots on the European markets , sovereign debt and hence the rates at which European States can borrow ?
I am afraid not .
This did not stop Standard & Poor , again quite recently , from threatening to downgrade Belgium 's rating , nor Moody 's from threatening Spain nor Fitch Ireland .
None of these agencies has been penalised , neither by their customers nor by their reputation being tarnished , for not having done their work properly during the Enron or subprime crises .
They are now claiming to have a political role : the threat against Belgium is an attempt to force the constitution of a government ; the absence of threat against France to artificially prevent the fragmentation of the euro area .
The truth is that they only have power because the markets are not regulated , and your texts , which I have however voted for , will not do much to improve things .
The regulation covers both the supervision of credit rating agencies by the European Securities and Markets Authority and supervision of the use of credit ratings by individual entities supervised at national level .
The national supervisory authorities will remain responsible for supervising the use of credit ratings by these individual entities .
However , the national authorities will not have powers to take supervisory measures against credit rating agencies in breach of the regulation .
This is the very point on which the proposal is being examined in terms of compliance with the principle of proportionality .
The proposal creates a control system but , within the context of the current neoliberal environment , there is no provision for real , essential application of it ; it is merely a psychologically novel action directly mainly at the public at large .
It is not designed to replace a previous system ; it is designed to introduce a new control system which has not previously existed , even in this form , which is what allowed the credit rating agencies to steam ahead regardless in the first place .
In this sense , it is perhaps better to have this system than none at all .
I voted in favour of the report on the introduction of centralised supervision of credit rating agencies .
I am in complete agreement with the content of Mr Gauzès ' report on the proposal for a regulation which sets out a model for the centralised supervision of credit rating agencies by the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) , especially given the significant mobility of services provided by credit rating agencies and their instantaneous impact on the financial markets .
Centralised supervision could lead to increased transparency in the world of credit rating agencies and could promote greater competition between the different agencies .
That is the reason why I voted in favour of the report .
However , I am concerned that the proposed period during which all the changes regarding the transfer of competencies and duties from the relevant supervisory bodies in the Member States to ESMA is too short , and so I think it should be extended .
I approved of this report because the global financial crisis , to which the credit rating agencies made their contribution , showed the need to set up a mechanism for monitoring and supervising credit rating agencies .
This was the purpose behind the adoption , in 2009 , of the Regulation on credit rating agencies .
It made it possible to establish a European system for registering and supervising credit rating agencies which issue ratings used in the European Union .
It also lays down the conditions for the use in the European Union of ratings issued by third-country agencies .
The agreement reached on the architecture of European supervision which will enter into force on 1 January 2011 provides that the ESMA will exercise its own supervisory powers in relation , in particular , to credit rating agencies .
It is therefore necessary to amend the Regulation on credit rating agencies in order to organise the accreditation and supervision of credit rating agencies by the European Securities and Markets Authority .
This authority will be endowed with its own supervisory powers , but also investigatory powers , and it will be able to punish failure to apply this Regulation .
Fines will be levied by the Member States .
A mechanism for monitoring and supervising credit rating agencies is necessary .
We must take note of the fact that credit rating agencies contributed , in part , to the crisis .
In 2011 we will receive a proposal from the Commission in relation to various supplementary measures concerning ratings , and introducing such measures will be possible after adoption of this report .
The above considerations persuaded me to endorse the report , which I did as an expression of my conviction that it will enter into force quickly and we will see positive results .
Private credit rating agencies have been given new rights to set the standards and promises of delegation of power from the public authorities .
Their dependence on private partners knows no limit .
Nor does their arbitrary nature .
The public authorities have given up .
It is shameful .
in writing . - ( PT ) There is a need to move towards this change so that Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 can be adapted to the new European supervisory architecture and so that a new mechanism for the centralisation of the operations of rating agencies can be introduced .
Thus the European Supervisory Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority - ESMA ) will be given its own powers of supervision , investigation and for the application of sanctions .
It is essential that ESMA is in a position to exercise its powers and to ensure the vigorous supervision of credit rating agencies active within the European Union .
in writing . - ( ES ) I was not able to support this report , as although I am in favour of many of the points included and of the general propositions of increased transparency and improved information and supervision for credit agencies and other financial entities , this proposal will serve the interests of investors , who are professionals far removed from what has been described as the ' real economy ' , since it gives them greater legal security .
Therefore , although I believe it is necessary , as this proposal states , to work hard to achieve transparency and the right to clear information in the financial system , I believe it is more necessary to put an end to financial speculation and work to achieve regulation that will place the financial markets under the supervision of the Member States .
This report works towards transparency , information and a degree of supervision of financial agents , but it does so cautiously and from a pro-capitalist perspective that seeks to please the financial industry , which I neither share not support .
in writing . - It is a very important instrument to inform EU citizens about the situation in the companies and banks , but also to compare the competitiveness of different brands and articles .
I voted in favour .
I also hope that in future this regulation will be completed by control of the rates of political parties and the mass media in order to prevent the manipulation of public opinion for money .
The credit rating agencies do not work hard in getting the information and analysing it .
They are ready to show the convenient result to those who pay .
All those who are manipulating public opinion and thus betraying society deserve severe punishment .
in writing . - ( DE ) More than anything else the financial crisis has made it clear to us that credit rating agencies have a dangerous monopoly and that their evaluations are not always adequate and are sometimes highly risky .
Therefore , it is important to set up a mechanism for monitoring and supervising rating agencies .
As they form part of a highly complex system of financial markets , the decision was made to introduce a double system for this purpose .
In addition , the report lays down the conditions under which ratings issued by third-country agencies can be used in the European Union .
It is , of course , essential for the supervisory system to allow sanctions to be imposed .
The future will show to what extent these will actually be applied .
The fact that several EU supervisory bodies have now been set up , involving increased administration and costs , is not a good thing for European taxpayers .
I have taken this into account when voting .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution as I agree that :
the registration and permanent supervision of credit rating agencies within the Union should be the sole responsibility of the European Supervisory Authority ( ESA ) , namely the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) , which should have exclusive powers to sign cooperation agreements on the exchange of information with the relevant authorities in third countries ;
the ESA ( ESMA ) should be responsible for the registration and permanent supervision of credit rating agencies , with the right to seek , by means of a simple request or a decision , all of the information that it needs from credit rating agencies , individuals involved in credit rating activities , organisations that are the subject of rating and third parties linked to them , third parties to which credit rating agencies have subcontracted any operational tasks , and individuals of any other kind that are closely and substantively linked to credit rating agencies or activities ;
that the registration of a credit rating agency agreed by a relevant authority should be valid throughout the entire Union following the transfer of supervisory powers from the relevant authorities to ESA ( ESMA ) .
The global financial crisis , to which the credit rating agencies made their contribution , showed the need to set up a mechanism for monitoring and supervising credit rating agencies .
This was the purpose behind the adoption , in 2009 , of Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 on credit rating agencies .
It made it possible to establish a European system for registering and supervising credit rating agencies which issue ratings used in the European Union .
It also lays down the conditions for the use in the European Union of ratings issued by third-country agencies , by applying a double system of equivalence and endorsement of ratings .
I therefore voted in favour and support the rapporteur , Mr Gauzes , who suggests focusing on the introduction of the European Securities and Markets Authority into the supervision of agencies and on the definition of its new tasks and new powers .
It is , in fact , vital for the ESMA , as soon as it is established , to be in a position to exercise its remit to ensure sound supervision of credit rating agencies operating in the EU and also third-country agencies whose ratings will be authorised in the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution as I agree that the transparency of the information provided by the issuer of a financial instrument rated by a designated credit rating agency may potentially represent substantial added value for the functioning of the market and the protection of investors .
in writing . - The global financial crisis , to which the credit rating agencies made their contribution , showed the need to set up a mechanism for monitoring and supervising these agencies .
This was the purpose behind the adoption , in 2009 , of Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 on credit rating agencies .
This made it possible to establish a European system for registering and supervising credit rating agencies which issue ratings used in the European Union .
It also lays down the conditions for the use in the European Union of ratings issued by third-country agencies , by applying a double system of equivalence and endorsement of ratings .
During the debates preceding the adoption of Regulation ( EC ) No 1060 / 2009 , your rapporteur stressed the need for EU-wide joint oversight of credit rating agencies ' products and integrated supervision of them .
This principle was upheld and the Commission undertook to draft a legislative proposal along these lines .
The agreement reached on the architecture of European supervision which will enter into force on 1 January 2011 now makes the effective implementation of rating agency supervision possible .
It is stressed in the regulation establishing the ESMA that this authority will exercise its own supervisory powers in relation , in particular , to credit rating agencies .
The regulation covers both the supervision of credit rating agencies by the European Securities and Markets Authority and supervision of the use of credit ratings by individual entities supervised at national level .
The national supervisory authorities will remain responsible for supervising the use of credit ratings by these individual entities .
Nonetheless , the national authorities will not have the power to take supervisory measures against credit rating agencies in the event of infringement of the regulation .
This is the very point on which the proposal is being checked in terms of compliance with the principle of proportionality .
The proposal creates a control system for which , within the context of the current neoliberal environment , there is no provision for real , essential application above and beyond its psychologically novel action , which is directly mainly at the public at large .
However , it is not designed to replace a previous system ; it is designed to introduce a new control system which has not previously existed , even in this form , which is what allowed the credit rating agencies to steam ahead regardless .
In this sense , it is perhaps better to have this system than none at all .
in writing . - ( DE ) I was happy to vote in favour of this report .
The gradual process of regulating the financial markets is beginning to take shape .
Protection for investors has been improved and transparency has been increased .
The regulations are now more wide-ranging and comprehensive and , therefore , provide better protection for those involved .
in writing . - ( DE ) The worldwide financial crisis , which was in part caused by credit rating agencies , has made it necessary to set up a mechanism for monitoring and supervising these agencies .
For this reason , the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) will come into being on 1 January 2011 .
At the same time , the continuing crisis and the constant new discoveries about market mechanisms make it necessary for the tasks and authority of this body to be constantly adjusted and , if required , expanded .
Therefore , I very much welcome the detailed specifications and clarifications concerning the authority of the ESMA in its relationships with the relevant national bodies .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because it contributes to the necessary simplification of the EU legal framework .
I believe that the eight directives currently in force in the field of metrology hinder more than help work in this field .
At the same time I share the rapporteur 's position that the Member States should be given more time to investigate whether repealing the Directives will lead to legal uncertainty which makes European harmonisation of rules necessary .
I therefore believe that a solution must be adopted which repeals the Directives , but also provides sufficient time to analyse the possible consequences in context with the broader review of the basic legal instrument in this field .
Metrology is the science of measurements .
Since ancient times , Europeans have adopted a succession of measuring systems in all fields ( length , volume , alcoholometry , and so on ) .
The adoption of the metric system , for example , led to improved collaboration between the various economic operators on the continent and then globally .
However , a wide variety of measurements and measuring systems prevail in many fields .
Through a desire to remove these barriers to cooperation between Europeans , the Union has a longstanding policy of harmonising measuring systems .
Directive 2004 / 22 was an important step in this movement .
As we prepare to revise this legislation , a number of instruments now appear obsolete and should be removed to make it more readable .
I supported this text as it provides a welcome adjustment to the law on metrology .
I agree with the need to simplify the Community acquis and to update the directives that no longer apply , adapting them to our times .
The directives in question are obsolete and do not contribute to better regulation .
The Commission believes that there is no need to harmonise legislation on metrology , as its understanding is that there is sufficient cooperation between Member States and that the current situation of the common recognition of rules based on the international parameters of the different Member States is satisfactory .
However , it needs to be taken into account that it would be detrimental to have a void in the regulation on this issue , and that we should not contribute to legal uncertainties .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report under discussion talks about the possibility of withdrawing up to eight directives relating to metrology in six sectors , with a view to simplifying the body of European law in this area : cold water meters for non-clean water ( Directive 75 / 33 / EEC ) ; alcohol meters and alcohol tables ( Directives 76 / 765 / EEC and 76 / 766 / EEC ) ; medium and above-medium accuracy weights , respectively ( Directives 71 / 317 / EEC and 74 / 148 / EEC ) ; tyre pressure gauges for motor vehicles ( Directive 86 / 217 / EEC ) ; standard mass of grain ( Directive 71 / 347 / EEC ) , and calibration of ship tanks ( Directive 71 / 349 / EEC ) .
The different options relating to these eight directives under consideration being - revocation in its entirety , revocation with conditions and no measures being taken - the Commission concluded that there is no option that stands out .
However , for reasons of improved regulation , the Commission favours the revocation in its entirety of all of the directives , that is to say , it favours new regulation within the framework of measuring instruments .
I favour this choice by the Commission from a legislative excellence point of view , although I believe that the Member States should be given sufficient time to analyse the possible consequences within the context of a broader review of the basic legal instrument in this area , namely the Directive relating to measuring instruments ( Directive 2004 / 22 / EC ) .
A simple and up-to-date Community acquis is one of the EU 's objectives .
It does not make sense to keep rules that are entirely obsolete in place .
With regard to metrology , the understanding is that there is no need to proceed with any harmonisation , as the legislation in place is a common recognition of rules based on the international parameters of the various Member States .
However , it is important that a gap in the regulation on this issue is not created , so that there are no legal uncertainties .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of this report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and the Council repealing eight Council directives regarding metrology as , like the rapporteur , I support the general objective of better legislation .
I also support the view that ' Member States should be given more time to investigate whether repealing the directives will lead to legal uncertainty ' .
I believe that these directives concerning measuring instruments need to be repealed and simplified by revising the legal basis for metrology : the Directive on measuring instruments .
In general I think it is a positive step to simplify EU legislation , as it will improve access for citizens to that legislation and make it possible to work more efficiently in that field .
in writing . - ( DE ) Eight EU directives currently cover the field of metrology in six different areas .
For reasons of better law-making , the Commission is therefore proposing to repeal the directives .
According to the Commission , harmonisation is not necessary , as the current situation of mutual recognition of national rules functions satisfactorily .
However , the rapporteur is of the opinion that the Member States should be given more time to investigate whether repealing the directives will lead to legal uncertainty .
I have voted in favour of the report , as the problems of legal uncertainty will be taken into account by the rapporteur .
Repealing European directives essentially means leaving a regulatory vacuum in the European Union 's system , but modernising a system such as that of the directives on metrology is certainly a step toward a broader and more up-to-date common system .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the report repealing the eight Council directives on metrology .
The principle shared by the Council and the Commission is nevertheless delicately balanced because each Member State will have to rely on mutual recognition of national standards , avoiding causing problems to businesses in the sector that rely on metrology rules until the revision of the directive on measuring instruments that will harmonise the relevant legislation at European level is adopted .
I agree with the position of the rapporteur who advocates improved regulation with regard to metrology .
The Commission was favouring the complete revocation of all eight directives relating to metrology ; however , the rapporteur 's position is more balanced , giving Member States more time to investigate whether revocation of the directives will lead to legal uncertainty , making it necessary for there to be European harmonisation of the rules relating to metrology .
A transitional period is thus established in order to analyse the possible consequences of the revocation of the directives , and to analyse the need to review the basic directive in this area ( Directive 2004 / 22 / EC ) .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Weisgerber , who favours the general objective of better regulation .
However , with regard to this proposal it is not that clear what the best option will be .
The Commission concludes in their Impact Assessment , when looking at the different options concerning these eight metrology directives ( full repeal , repeal with conditions , do nothing ) , that ' no option stands out ' .
Still , for reasons of better regulation , the Commission favours the full repeal of all directives ( and relies on mutual recognition of national regulation ) above harmonisation , that is , . re-regulation in the Directive on measuring instruments .
To reiterate , I agree with the rapporteur , who is of the opinion that Member States should be given more time to investigate whether repealing the directives will lead to legal uncertainty which makes European harmonisation of rules necessary .
in writing . - ( RO ) Repealing all eight directives will most likely lead to additional administrative burdens as Members States will be able to introduce national provisions implementing the measuring instruments covered by the directives being repealed .
Neither the directives being repealed nor those remaining in force will enhance the common level of consumer protection . This could only be achieved by amending them .
I think that Member States should be given more time to investigate whether repealing the directives would lead to legal uncertainty which would make the harmonisation of European rules necessary .
I also support the rapporteur 's proposal for the process to be completed by 1 May 2014 .
Consequently , I voted for this report as it opts for a solution where the directives will be repealed , but also provides sufficient time to analyse the possible consequences in the context of the broad review of the basic legal instrument in this field , the Measurement Instruments Directive ( 2004 / 22 / EC ) .
in writing . - ( PT ) I agree with the general objective of improved regulation in the area of metrology .
However , I believe greater reflection would be advisable , as hasty standardisation could lead to more disruption and legal uncertainty than benefits .
in writing . - With this vote , the EP shows that it favours the general objective of better regulation .
However , with regard to this proposal it is not that clear what the best option will be .
The Commission concludes in their Impact Assessment , when looking at the different options concerning these 8 metrology directives ( full repeal , repeal with conditions , do nothing ) , that ' no option stands out ' .
Still , for reasons of better regulation , the Commission favours the full repeal of all Directives ( and relies on mutual recognition of national regulation ) above harmonisation , that is , re-regulation in MID .
The EP is of the opinion that Member States should be given more time to investigate whether repealing the directives will lead to legal uncertainty which makes European harmonisation of rules necessary .
Therefore we have opted for a solution where the directives will be repealed and which also provides sufficient time to analyse the possible consequences in context with the broader review of the basic legal instrument in this field , the ' Measurement Instruments Directive ' ( 2004 / 22 / EC ) .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted in favour of the report , because it makes a significant contribution to reducing bureaucracy , which is something that is constantly being called for , and allows more than 20 directives that are obsolete or no longer needed to be repealed .
This is the right approach to achieving a simpler and leaner Europe .
in writing . - ( LT ) I approved of this important resolution because I am convinced that the European citizens ' initiative will be a powerful agenda-setting instrument and will foster greater cross-border debates within the EU .
The citizens ' initiative gives European citizens the right to make a legislative proposal .
For this initiative to be effective the organisers of a European citizens ' initiative should gather into a citizens ' committee composed of persons coming from different Member States .
This will ensure that the issues which arise are truly European , all the while having the added value of helping the collection of signatures from the very beginning .
I feel that the citizens ' initiative will only succeed if the EU regulation is citizen-friendly and does not create cumbersome obligations for and frustration among the organisers .
It is also very important that the process is in line with the EU data protection requirements and that it is fully transparent , from the start until the end .
The European citizens ' initiative is a new instrument of participatory democracy on a continental scale and therefore significant attention should be paid to communication and information campaigns aimed at raising awareness of the European citizens ' initiative .
The compromise between the European Parliament and the Council on the regulation on the so-called citizens ' initiative , which has been accompanied by ridiculous triumphant talk about the strengthening of the democratic institutions of the EU , is nothing more than an insulting attempt to manipulate and fool the people .
The misleadingly entitled citizens ' initiative is not only useless ; it may prove to be dangerous for the people .
Apart from any procedural requirements agreed in terms of collecting 1 000 000 signatures petitioning the Commission to take a legislative initiative , materially it is the same : the Commission is under no obligation to propose the legislative initiative and is not bound by its contents .
On the contrary , this type of ' citizens ' initiative ' , guided and manipulated by the mechanisms of capital and the bourgeois political system , may be used by EU bodies to present the most anti-grassroots and reactionary choices of the EU and the monopolies as an apparently ' popular request ' .
Moreover , this sort of ' initiative ' will be used to set signatures , memoranda and requests against the organised grassroots and working class movement , mass demonstrations and struggles and various forms of fight .
Various ' citizens ' initiatives ' cannot hide the reactionary face of the EU , nor will they be able to reverse the escalation in the class struggle and grassroots fight .
The citizens ' initiative was promised in the Treaty of Lisbon and is now finally being implemented .
This new form of participation in the formulation of European Union policy allows European citizens to directly approach the Commission asking it to table a proposal on matters of interest to them , provided these fall within the framework of the EU 's powers .
We were only waiting for rules of procedure to be introduced for this new European citizens ' right to become a reality .
This has now been done and I supported the proposal in the vote .
A ' citizens ' committee ' made up of individuals from at least seven Member States can register an initiative with the Commission .
After this , the process to gather signatures on paper or online can begin .
The million signatures that are required must come from at least one quarter of the EU Member States and must be gathered within 12 months .
Member States will verify the statements of support .
All the signatures must be submitted by European Union citizens old enough to vote in the European parliamentary elections .
Lastly , the Commission , as guardian of the treaties , will be the final judge of whether the proposed legislative procedure should be undertaken .
in writing . - ( LT ) I support the decision adopted by the European Parliament on the right in the European citizens ' initiative to make a legislative proposal .
It is believed that the introduction of the initiative will establish a direct link between the citizens and the institutions , thus bridging the gap between them and ensuring that the EU institutions will address the concrete problems which are of importance to them .
Through the ECI , EU citizens can appeal directly to the European Commission to initiate a legal act .
The Commission will be the one deciding on the follow-up to be given to successful citizens ' initiatives .
The European Parliament will be able to contribute to the achievement of these goals through the organisation of public hearings or the adoption of resolutions .
As this is a new initiative it would be useful for the Commission to present a report on its implementation every three years and , if relevant , to propose a revision of the regulation .
In order to ensure effective application of the initiative complicated administrative procedures should be avoided .
It is also necessary to ensure that the process is in line with the EU data protection requirements .
After a compromise was reached on the rules governing the European citizens ' initiative , the report was adopted by a very large majority : 628 for and only 15 against and 24 abstentions .
I am delighted with this vote , which introduces the opportunity starting in 2012 for Europe 's citizens to make their voices heard more clearly .
The concept is simple , it is a sort of petition at European level : a citizens ' committee made up of members from at least seven Member States will have a year to collect one million signatures on a subject of public interest which requires the attention of the Commission .
The Commission must then decide within three months whether or not it considers that a legislative proposal on the subject is appropriate and must give reasons for its decision .
We may be opposed to some of the conditions obtained by Member States , such as the requirement to be a citizen rather than simply a resident of the European Union in order to be able to sign the petition ; or the option for states to ask for individuals ' identity cards in order to check their signatures .
Nonetheless , the citizens ' initiative is a positive idea and a step towards participative democracy which we must now put into practice .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report because the European citizens ' initiative , introduced in the Treaty of Lisbon is a huge step towards closer relations between the European Union and European citizens .
The new initiative will grant citizens the same political initiative powers that the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament already enjoy .
Furthermore , it will provide citizens with a means to be heard by enabling them to refer some issues of interest to the European institutions .
Such a two-way flow is mutually beneficial .
With the introduction of the initiative there will be a guarantee that the European Union institutions will address the concrete problems which are of importance to citizens .
Moreover , the European Parliament will be able to help citizens achieve these goals by making use of all the means in its power to support the citizens ' initiatives of its choice , notably through the organisation of public hearings or the adoption of resolutions .
However , the European Union must ensure that the process is in line with the EU data protection requirements and that it is fully transparent , from the start until the end .
Only by guaranteeing a safe environment where citizens can present proposals , will we be able to win their trust and encourage their interest in the work of the European Union .
The citizens ' initiative , which gives a million Europeans the right to propose legislative initiatives , incorporates the concept of participative democracy into the European Union , which is actually stipulated in the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is a new , important step which the EU is taking and Parliament will therefore receive feedback from the citizens whom it represents on whether it is doing a good job or not .
I welcome the fact that Parliament has endeavoured , as far as possible , to make the legislative initiative procedure for EU citizens as simple and easy to use as possible because they are the ones who will actually use it .
We would not have needed a complicated procedure which would have only made EU citizens frustrated .
Parliament 's key demands have been accepted , such as the admissibility check right at the start rather than carrying out a check after the first 300 000 signatures have been collected .
I regard it as a victory for Parliament and EU citizens that the minimum number of Member States from which signatures need to be collected is a quarter and not a third , as had originally been proposed .
I hope that when Parliament 's decision comes into force in 2012 , there will be as many initiatives as possible submitted by EU citizens .
I voted in favour of the report on the citizens ' initiative , knowing full well that it is simply a means of expression of the will of the citizens of Europe and not a powerful means of participating in or reversing current policies .
The Commission tried to the very end to limit this specific civil right and , thus , the final text does not reflect the real ambitions ; for example , it introduces particular complex procedures for exercising this right .
Unfortunately , important amendments by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left were rejected and , as a result , initiatives cannot be signed by EU residents who are not nationals of a Member State , thereby precluding equal participation of residents , regardless of nationality , nor is there a guarantee that signatures will tally with signatories ' ID numbers .
Despite this , the final text is a much better version than the text originally proposed , in that it sets the minimum at a quarter of the Member States , proposes that initiatives be registered immediately and requires the Commission to organise a public hearing for every successful initiative and to guarantee absolute transparency in connection with the funding of each initiative .
I have always seen this initiative as one of the most important innovations of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The possibility of a million citizens of a significant number of Member States being able to put forward a legislative initiative should contribute to the strengthening by European citizenship of civil society organised at an EU level .
I have emphasised the scope of this measure , given that Members of the European Parliament do not have the right to legislative initiatives .
I hope that the practical application of this legislative initiative does not turn out to be excessively bureaucratic , discouraging use of this new instrument .
in writing . - Although I fully support the European Citizen 's initiative , I voted against the final legislative resolution because I am disappointed with how little was ultimately achieved with this promising tool .
In particular , I do not agree with the provision requesting signatories in the majority of Member States to give their personal ID numbers .
I am also against the restriction of participation in the ECI to EU citizens only .
The adoption of the basic rules of ' the citizens ' initiative ' as laid down by the Treaty of Lisbon , marks another step further towards direct democracy in Europe .
In future , the Commission will have to consider drawing up a new European law when there is demand to do so from one million citizens from at least one quarter of all Member States .
This new instrument therefore gives European citizens the ability to genuinely influence the legislative process , by bringing a demand or a concern raised by the people 's will to European level .
It is a victory for our movement which has consistently called for bringing the European Union closer to its citizens by building a more solid , a more transparent and a more accessible Europe .
I am pleased that I voted , along with the huge majority of Members , in favour of the report on the ' citizens ' initiative ' , which introduces an unprecedented dose of popular participation in the EU 's legislative process .
Indeed , by giving one million citizens the right of political initiative , Parliament is holding itself up as a fine example of participatory democracy .
This is now the way forward for the European Union : it must become ever closer to its citizens .
in writing . - ( DE ) Some small improvements have been made in comparison with the original draft .
Therefore , I have voted in favour of the report .
Nevertheless , I would like to say that , even with this toothless citizens ' initiative , there is still a striking democratic deficit in the EU , which does not have any form of direct democracy .
As a result , the next step must be the introduction of obligatory referendums for successful initiatives .
The inclusion of a mandatory public hearing for the initiators of petitions involving the Commission and Parliament is very welcome .
Now the Member States must implement the citizens ' initiative quickly , without wasting time or introducing excessive red tape .
Identity card checks by local authorities , such as those which apply in the case of national petitions for referendums , will not be needed to evaluate the statements of support .
The national electoral authorities should rely on random sampling , as proposed by the European Parliament .
I voted in favour of the report on the draft European Parliament and Council regulation relating to the citizens ' initiative , one of the most relevant provisions introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , and under the terms of which one million citizens can ask the Commission to put forward certain legislative proposals .
The proposals adopted by the European Parliament should enable the rules relating to the citizens ' initiative to be made clearer , simpler and easier to apply .
The citizens ' initiative , approved today , is one more step towards the establishment of a Europe made for people and by people , increasing its democratic nature and transparency , and encouraging Europe to move closer to its citizens and an active , interested and participative civil society .
From now on it will be possible for European citizens to submit a request that the European Commission proposes legislation on a given issue , provided that a minimum number of signatories coming from at least one-fifth of Member States is guaranteed .
However , I have to express some bewilderment at the exclusion of collective entities and organisations as ' organisers ' ( Article 2 , No 3 ) , thinking in particular of NGOs and political parties , the founding organisations of representative democracy , as well as at the terminology chosen - " citizens ' committee ” - to identify the group of organisers .
I am also left wondering at the attempt to set the minimum age of signatories at 16 , when , in the majority of Member States , the right to vote , actively or passively , is acquired at the age of majority , at 18 years of age .
This should be the yardstick , as proposed by the Commission in sections 7 and 2 of Article 3 of the proposal .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am pleased about the adoption of this report on the European citizens ' initiative introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , which has the objective of assigning to citizens the same powers of political initiative as those currently enjoyed by the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament .
Each initiative will have 12 months to collect one million signatures , which need to come from at least a quarter of Member States , currently seven .
The minimum number of signatories per country varies from 74 250 in Germany to 3 750 in Malta .
In Portugal 's case , the minimum number of signatories required to support an initiative will be 16 500 .
The validity of declarations of support will be gauged by the Member States .
In Portugal , an identity card , passport or citizen 's card number will need to be included .
Signatories should be EU citizens and be old enough to be able to vote in European elections ( 18 in Portugal ) .
It will then be up to the Commission to analyse the initiative and decide , within a timeframe of three months , if it will put forward European legislation on the issue .
The Community 's executive will then have to ' indicate the measures that it intends to take , and the reasons that justify these or not ' .
This justification will be made public .
I welcome the report by Mr Lamassoure and Mrs Gurmai on the citizens ' initiative .
This vote has approved and even helps lay down the ground rules for the operation of the European citizens ' initiative , as provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
A citizens ' committee composed of persons coming from at least seven Member States may register an initiative and begin to gather the 1 million signatures necessary , on paper or online , once the Commission has carried out an admissibility check .
This example of participative democracy has great potential because it involves citizens at first hand and enables them , in a certain sense , to be a part of our work .
The joint work by the two co-rapporteurs showed that even ideological divisions can be overcome when work is carried out effectively and in the interests of citizens .
This underlying position is typical of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which is always pro-active , open to dialogue and cooperation , but at the same time is anchored in solid and unshakeable values .
This is a clearly demagogical initiative , propaganda by the European Union , which only serves to try and hide the impoverishment of democracy that is taking place , and to make us forget that it is those in charge in Europe who prevented a referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon itself , which anticipated the so-called citizens ' initiative .
Meanwhile , the Treaty on European Union itself establishes limitations on such a citizens ' initiative by stating , in Article 11 , that a million signatures from a significant number of Member States is required , and going on to say that they can only invite the European Commission to put forward an appropriate proposal on issues that these citizens consider to require a Union legal instrument in order to apply the Treaties .
In other words , after all the work of collecting signatures and fulfilling the requirements that the draft regulation lays down , there are no guarantees that the citizens ' wishes will be taken into account .
In any case , the report approved by the EP improves slightly on the European Commission 's proposal , but must comply with the terms of the Treaty , which initially , in fact limits any deepening of the citizens ' initiative .
That is why we abstained .
Any citizens ' initiative must be signed by over a million citizens of the European Union , and a quarter of European Union Member States must be covered by those signatories : that was the most important point of this Regulation .
The Irish Government intends to verify the signatories from Ireland by checking that country 's electoral roll for elections to the European Parliament .
I abstained on the regulation to implement the European citizens ' initiative .
In my opinion , Parliament is misguided in wanting to facilitate these initiatives as much as possible , particularly in reducing the number of Member States from which the signatures must come .
I remain a supporter of representative democracy .
Citizens ' initiatives will not help resolve the EU 's economic , social , environmental and societal problems .
What are called citizens ' initiatives will essentially serve extremist political forces that will seize these instruments to campaign for the restoration of the death penalty , against the construction of minarets , against the ' creeping Islamisation ' of Europe and other populist subjects .
We have all been waiting for it ever since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force last year : the regulation on the citizens ' initiative , which lays down the procedures for its implementation , its rules and basic procedures and which above all will finally enable use of this new instrument .
From now on , one million European citizens , that is to say just 0.2 % of the EU population , can ask the Commission to put forward proposals in certain areas : an important step towards participatory democracy , which should enable and encourage cross-border debates in Europe as the initiative must be brought by citizens residing in various Member States ; a significant step forward in bringing together the citizens of Europe , in the hope that this new instrument will actually be used by European citizens , that it will be effective and that the European Commission will be able to follow the proposals put forward by citizens .
The European citizens ' initiative is one of the most interesting innovations set out in the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is a European petition that will enable one million European citizens , from a representative number of EU Member States , to impose a matter on the Commission 's agenda .
In other words , it marks the emergence of a genuine legislative power for European citizens , as the Commission will be obliged to respond to this citizens ' initiative by commissioning a study or proposing a directive .
In a context where citizens ' feeling of belonging to the Union is still too weak and where rates of abstention at the European elections , especially , are particularly worrying , this new tool will enable European citizens to become fully-fledged actors in European democracy .
For this reason , I find it somewhat regrettable to hear voices being raised today on the risks involved in the citizens ' initiative .
The compromise reached with the Council is completely fair , and the criteria governing the admissibility of the project will ensure that unfair initiatives will never see the light of day .
We should not be afraid of debates generated by citizens availing themselves of this tool .
I voted for this text .
The European citizens ' legislative initiative constitutes a fundamental step in the process of building a Europe based on citizens ' rights .
Strict admissibility criteria , accessible and simplified procedures and representativeness of Member States constitute the key pillars of an instrument that restores the primacy of the value of participatory democracy .
In accordance with the values of the Union , the Treaty of Lisbon grants at least 1 million citizens , representing at least one quarter of Member States , an authentic opportunity for effective citizens ' involvement in forming rules in line with expectations of the European people .
We hope that this instrument will boost citizens ' rights and that we will soon reach a time when we will be able to positively assess the results achieved and , where necessary , make due corrections in the interests of citizens to make this truly innovative project even more streamlined and flexible .
In this way , the Union based on the euro will be coordinated with the Europe that hinges on the European people 's right to citizenship .
in writing . - ( LT ) I approved of this report because the European citizens ' initiative is a new instrument of participatory democracy on a continental scale .
It is a tool which should be used by the citizens themselves and its aim is to strengthen direct democracy , active citizenship , and the influence of the European citizens on the European Union policies .
This initiative was introduced in the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe and then in the Treaty of Lisbon , with the aim of granting citizens the same political initiative powers that the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament already enjoy .
I am pleased that the report promotes the use of modern technologies as an appropriate instrument of participatory democracy .
The introduction of the initiative will establish a direct link between the citizens and the institutions , thus bridging the gap between them and ensuring that the EU institutions will address the concrete problems which are of importance to them .
in writing . - ( DE ) The citizens ' initiative that has been adopted today is an important step towards bringing the European Union closer to its citizens .
This finally gives the citizens of the European Union the opportunity to take an active part in political events .
In addition , it enables them not only to become involved in politics , but also to call directly on the Commission to take action .
It is important to ensure that the initiative is as citizen-friendly and straightforward as possible , without encouraging its misuse .
However user-friendly the citizens ' initiative is , if it is overused it will become devalued .
The citizens ' initiative will introduce more democracy and will contribute significantly to making Europe more modern and to bringing it to life for its citizens .
I would like to call once again on Parliament and also on the Commission to ensure that the Committee on Petitions is given an appropriate role in this process .
One of the main objectives of the European citizens ' initiative is to bring the European institutions closer to the citizens and to make it easier for ordinary Europeans to exercise their rights and privileges .
It will certainly improve the lives of the residents of Member States and help in the creation of a pro-social image for the Union .
The authors of the proposal have also endeavoured to achieve the simplest possible model for organising meetings and collecting signatures as part of an initiative .
If Europeans are going to want to voice their opinions on a matter which they consider to be important , it is our duty to ensure that they are heard and their requests given consideration .
After all , this is what true democracy means .
in writing . - ( LV ) Today the European Parliament has made a historic decision , which gives civil society the opportunity of becoming much more actively involved in the decision-making process .
An active civil society , which takes part in the making of political decisions , is one of the cornerstones of a democracy .
It is one of the basic requirements for a politics of high quality , which has over the course of many years allowed the Member States of the European Union to reach a high level of democracy , human rights and welfare , and Europe as a whole to become the world 's most developed region .
The task of civil society does not lie solely in taking part in elections .
Citizens must also become involved from day to day in the decision-making process , expressing their opinion on specific decisions or events on the political agenda .
It is in their interests to become involved in democratic control over authority and to criticise politicians over their activities .
Without an active civil society , it would not have been possible to restore the independence of the Baltic States and secure our return to Europe .
That is why I am voting in favour of the citizens ' initiative with great conviction .
Until now , European legislation has not contained sufficiently developed clear mechanisms for Europeans to become involved in the decision-making process and for drawing the attention of European institutions to citizens ' current concerns .
I believe that the citizens ' initiative will increase people 's faith in the European Union and enhance the legitimacy of decisions that are made .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the proposed amendments by the EP to the citizens ' initiative , as I believe that they make the initiative stronger and enable more people to participate .
This is a historic moment in which European citizens are being given a concrete measure for bringing important issues and topics to EU level .
I urge the Commission to take note of the amendment asking for easy procedures and transparent information for citizens .
It is one thing to create such a mechanism , but it also has to be accessible and understandable to EU citizens in order to enable them to make full use of it .
Parliament is seeking an easing of the criteria with regard to signatories by asking that they should come from at least a fifth , rather than a third , of the Member States .
It is also calling for the creation of an easily accessible , free-of-charge online collection system for signatures .
I would especially like to underline the need to convene citizens ' committees to organise initiatives .
The citizens ' committees movement was one of the most important factors that led to the renewed independence of Estonia in 1991 .
This is a clear sign that citizens together can bring down walls .
in writing . - ( DE ) I support Parliament 's decision to introduce the option of the citizens ' initiative for the citizens of the EU .
The new EU-wide petition system is an important means of allowing citizens to become more involved and will ensure more direct democracy .
The Treaty on European Union as a whole improves the democratic functioning of the Union .
Citizens can participate in the democratic life of the Union and approach the Commission directly .
The citizens ' initiative gives citizens a right of initiative similar to that of the European Parliament and the Council .
In order to ensure that the citizens ' initiative is implemented correctly , at least one million signatures are needed from a minimum of one fifth of all the Member States .
In addition , Parliament recommends measures in its resolution which will make the citizens ' initiative easier to use .
For example , the Commission should consider using the existing programmes which promote mobility and active citizenship , as well as new forms of communication , such as social networking , which encourage public debate .
I welcome the fact that the representations and offices in the Member States will act as interfaces and advisory bodies .
in writing . - ( DE ) Despite the improvements to the European citizens ' initiative resulting from the compromise between the Commission and Parliament , it still involves unnecessary bureaucratic hurdles .
In addition , there is the risk that it will be used as a tool , for example by large companies and organisations , because although transparency is guaranteed , there is no limit on donations from businesses .
For these reasons among others , we have abstained in the final vote .
Some of our criticisms are as follows :
1 .
Businesses are not excluded from the initiative .
2 .
No decision has been made about whether younger citizens can take part from the age of 16 .
Instead this is dependent on national electoral law .
3 .
Third-party nationals who live in the EU cannot take part .
4 .
No compensation is available above 100 000 signatures ( EUR 0.005 per signature ) .
As a result , the initiative will be very costly for the initiators and , therefore , is not equally accessible to all .
5 .
There is no ban on company donations in support of a European citizens ' initiative and they have no upper limit .
6 .
No specific information is provided about the possibility of appealing to the Court of Justice of the Europe Union if an initiative is rejected .
7 .
If the European Commission rejects a related draft legislative text , it is not obliged to justify its decision .
in writing . - ( RO ) The citizens ' initiative will establish a direct link between citizens and institutions , thereby plugging the current gap and making EU institutions deal with the major problems facing citizens .
I wish to emphasise a few points which must not be overlooked :
1 .
The citizens ' initiative will only be successful if the associated regulation is easy for citizens to understand and apply , without imposing excessive obligations on organisers .
2 .
Following the negotiations conducted with the Commission and the Council , we have a common understanding which stipulates the need for the supporters of a citizens ' initiative to provide certain elements of ID and for facilities for Member States to verify them .
However , it is vital to ensure that the process complies with EU legislation in the area of data protection .
Any organisation with the opportunity to support citizens ' initiatives must provide total transparency regarding the support being provided so that the signatories are aware who is behind an initiative they choose to support .
3 .
The European Parliament information offices in Member States and the Commission 's information networks , such as Europe Direct and the Citizen Signpost Service , must be involved in providing all the necessary information regarding the citizens ' initiative .
I was pleased to hear the result of today 's vote on the citizens ' initiative .
By bringing in the citizens ' initiative , the Treaty of Lisbon has become a legislative tool for the EU 's citizens , but we have to remember that collecting a million signatures does not yet mean that a new law will be made .
This process has to go the whole length of the UE legislative route , and we MEPs must make sure that procedures are simplified , to avoid disappointment , here .
I think we should run a good information campaign in the Member States about this instrument , so that the issues raised under the EU citizens ' initiative correspond with what is said in the Treaties and are in accord with the EU 's values .
in writing . - ( PT ) With this important initiative of the European Parliament , one million European citizens will be able to ask the European Commission to put forward legislation on a given issue .
The rules implementing the ' citizens ' initiative ' , approved today by the European Parliament , state that signatories need to come from at least seven Member States .
In Portugal 's case , at least 16 500 signatories will be required to support an initiative .
Alongside the Treaty of Lisbon , a ' citizens ' right of initiative ' was created , under the terms of which one million European citizens may ask the European Commission to put forward certain legislative proposals .
The regulation adopted in plenary today sets out the necessary conditions for putting forward future citizens ' initiatives .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of this report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on the citizens ' initiative because , although it only vaguely satisfies my group 's position , because it ignores important issues such as the idea of allowing initiatives proposing changes to the Treaties or that of extending the period for collecting signatures from the proposed 12 months to 18 months , I believe nonetheless that the report is an considerable yet insufficient improvement on the text put forward by the Commission .
The citizens ' initiative is a mechanism for public participation laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon to make it possible for citizens and civil society to play a role in the process of drawing up European policies .
I have supported the text tabled as it facilitates the creation of the mechanism and its combined procedure .
For example , it simplifies the process of registering initiatives and reduces the requirement regarding the number of Member States that must be represented among the citizens ( from a third to a quarter ) .
It also represents progress compared with the Commission 's proposal , since it improves transparency regarding the funding of campaigns to collect signatures .
The European citizens ' initiative will be a powerful tool for shaping the agenda of the European Union .
The initiative was introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon and will allow one million European citizens to call on the European Commission to put forward proposals on subjects within the framework of its powers .
This initiative grants EU citizens the right to make their opinions known and in doing so confers on them a right of initiative similar to that exercised by the European Parliament and the Council .
Citizens ' initiatives should also encourage wider cross-border debate , as they will need to be put together by citizens of several different Member States .
The initiatives will only be able to be implemented , however , if they meets certain procedural requirements or requirements on compliance with the European Union 's fundamental values , in order to prevent the instrument from being used for non-democratic purposes .
These requirements guarantee the reliability and hence the efficacy of the initiative .
It is also vital to ensure that the process complies with EU data protection requirements and is fully transparent from beginning to end .
in writing . - I do not share the opinion of my colleagues from the S & D Group , which is why I have abstained from voting .
It does not matter who writes the nonsense : to multiply it is foolishness .
The citizens ' initiative is necessary , no doubt , but to collect one million signatures in order to be heard is nonsense .
I would like to ask the rapporteurs if they ever collected signatures themselves .
If they did , they should know that the minimum cost of each signature certified by a notary is 20 euros .
That means 20-30 million euros to introduce a new law .
Who will finance this action ?
Only large enterprises are able to do that , not ordinary people .
Is this not then a fake ?
A point to remember : MEPs also represent these people .
in writing . - This initiative was promised during the Lisbon process , so I am pleased that it is now being moved forward .
It is imperative that the citizens ' initiative is not open to political , business or other manipulation .
It should be left to the genuine initiative of citizens and not be manipulated with a hidden agenda .
It should be open and transparent .
To set the ball rolling , the Commission should advertise the agreed conditions for an initiative when they are agreed .
Would it not be reasonable for the initiation of the process that the Commission organise some form of arms-length competition across the EU to test the water and find out what are the top ten issues on which citizens would welcome an initiative with fellow citizens .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European citizens ' initiative is the first tiny step in the right direction .
I have voted in favour of it because it is the first directly democratic instrument in the EU .
However , overall the citizens ' initiative is simply a veneer of direct democracy , which will lead the citizens to believe that they have the right of codecision on some issues in the European Union .
The citizens ' initiative does not involve any consequences , regardless of how many people sign it .
The parallels with the system of petitions for a referendum in Austria are obvious .
In Austria , these petitions are generally just shoved in a drawer and much the same thing will happen with the EU citizens ' initiatives .
In addition , care has evidently been taken to ensure that non-conformist opinions can be suppressed .
The Commission makes the final check on the admissibility of a citizens ' initiative .
In the real European Union , the rulers not only put in place the legislation and directives , they also want to control the will of the citizens .
However , the European citizens ' initiative at least gives non-conformist movements and parties the opportunity to develop their ideas .
It will in future be possible at an EU level , as it is in Austria , to run campaigns and to show the citizens that there are routes to a different and better Europe which lead away from the blind alleys in Brussels .
Although I naturally support the regulation on the citizens ' initiative , I am not in agreement with the possibility of members of the European Parliament , or members of national parliaments , being able to take part in these initiatives , or the possibility of them being funded by political parties or public bodies .
I believe that both solutions go against the spirit of the new mechanism , which aims to provide ordinary citizens and civil society with the means of taking part in the political life of the Union .
I also disagree with the powers given to the Commission to adopt certain technical specifications required for the application of the law by means of an ' executive act ' .
Measures of general application assigned to the Commission for the application of legislative instruments should not be considered to be ' implementing acts ' , under the control of Member States , but ' delegated acts ' , under the direct control of the legislator .
In the same way , it does not make sense , after the Treaty of Lisbon , to continue to apply the ' regulatory procedure ' under the traditional committee system , as it clearly concerns issues that are currently covered by the legislative procedure or by the ' delegated acts ' procedure .
The provisions referred to are therefore contrary to the Treaty of Lisbon .
Apart from these specific objections , I believe that overall this is an excellent law that does justice to the political and constitutional importance of this new mechanism for participatory democracy within the EU .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the position of the European Parliament on the European citizens ' initiative , because I fully support this citizens ' right provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
As an optimist I feel that this may be one of the main instruments helping to bring European Union institutions closer to ordinary people .
Ultimately , a civically active part of society will be able to have a direct impact on decisions taken at EU level .
It should be recognised that at a time when many European initiatives are viewed rather critically by the public , from the outset the European citizens ' initiative has largely been met with positive assessment and approval .
I hope that we will ultimately have clear rules that are not weighed down by unnecessary bureaucratic requirements , and that will help European society voice its opinion .
This report fully meets my expectations , particularly on three issues .
Firstly , the minimum age for supporting a legislative initiative has been fixed at 18 years old which is the minimum age for voting in European Parliament elections and as is required to participate in instruments of direct democracy , such as referendums .
Secondly , the need to request the identity documents of resident European citizens who intend to sign the statements of support , in order to carry out the checks provided for by the regulation in accordance with the laws in force .
Lastly , the need to allow for a term of 12 months for the application of the regulation after its entry into force , with the aim of allowing the competent national administrations - many of which will be seeing this type of instrument for the first time - to prepare all the necessary legal , administrative and financial measures .
It is with great satisfaction that I vote in favour of this report relating to the citizens ' initiative , one of the greatest innovations of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This new legal instrument may become a way of bolstering the participation of European citizens .
In fact , enabling millions of citizens to suggest to the European Commission that it should legislate on a given issue is a very positive step on the path of bringing Europe closer to its citizens .
I applaud the work of the rapporteurs whose objective was to simplify the citizens ' initiative and remove any bureaucratic burden , so as to make it as accessible as possible .
I agree with the majority of the requests made by the European Parliament , specifically the checking of the acceptability of an initiative being made at the time of its presentation , and not after 300 000 signatures have been collected , which could raise the expectation of the signatory citizens .
I support the reduction in the minimum number of Member States involved in the initial signing of the initiative .
The original proposal was for signatories to come from at least one third of Member States , and the European Parliament and the Council reached an agreement that the signatories should come from a quarter of all Member States .
I support the initiative by the rapporteurs Mrs Gurmai and Mr Lamassoure , which is that the organisers of a European citizens ' initiative should gather into a citizens ' committee composed of persons coming from different Member States .
This will ensure that the issues which arise are truly European , all the while having the added value of helping the collection of signatures from the very beginning
I support the rapporteurs ' idea , whereby the European citizens ' initiative is a new instrument of participatory democracy on a continental scale .
Therefore , the present regulation may not be flawless and practice may present European decision-makers with new challenges .
For this reason , I agree with the rapporteurs ' call for the Commission to present a report on its implementation every three years and , if relevant , to propose a revision of the regulation .
in writing . - ( RO ) The citizens ' initiative , introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , has been devised to give citizens the right to participate in the democratic life of the European Union .
Its aim is to provide citizens with a means of having their voice heard by enabling them to refer a number of issues of interest to the EU institutions .
These may include difficulties that they face in their daily lives which they do not feel receive enough attention and support from trade unions , political institutions or any other regular interlocutors from the institutions .
The citizens ' initiative will properly establish a direct link between citizens and institutions , thereby making EU institutions deal with the specific major problems facing citizens .
The citizens ' initiative comes with the need to comply with certain administrative requirements , but also to respect the fundamental values of the EU , among others , thereby ensuring its reliability and effectiveness , which will be the key to its success .
It is necessary to ensure that the process complies with EU applications in the area of data protection , as well as guarantee total transparency .
Any organisation , association or even political party will have the opportunity to support the citizens ' initiatives which they choose , subject to total transparency regarding the support being provided so that signatories are aware who is behind an initiative they choose to support or not .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am glad about the approval of this report , which represents a very important step in the affirmation of the constitutional nature of the European Union , providing citizens with a mechanism for accessible and effective democratic participation , which will undoubtedly contribute to the increased involvement and commitment of citizens with regard to European political life , and a strengthening of the ties of solidarity between the various Member States .
in writing . - ( FR ) Participative democracy has made its triumphant entry into Europe with the adoption of this report on the European citizens ' initiative , one of the major areas of progress brought in by the Treaty of Lisbon .
One million European citizens will now be able to approach the Commission and require it to pronounce an opinion on an issue of interest to society , provided that it falls within the framework of the Commission 's powers .
One million citizens , who must come from at least a quarter of the Member States and must be of voting age , in other words only 0.2 % of the population of the EU .
The signatures must be collected in writing or over the Internet and must be verified .
The organisers will have to be identified : who they are , what they support , for whom they are working .
This is a potential leap forward for the European Union 's democratic legitimacy .
It is a step towards bringing citizens closer to an EU which they often see , rightly or wrongly , as being light years away from their day-to-day concerns .
However , the risk that the initiative could be exploited by certain non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) or by a given sector of industry should not be ignored .
For it to be a success , the initiative must genuinely come from citizens .
It must help to move the debate forward , to reconcile citizens with the European Union and to contribute towards the development of a European civil society .
Today we voted in plenary on the European citizens ' initiative .
This initiative was introduced by Article 11 of the Treaty of Lisbon , with the aim of empowering citizens with the same political initiative powers that the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament already enjoy .
The ECI is a new instrument of participatory democracy on a continental scale .
On 31 March 2010 , the Commission submitted its proposal for a regulation and on 14 June , Council approved the general approach to the ECI .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs of the European Parliament adopted this report in November , which included a negotiation mandate .
The trialogue of 30 November reached an agreement over various amendments .
The main points of the agreement concern : combining registration and admissibility ; the number of signatures that must come from a minimum of one quarter of Member States ; setting up a citizens ' committee ; the minimum age for supporting an initiative ; and the online collection system .
Our citizens have been waiting for this new instrument , which will give them some influence over EU policy .
They have already demonstrated that they will know how to use it to have their say in the legislative debate : take the petition for a moratorium on genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) launched by Greenpeace and Avaaz , which was sent last week to Commission President José Manuel Barroso .
Sadly , the citizens have acted before the legislators and the petition arrived before the rules of procedure , which will make the citizens ' initiative operative in early 2012 , had been defined .
It is up to us Members of Parliament therefore to relay and support the request expressed by almost 1.2 million people and to ensure that it is properly followed up .
Parliament succeeded in using its influence in the talks with Council and the Commission to make the initiative as accessible and effective as possible and paved the way .
There is now nothing to stop citizens from participating directly in the functioning of the EU .
Today 's vote has given the go-ahead for the first example of European democratic participation .
The European citizens ' initiative is one of the most innovative provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon and a first step toward direct democracy .
The initiative is an instrument that allows citizens to call on the European Commission to submit a legislative proposal on any issue that they consider to be in their interest by submitting 1 million signatures , which represent 0.2 % of the population of the European Union .
Issues relating to the environment , social matters and disasters caused by the financial crisis are among the most sensitive topics that may mobilise citizens to call on the EU to legislate on these matters .
With the proposal for the citizens ' initiative which has been adopted , today , we have put into effect an important element of the Treaty of Lisbon , thanks to which citizens will be able to participate directly in debate about the European Union .
This is particularly important for the European Parliament , which is elected by popular vote .
Our role , now , is to give serious attention to this tool , which provides for even greater democratisation of public life in Europe .
It would not be good if it were a dead letter and the citizens had the impression we are only giving them the theoretical possibility of participating in a legislative initiative .
It will be an important test for the European institutions as to what extent they are , in fact , serving the citizens and not themselves .
It is good that after this law has been in force for three years we will be able to revise provisions which have proved to be insufficiently effective , so that it will really be a system which guarantees democratic discussion .
in writing . - ( NL ) I have voted in favour of the adoption of rules for the European citizens ' initiative .
The European Parliament has achieved enough in its negotiations with the Council of Ministers .
The citizens ' initiative gives inhabitants of the European Union the possibility of getting a proposal onto the European political agenda .
Once one million signatures have been collected , the European Commission is obliged to consider the proposal and state reasons why it will or will not turn it into an official legislative proposal .
The European Union insisted that signatures must be collected from at least nine different EU Member States , but Parliament succeeded in lowering that threshold to seven .
In addition , organisers who manage to collect a sufficient number of signatures will also be allowed to explain their proposal in person to the European Commission and the European Parliament .
It is a pity that Parliament has not been able to defeat the rule that eighteen countries must require their citizens to state their identity card number when they sign a citizens ' initiative .
That will scare people off .
Some will fear identity fraud .
There are countries that are not going to ask for the identity card number .
This will create an inequality in the law within the EU .
How seriously it will take European citizens will now be an issue primarily for the European Commission .
in writing . - ( DE ) Today 's vote on the European citizens ' initiative has established a new element of direct democracy almost exactly a year after the Treaty of Lisbon came into force .
I took up my mandate in the European Parliament with the aim of putting the concerns of the people of Austria on the table in Brussels .
I am committed to this principle and , therefore , it is essential for me that the concerns of the people are heard at a European level .
The European citizens ' initiative should be seen as an opportunity to involve people more closely in the EU 's decision-making process .
The citizens of the EU now have the possibility for the first time of submitting legislative initiatives to the Commission and , as a result , actively influencing EU policy .
Following long negotiations , it can be regarded as a success that the admissibility barrier has been lowered from the level of 300 000 signatures and the number of Member States reduced to a quarter .
One special feature in Austria is that young people can take part in citizens ' initiatives from the age of 16 .
This shows once again that it is important to Austria to include young people in the EU project , because they are ultimately the ones who will take the European spirit forward .
The European citizens ' initiative ( ECI ) is an instrument of public participation that aims to respond to the democratic deficit and , as such , to reduce the distance that European citizens feel exists between them and European institutions .
The institutionalisation of this initiative , provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon , makes it possible for European citizens to invite the European Commission , indirectly , to put forward certain legislative measures , provided that these fall within its powers .
This report , presented by the European Parliament , defines the criteria for implementing this European right of initiative , in order to make it simpler , more accessible , swifter , more transparent and more uniform throughout all Member States .
The creation of a real European public space will be possible thanks to this initiative , which will boost civil dialogue and the involvement of civil society .
I believe that all initiatives that aim to reduce distances between citizens and the European project should be emphasised , implemented and carried out in full .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the report on the citizens ' initiative .
The new provisions introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon boost participatory democracy and mark an important step towards fostering civic spirit .
Forty-two per cent of European citizens have confidence in EU institutions .
One of the reasons for this might be that European citizens get to know about few of the European initiatives and policies targeted at them .
This is precisely why the citizens ' initiative not only offers European citizens the opportunity to participate directly in the decision-making process , but also empowers them to make a contribution to setting the European agenda .
The citizens ' initiative will therefore help bring European citizens ' major concerns and requests before the European legislative .
This is not a new concept .
In 2007 we proposed collecting 1 million signatures to request the Commission to table a directive for integrating people with disabilities into society .
At the time , only around 700 000 signatures were collected , but the legislative proposals were submitted to the European Commission .
Consequently , it will be vital , with a view to meeting our commitment to Europe 's citizens , for us to ensure that the requests submitted via the citizens ' initiative will be turned into legislative acts which will improve the situation of these citizens .
in writing . - I welcome this report as a way of encouraging citizen engagement in Europe by allowing EU citizens to propose legislation which could have an effect on their daily lives .
Citizens will be able to let the European Union know what they think of its work .
With a million signatures that must come from at least a quarter of all EU states , this initiative puts some power back into the hands of the people .
The procedure has been simplified by Parliament to ensure ease of use and to maximise citizens ' participation in the initiative .
Once all signatures have been verified , the Commission will decide within three months whether a new law can be proposed , and it will have to make its reasons public .
Reference is often made in this Parliament to the citizens of the European Union , whose interests we represent .
At the same time , those same citizens have long regarded not only this Parliament , but all European institutions as too distant and insensitive to their problems .
The European citizens ' initiative can change this .
It will enable citizens to say directly : we want this , we do not want that and this must change .
We also like to talk about European integration .
What unites people from different countries , however , more than the need to look for a common view , to formulate a common proposal and to seek the support of people speaking various different languages ?
The implementation of the citizens ' initiative will mean in practice that citizens from various Member States will speak in one voice about the subjects that are important to them .
A common initiative and a common interest will be the soil from which a true European identity may grow .
I firmly believe that in the near future this practical sense of European-ness will begin to form .
I believe that , in contrast to the phrases in the brochures of European institutions , it will be vibrant and viable , because the citizen himself will be the source of the new European identity and the new European-ness .
I therefore welcome the submitted draft regulation on how the citizens ' initiative will be implemented , and I am ready to do all it takes to ensure that the voice of the citizen is not only heard but also respected .
in writing . - ( PT ) I believe the Commission 's Work Programme for 2011 to be ambitious , having European economic recovery as its main objective , through the political priorities of the EU 2020 Strategy together with the budget within the 2011 multi-annual financial framework , with its new funding and expenditure measures , with a new decision on ' own resources ' , demonstrating the concern that conditional funding may aggravate the situation of the weaker national economies and not have the desired effect of the EU 2020 Strategy , which is to re-launch the economy .
I believe that the Structural Funds are essential for the economic recovery and competitiveness of European regions , as in a time of crisis , conditionality added to austerity measures may further adversely affect the internal development of the EU .
Emphasis needs to be placed on reform of the Common Agriculture and Fisheries Policies and the Cohesion Policy , with the different points of departure of different regions always needing to be taken into account , and this includes measures adapted to the different realities .
SMEs should play an prominent role , and the approach involving the internationalisation of SMEs within global trade relations and efforts towards their modernisation and competitiveness provided for within the priorities of this work programme is to be applauded .
in writing . - I would like to draw your attention to certain very important issues that are missing from the Commission Work Programme for next year .
These concern issues related to human rights . Does the Commission intend to initiate any specific actions or legislation in the area of human rights during the next year ?
We have heard that Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy Baroness Ashton intends to pay special attention to human rights during her term in office .
However , there has been very little attention paid so far to human rights in her actions and statements .
The External Action Service is also meant to beef up EU action in the area of human rights , but now that there is no EU budget for 2011 the EEAS will not be able to fully undertake its duties as from 1 January 2011 .
Can you , Mr President , tell us what your plan B is and how you intend to strengthen the EU 's credibility when it comes to defending and promoting human rights in the world ?
Parliament was called upon to express its opinion on the statement by the Commission on the Commission Work Programme for 2011 .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which draws attention to the need for proper collaboration between the Commission and Parliament and to the Commission 's role as guardian of the treaties and of the EU 's general interest .
The resolution also places particular emphasis on the ' Europe 2020 ' goals of growth for jobs and welcomes the ' European semester ' aimed at more effective management of public finances .
This growth must be smart ( it must promote digital technology , research and development and education ) ; sustainable ( with a target of 20 % greater energy efficiency ) and inclusive ( by combating discrimination between workers and through better industrial relations ) .
The Commission must look further at the internal market , the area of freedom , security and justice and its external policy , which is still in its infancy .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this European Parliament joint resolution because it discusses and assesses the priorities for the activities of the European Commission in 2011 and future challenges .
In the last part-session at the European Parliament in Strasbourg , President Barroso presented the Commission Work Programme for the coming year , therefore the European Parliament believes that it is very important to establish a dialogue with the Commission and to pay particular attention to fundamental EU strategic objectives .
Furthermore , Parliament urges the Commission to ensure a realistic and clearer timetable relating to major proposals to be put forward , which must be effective and translated into reality and better implemented than in the past .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that although the Commission planned to create new jobs and implement the objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy as soon as possible , in the field of employment and social affairs there are no specific proposals on the creation of new and high quality jobs in the Commission 's programme for the coming year .
Again the Commission proposes the same legislative initiatives on the posting of workers and working time as it did in the work programme for the previous year , and pledges to improve the rights of migrant workers throughout the European Union .
Full economic recovery requires a common European strategy for sustainable growth and employment creation , backed by the necessary powers and resources .
in writing . - ( PT ) Bearing in mind the fact that the current crisis into which Europe has been plunged continues to have an effect on the economies of the Member States , significant adjustments urgently need to be made at both a national level and in the Union itself .
Conscious of the fundamental importance that 2011 will have for the success of the future of the Union , and the challenge that this poses to the European Commission , and in a general way to the Union as a whole , I am voting in favour of this draft resolution .
I would furthermore like to highlight all of the proposals that reveal the European Commission 's intention to explore the growth potential of the single market .
I believe that maximising the potential of the single market , through greater integration of the markets and the strengthening of European company and consumer confidence could have a leverage effect on the European economy .
However , I believe that the Commission could have gone further on this matter , putting forward more ambitious and concrete proposals to address the needs of those operating within the market .
The Commission Work Programme 2011 needs a top-up of European Union spirit and greater courage in facing up to the EU 's main political and institutional problems , particularly in the light of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and in accordance with this .
The issues to be tackled include : 1 .
Greater respect for the role of the European Parliament in the formulation of proposals , taking due account of the positions it assumes in its opinions and proposals for initiatives ; 2 .
Closer and inter-institutionally more balanced cooperation on the budget and on financial prospects ; 3 .
Greater courage in formulating proposals for the efficient use of EU resources that make it possible to achieve binding objectives and concrete benchmarks ; 4. effective and incisive EU governance of the economy and finance , as well as financial participation of employees in the success of the company that allow more widespread , balanced and inclusive economic and social development .
Even though the Commission Work Programme 2011 covers only some of the points listed above , I nevertheless consider it necessary to support it .
I voted in favour of the resolution relating to the Commission 's Work Programme for 2011 , which is the first to be adopted within the framework of the new programming period and should contribute to a deepening of the dialogue between Parliament and the Commission , with the aim of improving the relationship between political and budget priorities at EU level .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Commission has presented an ambitious Commission Work Programme for 2011 , which contains the following basic points : ( i ) inclusive growth ; ( ii ) sustainable growth and ( iii ) financial regulation .
With regard to the subject of inclusive growth , within which the Commission emphasises the sustainability of social security schemes and the fight against poverty , I am in favour of the need to find an exact balance between austerity and social support , and to determine in which direction reforms to European systems of social security should go .
With regard to the subject of sustainable growth , it is important to understand how the balance between the necessary environmental protection and future reforms of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and common fisheries policy ( CFP ) will be achieved .
Finally , with regard to financial regulation and the strengthening of economic governance , any steps to make the European banking system more robust and resistant to crisis scenarios and to strengthen the budgetary policies of Member States and their economic coordination should be seen as a number one priority , as the major challenge for 2011 will be to come out of the crisis and to lay the foundations for a policy of growth .
We voted against the European Parliament 's draft resolution on the European Commission 's working programme for 2011 because , on the basic issues , it supports its own positions and ignores the real need for a break with the neoliberal , militarist and antisocial policies that the European Commission favours .
Although the European Commission has been criticised for not having provided the answers that Parliament was seeking , in reality it has done so , when it congratulates itself on the priority given to economic reform , prioritising budget sustainability and making social sustainability secondary , or when it insists on favouring the deepening of the single market , or when it insists on concluding the Doha round as quickly as possible , and its respective free trade agreements .
Thus , what the majority in Parliament seek is to continue with the same policy , which is to promote the aforementioned austerity plans within various Member States , regardless of the increase in unemployment , poverty , inequality , asymmetry and economic recession that these austerity plans will cause , while economic and financial groupings continue with ever larger profits .
For all these reasons , we are compelled to vote against .
In 2011 , the European Commission will publish proposals on amending thecommon agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy .
Those two initiatives are extremely important to the farmers and fishermen of Ireland .
in writing . - ( DE ) In 2011 the Commission will submit its proposal for the multiannual financial framework for 2013 to 2020 .
It is clear to me that the field of agriculture and rural development must have the same level of funding as it does now and that the food sovereignty of the people of Europe must be guaranteed .
The production of food and the revival of rural regions as economic areas and recreational areas within easy reach of towns must in future be one of Europe 's highest priorities .
The Commission 's commitment to sustainable and integrative growth takes into account the environmental and climate objectives for 2020 and requires investment in green technologies , which will in turn create jobs .
I welcome Parliament 's call for the new multiannual financial framework for the period after 2013 to take into consideration the expansion of the EU 's responsibilities .
The plans for the EU 's trade policy are of great importance .
The Commission is obliged to bring the World Trade Organisation negotiations to a positive conclusion .
We must take a highly critical approach to the increasing focus on bilateral trade agreements , in particular the Mercosur negotiations which will be continuing next year .
I have just voted in favour of the Commission Work Programme for 2011 , but with reservations .
It no longer contains the promised communication from the Directorate General for Enterprise and Industry ( DG ENTERPRISE ) on corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) .
Instead the Internal Market and Services Directorate General ( DG MARKT ) has started an online consultation on the disclosure of non-financial information by companies .
This is alarming and suggests a possible change in policy .
The DG MARKT is no longer asking whether EU regulation is needed in the field of CSR , but instead how it should be structured .
The DG ENTERPRISE held several transparency workshops from which it emerged that almost all employers and unions were strongly opposed to mandatory CSR .
Since 2006 , the DG ENTERPRISE has been in overall control , as CSR initiatives represent contributions to a sustainable society by companies as part of their business activities .
They are the result of entrepreneurial commitment and are based on individual initiative and responsibility .
There is a consensus about this basic concept which has been developed over a number of years in numerous multi-stakeholder forums .
The DG ENTERPRISE has the institutional knowledge used to exercise control over these processes .
I am calling on the Commission to leave the responsibility for managing and structuring CSR with the DG ENTERPRISE .
I continue to oppose the idea of mandatory CSR reporting , as it will lead to new red tape and discourage companies from making additional voluntary commitments .
in writing . - The financial crisis has severely damaged the economies of all Europe 's Member States .
In this resolution we call for a strong and determined response from the European Commission , to boost growth and ensure a strong and lasting recovery that benefits all Europe 's citizens .
We support the call for a review of the own-resources system to create a system that is fair , clear , transparent and neutral concerning the tax burden ; we welcome consideration of options that would reduce the cost of the EU to its citizens , for example by correcting the current under-taxation of the financial sector .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Commission 's new Work Programme for 2011 is based on three points : ( 1 ) inclusive growth ; ( 2 ) sustainable growth and ( 3 ) financial regulation .
We will therefore need to work towards achieving the sustainability of social security schemes to fight against poverty , whilst achieving economic growth that is also concerned with the protection of the environment , the strengthening of economic governance , the European banking system becoming stronger and more resistant to future crisis scenarios , and the strengthening of the budget policies of Member States , as the main challenge for 2011 is to come out of the crisis and resume a policy of growth .
in writing . - Congratulations .
Finally someone paid attention to the difference between the European Commission and gods .
It is time to replace idle talking by real work .
The European Commission should not ignore MEPs ' questions ; their duty is to fulfil the decisions of the European Parliament .
It looks like some Commissioners have forgotten that .
If not , what happened to the resolution on the comprehensive monitoring report adopted by the European Parliament on 11 March 2004 which opened the subject of the aliens in Latvia ?
It just disappeared from the agenda .
Who was responsible ?
Whose salary was cut down ?
Who was reprimanded ?
No one .
Long live the European Council !
I voted in favour of the resolution relating to the European Commission 's Work Programme for 2011 because I agree with its main objectives .
It is a fact that the main priority for 2011 should be to push forward with the economic recovery .
Within the Commission 's Work Programme , I would point very positively to the strengthening of economic governance and the completion of reform of the financial sector , through measures enabling growth to be restored in order to create jobs .
Effective , sustainable and inclusive growth of the economy is essential to restore confidence and optimism within the EU .
Investment in research and development , energy security and horizontal labour policies that allow for the real movement of workers are therefore the fundamental pillars of a work programme that is geared towards growth .
The objective of constructing a common area of freedom , security and justice also needs to be emphasised .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Commission Work Programme for 2011 does not reflect adequately the significant events which have had an impact on Europe since 2008 , or the hopes and expectations of Europe 's citizens either .
It is deplorable that this programme does not focus more on the loss of the 7 million jobs caused by the financial crisis , virtually ensuring constant unemployment in the years to come .
This aspect is one of the fundamental challenges facing the EU in 2011 .
The Commission will therefore need to find the way in which its initiatives and proposals will create sufficient decent jobs for ordinary citizens .
The Commission must heed the views of the social partners in the area of pensions and ensure that the future White Paper reflects the stakeholders ' expectations , which includes strengthening the first pillar , which is the public pillar .
I welcome the revamp of the EURES job information and advice portal aimed at young workers to make it more accessible to them .
However , I regret that this proposal has been postponed until 2012 , when today 's young people need it now .
The Commission 's programme makes no reference to the gender issue .
As a result , a European directive is needed which will tackle the 17.4 % pay gap between women and men , along with a directive on eradicating violence against women .
in writing . - ( DE ) As the voting list was changed at short notice , I did not have enough time to check the contents and to decide on one side or the other .
in writing . - The Greens / EFA have supported the proposed common resolution , as well as many of the amendments suggested .
I 'm glad that the reference remained untouched where we say that the EP strongly urges the Commission to come forward with bold and innovative proposals for a substantive revision of the own resources system .
I endorsed the adoption of the resolution on the Commission Work Programme 2011 .
In a previous speech , I have raised the issues of the need to prepare a draft directive on violence against women , rapid and efficient transposition of the Stockholm Programme and the inclusion of sport in next year 's budget .
It is also essential to renew work on the non-discrimination directive .
I appeal to the Commission and Member States for decisive steps to be made in this direction in 2011 .
While EU citizens impatiently await this directive , some Member States are continuing to question the validity of adopting it .
It is hard to understand the lack of awareness of the need to have a single anti-discrimination law which would protect the equal treatment of all people and not just of select social groups .
I am not persuaded by the financial arguments which emphasise the high costs of introducing the directive in relation to disabled people .
Even during a crisis , Europe must continue to treat all its citizens equally .
The Commission has presented its Work Programme for 2011 at a particularly delicate time for the European Union .
Recovery from the economic crisis is still not completely established , meaning that the programme for next year needs to continue to be focused on a dynamic of the recovery of the European economy .
2011 should be the year that the EU 2020 Strategy becomes integrated into European proceedings , with a view to pursuing the objectives of smart , sustainable and integrated growth .
I reiterate the importance of re-establishing job-creating growth by accelerating the EU 2020 programme of reforms .
Within this context , I would emphasise the role of the following flagship initiatives : Innovation Union , Digital Agenda , New Skills and Jobs , and the Platform against Poverty .
I believe it essential to ensure structural reform in order to improve European competitiveness and to speed up economic growth , specifically through a policy of cohesion that encourages investment in the real economy .
Any future cohesion policy should also ensure that the new multi-annual financial framework is directed towards achieving the objectives of the EU 2020 Strategy , and European policies within the framework of Lisbon .
The European Parliament needs to take an active part in this , and it is essential that the Commission urgently comes up with a model of inter-institutional cooperation for this .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution because the EU and the African Union ( AU ) must jointly address key issues of common concern in order to successfully implement the partnership between Africa and the EU which is based on the mutual interest in exploiting their combined potentials .
For there to be closer cooperation , democratic governance and human rights must be ensured , but regrettably Mr Robert Mugabe was invited to and actively participated in the 3rd Africa EU-Summit .
I therefore call for all actors to take a stronger political stance in future in order to send a clear message of the EU 's firm belief in the rule of law and democracy .
It is also important for all member states of the African Union to ratify the African Union Charter on Democracy , Elections and Governance and to fully support the International Criminal Court .
This would safeguard the principles of democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights and at the same time would open up opportunities to effective cooperation in economic , social , cultural and other fields .
Since the Cairo EU-Africa Summit in 2000 , the European Union has launched an extremely wide-reaching external policy on Africa .
In 2005 , the EU launched its strategy for Africa .
Two years later , the standpoint was different and this time , the Lisbon EU-Africa Summit ended with the creation of a strategic partnership with Africa .
The third Africa-EU Summit ended just recently .
It was not a complete success : for example we did not welcome the presence of the dictator Robert Mugabe and , conversely , would have welcomed the presence of a representative from Sudan .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the future of partnership .
The new action plan is based on eight major new themes : 1- peace and security ; 2 - democratic governance and human rights ; 3 - trade , regional integration and infrastructure ; 4 - the millennium development goals ; 5 - energy ; 6 - climate change ; 7 - migration , mobility and employment ; 8 - science , information society and space .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution .
It is necessary to further develop the strategic partnership between Africa and the European Union , in order to meet common challenges together , promote sustainable economic growth and develop cooperation in the fields of energy , trade and climate change .
In developing cooperation it is necessary to give significant support to the fight against poverty , the protection of human rights , including social , economic and environmental rights and to address peace and security challenges on the African continent .
I welcome the Africa-EU Renewable Energy Cooperation Programme and commitments made to provide Africans with access to modern and sustainable energy services , to increase the use of renewable energy in Africa and improve energy efficiency in Africa in all sectors .
The EU and Africa should unite their efforts to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and take effective measures to combat climate change .
The necessary financing should be provided to implement the actions outlined , ensuring effective parliamentary oversight of the use of EU financial assistance .
in writing . - ( PT ) I was pleased to vote in favour of this joint motion for a resolution on the conclusions of the third EU-Africa Summit .
In the light of the African continent 's need to diversify its investment partnerships , specifically with Asian countries and Latin America , the proposed 2010-2013 EU-Africa strategic action plan is particularly relevant , in that it could add value to the Union for the Mediterranean and the Cotonou Agreement .
I believe that the regional integration of African countries through the African Union , and trade and investment in this context , will take on a crucial importance for political and economic stability and sustainable growth in Africa .
I hope , therefore , that African and EU leaders will not only honour the Tripoli agreement , but also recognise this strategic partnership , among others things , to be a valuable instrument for promoting intra-regional African trade .
I also share President Barroso 's conviction that renewable energy is vital for Africa 's economic and social development , and support his call for a green energy revolution in Africa .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the future of the Africa-EU Strategic Partnership during the period preceding the 3rd Africa-EU Summit because I believe that the partnership established between the two continents three years ago , during the Portuguese Presidency of the EU , should continue to be strengthened , so that together , we can face common challenges and promote sustainable development , peace and human rights .
I was in Lisbon in December 2007 when the first EU-Africa Summit took place , launching the basis for permanent dialogue between Europe and the African continent , to which we are linked by extremely important historical , cultural , economic and commercial ties , opening up a path to cooperation that took European and African leaders to Tripoli , 3 years later .
I believe that a lasting and healthy EU-Africa partnership is fundamental to development and progress , and I therefore believe that the investment that both parties have made in strengthening their relations is fully justified .
We live in a time in which traditional cooperation policies , implemented through mere humanitarian aid , no longer respond to the needs of developing countries , especially on the African continent .
Thus I believe that the future of cooperation will move , in a very definite way , towards establishing commercial relationships and economic partnerships , as well as towards an effective exchange in the areas of research , innovation and education , areas in which EU-Africa cooperation needs to be strengthened .
in writing . - ( PT ) The 3rd EU-Africa Summit took place in Tripoli between 29 and 30 November 2010 .
I regret that the Africa-EU Joint Strategy was not able to establish a new strategic relationship .
I reiterate my hope for a fruitful agreement at the next Summit and sustainable objectives for both partners , with the aim of combating poverty and guaranteeing fair income and support , as well as upholding basic human rights , including social , economic and environmental rights , in Africa .
The challenges for African countries are immense , within the context of a serious crisis in the world economy .
The crisis , presented as financial , has finally exposed the limits of economic growth , as understood by capitalism , namely the availability of fertile land for the production of food and other organic raw materials , and geological reserves for the extraction of mineral raw materials and energy to run industries .
This situation is accelerating the scramble for Africa , a continent that is immensely rich in natural resources .
The aim is the domination of markets and natural resources .
The EU 's policy towards Africa should be understood in this context ; blackmail for the signing of so-called Economic Partnership Agreements ; the promotion of the secession of Southern Sudan ; support and funding for the African Peace and Security Architecture , which seeks to position its armies so as to repress its people ; in order to serve the interests of the EU and its economic and financial groupings .
These are just some examples .
This resolution is therefore about neo-colonialism .
The ties that keep the countries in this region subjugated to interests that are alien to its people need to be loosened , establishing genuine cooperation and helping them to consolidate their independence and sovereignty with a view to their economic and social development and progress .
in writing . - ( PT ) It has been three years now since the last Africa-EU Summit , which was the start of a dialogue that has been sought between Europe and the African continent .
This partnership is fundamental for development and progress , and it is important that both parties strive to strengthen their relations .
Partnerships should not only relate to Community assistance ; commercial relationships and economic partnerships should also be established , with exchanges of experiences within the fields of research , innovation and education , thus strengthening future relations .
The Africa-EU strategic partnership is the European Union 's only tool covering intercontinental relations .
It marks a shift in the relationship between the EU and Africa : they are becoming genuine partners dealing with each other on an equal footing and covering a wide range of subjects of shared interest in their dialogue .
This is no longer a relationship between donors and recipients .
It is a strategically important relationship and needs to be revitalised and strengthened if both Europe and Africa are to cope with the challenges that lie ahead of us .
I am referring to the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals , the food crisis , the economic and financial crisis , climate change , and so on .
The theme of the Tripoli Summit : ' Investment , Economic Growth and Job Creation ' , is a reminder that peace and security , economic and political governance and respect for human rights are pre-requisites for development .
Legal and judicial protection of private investment is one of the keys to Africa 's economic and social development .
There can be no social , human and economic development if there is no prosperity .
in writing . - This future is dim , especially now , on the eve of the Africa-EU Summit .
The best way to ensure it is to finance the public education programmes .
People who can get secondary school education would prefer to live in their countries rather to beg in Europe .
We must support the governments that focus their efforts on making their countries attractive to their own citizens .
I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is important for the EU to become closely involved with the African states and to tackle existing and future challenges by means of a common strategy .
These include , in particular , bringing democracy to Africa , improving the living conditions of the people there and also the sustainable exploitation of raw materials , which offers benefits for both sides .
Another problem which needs to be resolved is corruption .
It prevents many African states from developing in a way which would improve the welfare of their citizens .
Unfortunately , millions of euros of aid from the EU is continuing to disappear as a result of corruption .
This could be used constructively for the direct benefit of the citizens .
We must apply the principle of helping people to help themselves .
Unfortunately , the resolution takes no account of this and simply envisages the continuation of existing practices .
Poverty is one of the main reasons why people emigrate from Africa and come to Europe .
Instead of questioning the European practice of export subsidies , which have a massive impact on the ability of some African states to survive , we keep coming up with more empty words .
The negative consequences of migration are being glossed over and , therefore , I felt obliged to vote against this resolution .
European Union / Africa relations are clearly fundamental .
I am therefore pleased with the adoption of the 2010-2013 Strategic Action Plan and with the partnerships established .
Among these I would point to the one relating to peace and security , together with the EU 's efforts to provide predictable and sustainable funding for African peace-keeping operations , and to the need to create local empowerment , resilience and determination to protect civilians during armed conflicts .
I should also emphasise the efforts towards cooperation on questions of common interest , such as : democratic governance and human rights ; trade , regional integration and infrastructure , and the Millennium Development Goals .
Within the context of this final aspect , the pledge by European Union countries to renew the commitment to allocate 0.7 % of their gross national income to development aid by 2015 should be emphasised .
This effort is crucial for meeting the Millinnium Development Goals , in particular with regard to specific policies on maternal , neonatal and child health , sex , education , agricultural policy , sustainable development , access to water and sanitation .
I regret the presence of the President of Zimbabwe , Mr Mugabe , at the summit held in Tripoli on 30 November , and the absence of numerous European Heads of State or Government .
I also note that the new United States ' Conflict Minerals ' law is a huge step forward to combat the illegal exploitation of minerals in Africa .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Council to submit similar proposals to guarantee the traceability of minerals imported into the EU market and on the African Union to cooperate in the sustainable exploitation of raw materials sector .
in writing . - Among the common points several groups agreed , ours amongst them , are the following : 1 .
Welcomes the adoption of the Strategic Action Plan 2010-2013 and of its partnerships , and hopes that it will contribute added value in relation to the Cotonou Agreement and the Union for the Mediterranean and that it is an expression of an ambitious approach to intercontinental relations ; 2 .
Stresses that the Africa-EU joint strategy 's founding principles should be designed to support developing countries ' sustainable needs in order to fight poverty , guarantee a decent income and livelihood as well as the fulfilment of basic human rights , including social , economic and environmental rights ; 3 .
Hopes that the lessons will be learned from the difficulties which arose during the implementation of the first ' Action Plan ' , for 2008-2010 and hopes that the intentions expressed in principle in the Final Declaration by Heads of State and of Government will be acted on ; 4 . Notes with interest that both the private sector and civil society , particularly from Africa , could be allowed to make a far more effective contribution to the strategy than has been the case to date .
in writing . - ( NL ) An American law has already placed curbs on the illegal exploitation of ' conflict minerals ' .
The joint resolution on the future EU-Africa strategy calls on the EU to do the same .
Minerals which are imported into the EU must be traceable .
Today , illegal exploitation is far too often the cause of civil wars and conflicts in the region , while this wealth could actually be an engine for sustainable economic development .
Action in the areas of capacity building , good governance , infrastructure development and investment are crucial .
A policy which is characterised by participation , which is socially and environmentally responsible and which benefits the people is indispensable .
Agriculture , too , is an engine for development .
This is why we need to strengthen the agriculture and fisheries sectors in a sustainable way , especially as regards small farmers and fishermen .
The debate around agricultural land and land ownership should be conducted thoroughly .
The Cancún Agreement is essential for tackling poverty in Africa , given the enormous potential of natural resources - sunshine , wind , rivers and tides - which African countries often possess in abundance .
The text of the resolution does not avoid the controversial issues and I have , therefore , accepted it .
The 3rd Africa-EU Summit , which took place in the capital of Libya , Tripoli , sought to strengthen the level of cooperation between the two continents .
On the subject of Growth , Investment and Job Creation , this Summit emphasised the need to create economic growth , capable of generating employment , alongside sustainable social development .
The Africa-EU strategy will be put into practice in line with the action plan adopted for the period 2010-2013 , which focuses on eight priority areas already established during the Lisbon Summit in 2007 .
Concrete measures relating to private entrepreneurship , economic integration and social questions , to peace and security on the African continent , to respect for human rights and the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals were all mentioned in the final Tripoli declaration .
First and foremost , I applaud this partnership between the two continents , which has demonstrated added value for both partners and the importance of continuing to boost the regional and global integration of the African continent .
However , I believe it is important for the European Parliament to take a more active role in this partnership , and for a funding plan for the effective implementation of the 2010-2013 action plan to be drawn up .
The importance of the protection and promotion of human rights and basic freedoms is at the centre of the democratic values of the European Union itself .
I agree that local and regional authorities could have a pivotal role in the implementation of these values , and propose a bottom-up approach .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon should be seen as a strengthening of the system at several levels of the protection of human rights , including the Charter .
It has become necessary to reflect on developments in the protection of these rights following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , remembering that the Charter has the same legal value as the Treaties , and needs to be incorporated in EU primary legislation .
The new horizontal obligations created by the Treaty of Lisbon are to be welcomed , and efforts between institutions need to be better coordinated for the sake of their effectiveness .
It should also be recalled that a new ' Justice , Fundamental Rights and Citizenship ' portfolio has been created within the Commission , and new action is to be expected from the Commission within the context of this new scenario .
Tangible results may be expected to be achieved from the new Commission communication : Strategy for the effective implementation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the EU .
For a very long time , European integration consisted simply of working on the creation of the internal market .
However , over the last ten years an unprecedented desire to emulate has come over EU legislators .
In the beginning , there was an automatic tacit division of labour between the Council of Europe , responsible for matters concerning individual freedoms , and the embryonic single market that was the European Community .
However , it was not long before the Member States ' national courts had to deal with disputes challenging Community law on the grounds of human rights .
This is why , after a long period of gestation , the Charter of Fundamental Rights was adopted in 2000 and came into force last year with the Treaty of Lisbon .
With the Charter , the European Court of Justice has a single legal basis under which to protect European citizens ' fundamental rights .
However , this new system is only just beginning .
This is why I supported this text , which reminds all the European parties concerned , including Member States and institutions , of their duties under the Charter and of the need to develop a genuine culture of civil liberties and effective collaboration on the subject .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
The effective protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms constitutes the core of democracy and the rule of law in the EU .
I therefore support the obligation strengthened by the Treaty of Lisbon to ensure the protection of fundamental human rights , combat social exclusion and discrimination and to promote social justice and protection .
Even if this is achieved , it is necessary to ensure cooperation between the European Union and national institutions , establishing effective inter-institutional cooperation to monitor the situation of human rights in the EU .
The Commission should continuously monitor the implementation of legislation in the field of human rights protection at national level and , in the case of gaps , should provide proposals for specific measures .
It would be useful for a report on the situation of fundamental rights in the EU to be issued annually to make sure EU citizens are properly informed on the new fundamental rights architecture .
Furthermore , the EU institutions should increase cooperation with international organisations in the area of the protection of human rights .
in writing . - ( LT ) I am delighted that since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force , we have made some significant achievements in the field of human rights , firstly because the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights became legally binding , and secondly because the European Union is obliged to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights .
I voted in favour of this report , because as far as the European Union strategy on the rights of the child is concerned , it is very important to develop practical measures to combat child abuse , sexual exploitation and child pornography and to promote safer use of the internet and to eliminate child labour and child poverty .
Combating trafficking in human beings , particularly women and children , is another pressing challenge .
Although numerous EU and national laws have already been adopted in this area , several hundred thousand people are trafficked each year to the EU or within the EU , and therefore there is an urgent need to apply the new proposed European Union directive on combating trafficking in human beings .
The effective protection of fundamental rights and respect for human dignity , freedom , democracy , equality and the rule of law should be a global objective for all European policies and an essential condition for the consolidation of the European area of Freedom , Security and Justice .
The year 2009-2010 was of major importance in this respect , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , within which the Charter of Fundamental Rights became legally binding , thus transforming fundamental values into concrete rights , directly enforceable by European and national courts .
It needs to be ensured that all new legislative proposals conform to the Charter and , by the same logic , that all instruments already in place are checked .
It is important that cooperation and coherence between the various bodies responsible is strengthened , at a European and national level , for the purposes of the control and application of this new general framework established by the Treaty of Lisbon , in order to ensure its effective application .
I also hope that the Commission completes , as quickly as possible , the process of the EU 's membership of the European Convention on Human Rights ( ECHR ) , which will provide an additional mechanism for the respect of human rights .
I am very pleased that citizens and the protection of their rights have finally been placed at the centre of Europe 's architecture .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report relating to fundamental rights within the European Union ( 2009 ) - Effective implementation following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , because I believe it to be necessary to promote a culture of fundamental rights within the European Union and the Member States .
The protection of fundamental rights should be an objective of all European policies , especially foreign policy , in the interests of promoting peace , human rights and basic freedoms .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon creates a new paradigm in the area of fundamental rights within the Union , and makes the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding .
We have an obligation to position the Union as a community that protects fundamental rights , both internally and externally .
There are still far too many attacks on freedom of expression , as I have reported a number of times , as in the recent cases in Saudi Arabia and Azerbaijan .
In this resolution , the rapporteur points out several situations that are more urgent and frequent , both within Member States and within the European Union as a whole .
The challenge now is to respond to these questions , and to adopt the strategies and measures required to solve these problems .
in writing . - ( PT ) The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon created a new situation within the EU in the area of human rights by making the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding and by giving the European Union the status of a legal entity , which enables it to sign up to international treaties .
The effective protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms are the basis of democracy and the rule of law within the European Union , and an essential condition for the consolidation of the European area of Freedom , Security and Justice , which requires action at several levels ( international , European , national , regional and local ) .
Within this context it is worth mentioning the important role that regional and local authorities can fulfil in the concrete application and promotion of these rights .
I am also pleased with the invitation to the Commission to designate 2013 the ' European Year for Citizenship ' , in order to bolster the debate on European citizenship and inform European citizens about their new rights following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
As usual , the report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union has given rise to two perverse trends : the first consisting of demanding more and more rights for all kinds of minorities , to the detriment of those of the majority of our fellow citizens ; the second consisting of castigating patriotic political movements and heaping the same old leftist , libellous insults on them , while attempting to dispute the legitimacy of their election victories and curb their freedom of expression .
This militant xenophilia and anti-patriotism are very wearing .
You are not in a position to judge the results of democratic elections held in democratic countries .
The recent victories of national parties in France , Hungary , Austria , Sweden , the Netherlands and elsewhere are not a sign of some worrying perversion .
They are a sign that Europe 's citizens are tired of your policies , your lax attitude towards immigration , your weakness in defending our nations ' economic interests , your complacency towards the financial interests of the powerful and your undermining of our social welfare systems .
It is you who are continuously infringing their rights , especially their rights to security , to employment , to a decent wage , to the preservation of their culture and to determine their own futures .
In the forum of the European Parliament , we have raised matters related to human rights violations , the principles of democracy and discrimination against national minorities many times , and we continue to do so .
We award the Sakharov Prize , we support humanitarian measures and we strive to attain rights and privileges not only for the people of Europe , but of the whole world .
However , I greatly regret that we are still unable to enforce respect for fundamental human rights in the Union 's Member States .
The Polish national minority in Lithuania , which comprises nearly 7 % of the entire population , is still suffering discrimination , and its rights are being flagrantly violated .
Yet again , I appeal to the Members of the European Parliament who are assembled in this Chamber , and also to the President of the European Parliament , the Commission and the European Council , to take effective steps to ensure that the Lithuanian Government upholds the principles of democracy and respects the dignity of its citizens .
in writing . - The ECR Group is a staunch supporter of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
We believe that the EU has a role to play in the defence of fundamental rights ; however , it is the Member States who carry the first responsibility , in line with their traditions of democracy and the rule of law .
We are of the opinion that the Gál report certainly contains good elements , but overall it stresses too much the role of the EU in areas which we believe to be the exclusive competence of the Member States , such as immigration and judicial systems .
Therefore we have had to abstain in the vote today on this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has created more responsibilities for the EU with regard to the creation of a culture of defending fundamental rights within the EU and Member States .
It is essential that the EU promotes protection of fundamental rights not only domestically but also throughout the world , where unfortunately major attacks on these rights continue to take place .
Only in this way can peace , human rights and fundamental freedoms be promoted .
in writing . - ( ES ) As the report states , I regret the fact that neither the Council nor the Commission have followed the recommendations of the 2007 report on the use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners and that they have not shared information on this with Parliament .
I support the general assessment regarding the need for the EU to redouble its efforts in order to prevent violations of fundamental human rights , which in too many cases have been suffered this year by immigrants and third-country nationals who live in the European Union .
Although I do not agree with part of the report 's assessment of the EU 's role in the world as a guarantor of human rights and the role of the European External Action Service , as it is vague regarding the compatibility of that role with the need to respect the principle of non-interference in the domestic affairs of other states , I voted in favour of the report because I support its general spirit in terms of the need for the European Union to respect human rights in all aspects of its work .
The protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms are central to democracy and the rule of law in the European Union .
The accession of the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights will contribute a further mechanism for upholding human rights , namely the possibility of taking cases to the European Court of Human Rights .
It is also important that the EU institutions and the Member States renew their efforts on awareness-raising , to ensure that citizens are aware of these fundamental rights , thus ensuring that these rights are better protected .
There also needs to be more effective cooperation with the international organisations working to protect fundamental rights and freedoms .
The European Union needs to devise a strategy on the rights of the child , through practical measures to combat abuse , sexual exploitation and child pornography and to promote safe use of the Internet and eradicate child labour and child poverty .
Combating human trafficking , especially that of women and children , which constitutes an intolerable form of slavery , must remain a priority .
in writing . - ( DE ) Human rights and fundamental freedoms play a central role in democracy and the rule of law .
Therefore , it is important to ensure that these basic values are safeguarded within the European Union .
The right to freedom of speech , religion , assembly and association , together with the right of free movement and of respect for human integrity and dignity , are the cornerstones of a free society .
I did not vote in favour of the report because it did not focus on Christian values and the restrictions on residents caused by immigration .
in writing . - ( DE ) The EU 's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights ( ECHR ) , as laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon , is problematic .
It puts fundamental rights in the EU under the control of the European Court of Human Rights ( ECtHR ) .
Apart from the legal problems which judges in the Court of Justice of the European Union are also warning about , it is clear that a court which passes a judgment opposing the presence of crosses in classrooms is not a suitable decision-making body for the EU .
The cross is the symbol of Christianity , which is one of the foundations of Europe and of our fundamental values .
The ECtHR has also recently attracted attention with its judgments , including its attempt to prevent transfers under the Dublin II Regulation from Austria to Greece .
The ECtHR seems to believe that the Member States with the best systems of social services should bear the entire burden of refugees in the EU .
This judgment by the ECtHR will not lead to the improved integration of refugees and is not an effective way of resolving the asylum challenges faced by the EU .
In addition , the neutrality of the ECtHR judges is not guaranteed .
One of the judges admitted that he would look more closely at appeals from asylum seekers than at other cases .
Giving preferential treatment to some of the parties who are lodging appeals is inappropriate .
In addition , one judge at the ECtHR comes from Turkey , where human rights are not respected and which has areas of the EU under military occupation .
For me the ECtHR is neither European nor a court of human rights .
Therefore , I have voted against this report .
The heart of democracy and the rule of law is the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
After the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon last year , the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights became legally binding , outlining a new European legal framework in which the universal values expressed in the Charter finally became concrete rights .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Gál because this text approves the effective implementation of fundamental rights in the European Union after Lisbon .
This is not only an internal step by the EU but also an external stance for the safeguarding and protection of human rights and the promotion of peace for the welfare of citizens in an atmosphere where the law guarantees peace of mind , safety and justice .
I voted today in favour of the report on the situation of fundamental rights in the EU .
This report provides added value by clarifying the role which the EU institutions will play in the fundamental rights sector in the new European architecture , especially after the Treaty of Lisbon , by promoting greater transparency , democratic control and access to documents between the EU bodies .
As regards the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is now binding and covers a broad range of rights , the Commission has been called upon to draft an annual report on compliance with the provisions of the Charter with an evaluation of the application of the various rights .
This report emphasises the obligations resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon with regard to combating social exclusion and discrimination , and promoting justice and social protection , equality between men and women , solidarity between the generations and the protection of children 's rights .
The emphasis on these points , together with the explicit reference to people belonging to minorities , another fundamental value of the European Union , was the reason for my vote in favour .
I support the position of the European Parliament in its request to the Comission to conclude the negotiations and technical consultations so that the European Union may accede without further delay to the European Convention on Human Rights .
in writing . - With this report the EP stresses , once again , that the effective protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms constitutes the core of democracy and the rule of law in the EU and an essential condition of the consolidation of the European area of freedom , security and justice and that it requires actions at various levels ( international , European , national , regional and local level ) ; stresses , moreover , the role that regional and local authorities can play in the concrete implementation and in the promotion of such rights ; therefore calls on all EU institutions , Member States ' governments and parliaments to build on the new institutional and legal framework created by the Treaty of Lisbon to devise a comprehensive internal human rights policy for the Union which ensures effective accountability mechanisms , both at national and EU level , to address human rights violations .
I endorsed the Gál report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2009 ) .
I would like to draw attention to paragraph 13 , which calls for full and consistent implementation of the Stockholm Programme .
In September this year , Mr Barroso assured us of the intensive work being carried out by the Commission in this area .
It is important to maintain the schedule of this work and its smooth progress .
All Europeans must be able to benefit from the same rights .
In the Europe of the 21st century there is no place for discrimination .
I would like to ask the Hungarian and Polish Presidencies to say what action they intend to take in order to implement the Stockholm Programme efficiently .
We must meet our obligations to the citizens and implement the legislation which we make .
I would also like to stress that pursuant to paragraph 39 of the resolution , the Member States should provide ongoing training of national judges on fundamental rights and freedoms , including the new aspects in the field after the Treaty of Lisbon .
Even the best law will not change anything , if it is not properly interpreted and implemented .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution because it is necessary to take measures to stop unfair commercial practices in the area of advertising , which above all have a negative impact on consumers .
In order to achieve tangible results it is important to step up European cooperation in combating unfair online advertising practices , and the most vulnerable groups of people such as children , adolescents , the elderly and so on need special protection .
It should be pointed out that there is a lack of information about consumers ' rights in respect of advertising , and I therefore support the proposal to take steps to facilitate access to information and make advertising more transparent .
It is also essential to develop a critical attitude to the quality of media content , because well-informed consumers are in a stronger position .
I believe that in view of the lack of advertising literacy , we should introduce a special education programme , aimed at children and adolescents and designed to make them advertising-literate by enhancing their understanding of advertising and teaching them how to interpret it .
The European Union has made it a point of honour to protect consumers within the internal market .
This is not simply a matter of ethics , but one of political strategy .
Greater consumer confidence in the range of products crowding onto the market stimulates demand .
In this respect , the role of advertising is ambivalent .
It is a powerful tool for developing demand but at the same time , due to questionable practices , it can sometimes be a negative factor in the functioning of the market .
These violations are more frequent in Internet advertising and the main victims are the weakest among us .
I voted in favour of this resolution calling on the Commission , at the end of a consultation and study already undertaken by Parliament , to take the necessary measures to reform the current regulations .
Addressing these new fraudulent practices will be one more step towards a single market that respects individuals .
I voted in favour of this report on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour .
Misleading and aggressive advertising is worrying consumers and businesses , and there are some good suggestions in the report to address this .
European consumers and businesses need to be protected from companies engaged in misleading advertising .
To this end , the people and businesses of the EU must be made aware of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive and the Directive on Misleading and Comparative Advertising so that they understand their rights .
Goods like alcohol and online gambling must be controlled so that vulnerable consumers are protected .
I particularly welcome the fact that this report requests the Commission to study the impact of the aggressive advertising on vulnerable consumers and to correctly apply the relevant laws on child protection .
Of concern are behavioural advertising and the emerging practice of aggressive advertising , such as using social networks and reading e-mail to obtain information for use in advertising .
The Commission must address these attacks on consumer privacy .
With the rapid evolution of advertising technologies and the spread of advertising via the internet , mobile telephones and social networks , it is necessary to take effective measures to protect the consumer from the impact of unwanted and misleading advertising .
Particular attention should be paid to the most vulnerable groups of people , including children and adolescents .
Cooperation between the Member States in combating unfair online advertising practices should be stepped up , in order to avoid the consequences of internal market distortion and unfair commercial practices .
Furthermore , there is a need to provide consumers with more information about their rights in the area of advertising and to make this information more accessible and transparent .
The Commission should continuously monitor and assess the application of legislation regulating unfair commercial practices in the Member States and prepare reports on the implementation of legislation .
As there is still a lack of information on the socio-psychological effects of advertising on the consumer , it is necessary to take action to research these effects .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report because it deals with unfair commercial practices in the field of advertising , and concentrates on issues arising from the development of new advertising practices and technologies .
I would like to point out that advertising has a major impact on gender equality , particularly when advertising often communicates discriminatory and / or undignified messages based on all forms of gender stereotyping , which hinder gender equality strategies .
I therefore agree that the European Parliament should call on the Commission and the Member States to ensure that the media and advertising professionals guarantee respect for human dignity and make every effort to combat discrimination and any incitement to hatred based on sex , race , ethnic origin , age , religious or other beliefs , sexual orientation , disability and social status .
As for the protection of vulnerable groups of people , the Commission should study the impact of misleading and aggressive advertising on vulnerable consumers .
I would like to stress that children , teenagers and the elderly in particular need special protection against the negative impact of advertising .
Advertising involves unfair practices and intrusion into public and private spaces , while making a number of target public groups vulnerable .
Internet advertising is the area which has enjoyed considerable expansion in recent years , generating a current value of more than EUR 14 billion on the European market alone .
It is important for us to step up European cooperation in combating unfair online advertising practices in view of the success of the ' sweeps ' , that is , systematic , simultaneous website checks carried out by Member States , which have so far been confined to three sectors : airline tickets , mobile phone ring tones and electronic devices .
These checks should be much more frequent and their scope of application extended .
Self-regulation of national markets addresses rapid developments in the advertising sector , with the focus on instilling responsible attitudes among players and disseminating good practices .
Self-regulation must be encouraged at EU level in order to establish a tradition of self-discipline and responsible communication .
The European Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , which covers the aspects relating to online advertising as part of the relations between companies and consumers , has become inadequate because the area of online advertising is evolving every day .
Social networks have seen a scale of expansion which was not envisaged a few years ago .
I voted in favour of this report on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour .
Indeed , considering the influence that advertising exercises on consumers and the economy , it is more necessary than ever to take action to prevent certain unfair advertising practices from influencing and conditioning commercial choices .
The spread of new systems of communication , such as the Internet , mean that even greater attention must be paid to consumers and in particular to more vulnerable sections of society , such as children and adolescents .
It is our duty to combat the spread of untruthful and misleading information and above all certain practices , such as e-mail spam , which invades the private lives of users and their privacy .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Juvin , when he calls for action to be focused on the suppression of unfair advertising practices by broadening the scope of the directive in force .
I believe that the measure we have voted on today offers an appropriate balance between freedom of expression and consumer protection .
Advertising is a fundamental instrument for the existence of a functioning market and for competition , and , in the final analysis , for consumers , given that , if duly regulated , it ensures a more informed choice .
However , new technologies at the service of advertising are opening up a new area for the development of new , unfair promotional practices , which justifies a change to the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive .
In order for advertising to fulfil its basic functions within a free and competitive market , it needs to be well regulated , and commercial practices that distort the market need to be duly punished .
This is particularly important for forms of online advertising via Internet and telephone , which often reach the public in an unsolicited manner , and raise important questions relating , among other things , to unfair practices and the unauthorised use of personal data .
This is why I believe this to be an excellent initiative that merits my support .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report concerns unfair commercial practices in the area of advertising , defined within the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive ( UCPD ) , and focuses on the problems inherent in the development of new advertising practices and technologies .
The report does not concern relations between companies ( B2B ) , which are specifically covered by Directive 2006 / 114 / EC .
Unfair practices in advertising take many forms : invasion of the public space and sphere , and focusing on people who are particularly vulnerable , such as children .
Given that young people and children are those most exposed to advertising on the internet , I am in favour of the need to develop an integrated European policy for combating the unregulated use of the Internet and means of communication .
To do this I propose the creation of a new , mandatory area that is specifically aimed at learning about the risks associated with the use of the Internet and means of communication , especially with regard to unfair advertising practices , directed at primary school children , and a mandatory subject within the final year of studying or training for primary school teachers and childcare workers to learn how to prepare the children for the safe and responsible use of the internet and means of communication , together with ongoing training for education professionals in this area .
The evolution of communication media and Internet developments have contributed to the spread of hidden advertising messages and unfair advertising practices that often invade the private lives of consumers .
It is essential to carefully consider the consequences that this may have on the most vulnerable groups , which must be protected from damaging and uncontrolled drip-feeding of advertising .
We must also not forget that sometimes advertising conveys social stereotypes associated , for example , with an overly casual view of sexuality and violence , or inappropriate messages that can negatively affect the behaviour of impressionable children and adolescents who still lack the necessary critical faculties .
It is therefore necessary to update the legislation in force on the subject and ensure better implementation and interpretation of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive .
Lastly , I should like to emphasise that it is essential that consumers should be properly informed of the way that collected data is used and processed , particularly in cases where the data is demanded from them in exchange for price reductions and other promotional offers .
To this end , it would be useful to promote effective information campaigns on relevant consumer rights and thus seek to compensate for the lack of knowledge about issues associated with the use of personal data .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the report on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour because I am in agreement with the rapporteur that , in the digital era , advertising has taken on a new dimension which necessitates - as the rapporteur has recommended - the implementation of an EU website labelling system modelled on the European Privacy Seal , certifying a site 's compliance with the data protection laws .
Consumers need to have information which is clear , non-manipulative and objective in order to be able to make intelligent decisions .
Sophisticated and aggressive marketing techniques have over the years prevented consumers from making informed choices with regard to goods and services .
This is especially so with regard to citizens who are particularly vulnerable , such as children .
We need to have a more disciplined approach which truly safeguards citizens ' interests .
in writing . - ( LT ) I approve of this report because it deals with unfair commercial practices in the field of advertising , as defined in the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , and concentrates on issues arising from the development of new advertising practices and technologies .
Advertising is a tool that benefits both the internal market , in other words , oiling the wheels of economic activity by stimulating competition , competitiveness , innovation and creativity , and consumers by increasing choice and lowering prices .
It is a key economic sector : the EU online advertising market alone is worth more than EUR 14 billion .
It must not be idealised , however : advertising can also involve unfair practices , intrude into public spaces such as advertising billboards and the private arena such as unsolicited e-mails , target vulnerable groups of people such as children and those in excessive debt , create potential entry barriers to the internal market where the outlay required is too high , distort the internal market by causing consumers to buy goods or services they would not normally have purchased and cause huge losses .
As a result of these and other problems that have arisen due to the use of new technologies , the rapporteur proposes a series of measures for consumer protection .
While personalised advertising , for example , offers of products or services tailored to consumers ' tastes , is not in itself a problem , it must not lead to the development of intrusive advertising based on consumer tracking , which breaches the principles of data protection and privacy .
in writing . - ( DE ) We want consumers to be responsible , well-informed and in a position to make sensible decisions .
Our aim is to supply consumers with all the information they need to allow them to take the right decisions in economic terms .
Advertising also makes an important contribution to providing consumers with information .
However , it must contain objective , reliable and relevant details , otherwise what is supposed to be consumer information will rapidly lead consumers astray or even result in them being deceived .
The purpose of the policy is to ensure a fair and safe trading environment , so that consumers can be involved in the market on an equal footing .
However , it is also important to me that consumers do not become victims .
By making purchasing decisions , they are in a position to exert a great deal of influence , but they must ensure that they make good use of it .
Advertising is an essential tool which ensures that the free market functions properly .
It brings significant benefits , not only to the economy , but also to consumers , who , thanks to advertising , are ensured a range of choice of product .
Unfortunately , the sustained development of new technologies , and particularly of the Internet , is resulting in the increasingly frequent use by businesses of unethical and dishonest practices in the field of advertising .
As the rapporteur points out , existing legislation does not regulate all the issues to a sufficient degree .
It is essential to take steps to protect European consumers effectively , and also to educate them in the area of the rights to which they are entitled .
Groups which are most at risk from unethical practices , such as children , young people and the elderly , should be given special protection .
Therefore , I agree with the proposals put forward by the rapporteur .
in writing . - ( DE ) New media , in particular social networking sites and blogs , are opening up new opportunities for communication and advertising .
The possibilities of Internet marketing result in additional demands being placed on consumer protection law .
The current directive concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market does not provide for these new advertising methods .
Young consumers and , in particular , teenagers and children are making extensive use of these new technologies and may be exposed to misleading and aggressive advertising .
The study ' EU kids online ' shows that one third of Internet users between the ages of nine and 10 use the Internet every day , while the figure for 15 to 16-year-olds is 77 % .
This makes it all the more important to take urgent measures in this area , including implementing restrictions and , at the same time , providing education and information .
I support the resolution to give consumers more information about the new technical communication options and the risks they involve .
I can agree with many of the comments and proposals given in the material .
However , I cannot identify with some of the propositions and proposals , which lean towards giving additional power to the state under the guise of consumer protection .
In my opinion , the report should put more emphasis on educating users on their online behaviour , on how to make their computer secure , and on how and to whom they should give their personal data .
It is not for states to provide technological solutions to be implemented under the pretext of consumer protection .
A computer is as vulnerable as any other electronic device which is connected to the Internet via an electronic communications network .
Politicians and states should undertake to teach citizens that privacy is something to be protected ; just as one needs to lock up and secure one 's own home , today it is just as important to secure our electronic devices , and their means of communicating with the world , to the same extent .
Politicians should also undertake to impose strict penalties for those who misuse personal data or breach personal privacy .
Essentially , it does not matter if this happens via the Internet or via some other means .
in writing . - ( FR ) From the title of this own-initiative report , I thought Parliament was finally going to examine the society model sold to us by advertisers without having been asked for anything .
However apart from a few interesting points such as controlling targeted advertising and discrimination in advertising , or the call for a reduction in TV advertising aimed at children , this text falls far short of what we might have expected .
It contents itself with castigating illegal advertising which supposedly obstructs our sacrosanct freedom of competition and proclaims the advantages of advertising for citizens , whom it refers to as consumers , and for the media .
Not with my blessing .
I am against this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Unfair commercial practices in advertising need to be combated .
We are getting ever closer to a serious phenomenon of personal debt .
We must do everything we can to stop the problem from getting worse .
Advertising can and should be an important tool for companies , serving as a source of income , stimulating competitiveness , providing healthy competition and encouraging creativity .
We all know that there are vulnerable people , for example children , who are a special target for advertising campaigns .
This is why I agree that this issue should be the focus of special attention , so that we can build a society that is better sustained at an economic and social level .
That is why I voted as I did .
in writing . - ( HU ) As far as the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour is concerned , advertising is beneficial for the internal market in the same way as it is beneficial for the consumers .
It encourages competition , increases competitiveness , and stimulates innovation and creativity .
It also represents an important sector in respect of the economy , as the online advertising market in itself transacts a turnover of EUR 14 billion .
However , we must also be aware of the opposite side of the coin .
Many advertisements attempt to manipulate vulnerable target audiences , such as children and severely indebted persons .
I believe that it is important to strengthen common European cooperation in combating unfair advertising practices .
We consider the emergence of discriminative gender stereotypes , which could act as an impediment to gender equality to be unacceptable .
Through the appropriate means we must ensure that media and advertising professionals respect human dignity and oppose direct or indirect discrimination or stereotypical depictions .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of this report on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour as it points clearly to an improvement in the existing legislative framework for protecting consumers from advertising , and the need for a review of that framework taking into account new advertising media that are not yet regulated .
I also gave the report my support as it seeks to improve harmonisation between the Member States in order to prevent legal loopholes that allow businesses to use deceptive advertising practices in the EU Member States .
I think that the reference to ' hidden ' advertising mechanisms that have developed on the Internet and are now in use there is appropriate ; in many cases the advertising is disguised as opinions or comments on social networking sites , forums or blogs .
I am also pleased that the report conveys concern to the Council and the Commission regarding the real risk posed by businesses that are both content providers and advertising sales houses .
These are the main reasons , among others , for my vote in support of this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Advertising is present everywhere , in the streets , the newspapers , on the television , the radio , the Internet , and whether we like it or not it has a huge influence on consumer behaviour .
It is a channel of communication .
Whilst the informative role of advertising is essential for the effective functioning of the internal market , consumers have the right to be informed and protected .
This is why the report on unfair commercial practices in advertising and the problems linked with the development of new advertising practices and technologies is very important .
Advertising control is vital if we are to keep it sound and truthful .
It is essential to strengthen European cooperation in this field , just as it is valuable to encourage joint regulation .
Lastly , online advertising is often aggressive and intrusive .
It needs to be looked into in greater depth .
in writing . - I voted in favour for a number of reasons :
1. it is time to recognise all mass media in the Internet ;
2. false information and defamation should be matters of criminal liability ;
3. in order to restrict access to vulnerable groups like children ;
4. in order to clean the Internet of spam and punish those who make it circulate ;
5. in order to induce very strict rules regarding announcements ;
6. in order to oblige Parliament to establish a special structure to search for plotters and hackers and hold them to account .
Let us work and get it done .
in writing . - ( DE ) Advertising is a powerful tool for business which in some cases can be used to address the subconscious .
The purpose of advertising is to influence consumer and purchasing behaviour .
However , the use of unfair business practices must be prevented .
The most important task is to protect public spaces , vulnerable people and privacy .
Assessing whether advertising has crossed these boundaries is , of course , extremely time-consuming .
In the case of sensitive areas involving legal drugs , such as alcohol and cigarettes , strict regulations have been in place for a long time .
Other areas will continue to be subject to self-regulation in the Member States , as a complement to the provisions of legislation .
There is some catching up to do , not only in the field of Internet advertising , but also , for example , in cases where additional costs are covered up and where the use of new technologies and advertising methods , such as social networking sites or blogs , represents new territory .
As it is important to protect consumers from ' hidden ' advertising and similar problematic advertising tactics , I have voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( LT ) Modern advertising has long overtaken the legal framework of this area .
Advertising on the internet - in search engines , email , social networks and Internet television - and on mobile phones is often presented to consumers without their consent , and even worse , using their data , sometimes collected without their knowledge or full awareness .
Furthermore , there are dozens of loopholes in the legal framework of such advertising .
Although alcohol advertising is prohibited on television for example , it is still accessible to minors on the Internet .
On the other hand , internet advertising can very easily cross a country 's borders .
Therefore the initiative to tighten the regulation of such advertising , and thus protect consumers , their privacy and personal data from unauthorised or disproportionate use , is very welcome .
Advertising - as the rapporteur has stressed - is an important sector of the economy .
However , it carries many dangers .
I fully endorse the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , which points out the necessity of eliminating advertising content which is discriminatory .
It is also extremely important - and this is said by the rapporteur - to protect groups which are particularly vulnerable to being manipulated by advertising , such as children , teenagers and the elderly .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal to run an educational programme throughout the European Union aimed at children and designed to help them understand the methods used in advertising .
We should also consider setting up similar programmes aimed at the other two groups which are vulnerable to manipulation - teenagers and the elderly .
It might be a good idea to extend this kind of education to people in other age groups .
In view of these comments , I decided to endorse the report on the impact of advertising on consumer behaviour .
The impact of advertising on the consumer often assumes enormous proportions that can lead to the risk of unfair commercial practices .
My decision to vote in favour of this report is a result of the way advertising is used on the market .
It acts as a tool that benefits both the internal market - oiling the wheels of economic activity - and consumers .
However , above all it is an important economic sector .
We must naturally also take into consideration the negative aspects that advertising can have : unfair practices , intrusion into public and private spaces , influencing of the most vulnerable groups of people , creation of potential entry barriers to the market and distortion of the internal market . It is therefore important to strengthen European cooperation in the struggle against unfair practices in advertising through a process of coregulation that can improve the efficacy and applicability of measures .
It is also essential , in my opinion , to safeguard the most vulnerable categories and reinforce education and information , increasing the transparency of adverts .
It would be an extremely good idea to run information campaigns on consumer rights through the use of educational materials .
The impact of advertising on consumer behaviour is a reality that should not be swept under the carpet , and this report does not do this .
This report , for which I voted in favour , concerns unfair commercial practices in advertising , defined within the Directive on Unfair Commercial Practices , and focuses on the problems inherent in the development of new advertising practices and technologies .
Advertising is a positive tool , both for the internal market and for consumers .
However , it is important to combat various abuses , among which I would highlight : unfair practices , the invasion of public and private space such as unsolicited emails , undue focus on vulnerable people and the possible distortion of the internal market , that is , thepurchase of goods and services that the consumers normally would not buy .
The analysis of the current legislation and proposals to review or improve it should focus on an assessment of these distortions .
I support the rapporteur in his desire to intensify European cooperation in combating unfair advertising practices , whether by extending its scope or its frequency .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Juvin , that European Union-wide cooperation in combating unfair online advertising practices should be stepped up in view of the success of ' EU sweeps ' ( systematic , simultaneous website checks by the Member States ) , which have so far been confined to three sectors : airline tickets , mobile phone ring tones and electronic devices .
I agree with the rapporteur , who suggests broadening the scope and increasing the frequency of such sweeps and encouraging coregulation , whereby the various stakeholders are involved in legislative developments , so that the resulting measures are more effective and easier to apply .
in writing . - ( RO ) The report deals with unfair commercial practices in the advertising field , as defined in the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , and concentrates on issues arising from the development of new advertising practices and technologies .
It does not discuss B2B relations , which are covered in particular by Directive 2006 / 114 / EC .
Advertising is a tool that benefits both the internal market , by oiling the wheels of economic activity ( through stimulating competition , competitiveness , innovation and creativity ) , and consumers ( through the diversity of options available and lowering prices ) .
This is an important economic sector as online advertising alone has a value of more than EUR 14 billion on the European market .
At a time when there is a lack of information about consumers ' rights in respect of advertising , steps need to be taken to facilitate access to information and make advertising more transparent .
Given that the general public is not even aware of the issues surrounding the use of personal data and the tools they have available for addressing them , information campaigns often need to be launched on consumers ' rights in respect of advertising , particularly with regard to the use of personal data , irrespective of whether it is provided voluntarily or collected automatically .
It is also necessary to produce educational tools designed to inform Internet users ( e.g. technologies for managing ' traces ' left on the web and resources for protecting privacy ) .
I should like to congratulate Mr Juvin on his excellent work .
With the 2005 Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , which does not guarantee an appropriate legal framework for combating misleading and aggressive advertising , a set of new and more persuasive forms of advertising is developing through the Internet .
The resolution enables European consumers to be better informed on the new intrusive forms of advertising present on the Internet , calls for greater protection for vulnerable consumers and emphasises the role of advertising in promoting positive role models .
I would like to express my particular concern about the routine use of behavioural advertising and the development of intrusive advertising practices ( such as reading the content of e-mails , using social networks and geolocation , and retargeted advertising ) which constitute attacks on consumers ' privacy .
I therefore call on the Commission to make it obligatory to insert the clearly readable words ' behavioural advertisement ' into the relevant online advertisements .
in writing . - This report deals with unfair commercial practices in the advertising field , as defined in the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive ( UCPD ) , and concentrates on issues arising from the development of new advertising practices and technologies .
It does not discuss B2B relations , which are covered inter alia by Directive 2006 / 114 / EC .
Advertising is a tool that benefits both the internal market ( oiling the wheels of economic activity by stimulating competition , competitiveness , innovation and creativity ) and consumers ( by increasing choice and lowering prices ) .
It is a key economic sector : the EU online advertising market alone is worth more than EUR 14 billion .

However , it must not be idealised : advertising can also involve unfair practices , intrude into public spaces ( e.g. in the form of advertising billboards ) and the private arena ( e.g. in the form of unsolicited e-mails ) , target vulnerable groups of people ( such as children and those in excessive debt ) , create potential entry barriers to the internal market ( where the outlay required is too high ) and distort the internal market ( by causing consumers to buy goods or services they would not normally have purchased ) .
I would in particular like to stress the issue of online data protection in Mr Juvin 's report .
It is necessary to ensure that consumers receive clear and comprehensive information about how their personal data are collected , processed and used .
However , rather than regulating the Internet , I would prefer a solution which involves educating Internet users and resorting to regulations or restrictions in limited cases only .
The introduction of censorship practices will only lead to other , more sophisticated fraudulent schemes and scams , which will always be one step ahead of any regulation .
Activities which inform and educate users are important , as is giving Internet users more options with respect to the treatment of their personal data .
It is important that the Commission starts to devise informative campaigns on the basic rights of consumers in respect of advertising , especially where this involves the use of their personal data .
I would also welcome the development of EU educational programmes that teach children and other vulnerable groups how to understand the pitfalls of advertising .
Equally , I welcome the report 's emphasis on the protection of vulnerable groups of consumers and the guarantee of respect for human dignity in advertising .
Advertising can effectively challenge and confront stereotypes .
It can be a positive force acting against racism , sexism , discrimination and so on .
However , it can also be a negative influence , contributing to violence , addictions such as smoking or alcoholism , or eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia .
The report also mentions other important factors that need attention .
That is why I supported the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) Internet advertising adapts itself to users ' behaviour .
Given a user profile , advertisers can target their advertising and avoid people outside their target group .
However , surveys show that users are largely opposed to personalised online advertising , which is often seen as intrusive .
Many people even feel that they are being watched .
A total of 62 % of those surveyed are concerned that data protection is being disregarded in the case of personalised advertising and data protection specialists also have misgivings , because personal data is being stored , compared and linked with other data .
In theory , every user can disable this option .
However , the link is not easy to find and , therefore , this report proposes to make it easier for consumers to refuse all further e-mail advertising by means of a direct , working hyperlink .
In addition , the report enables consumers to be provided with clear , accessible and comprehensive information about how their data is collected , processed and used .
Their data must be kept completely separate from that collected in the course of advertising activities .
The content of private e-mails must under no circumstances be misused for advertising purposes and default settings for computer systems must be used to protect privacy on the Internet ( privacy by design ) .
I agree with the general objectives of this action plan , which should ensure an improved flow of information at a local level or the creation of a single point of contact , taking into account the reduced use of European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) resources for measures relating to energy efficiency , with Member States and regions moving to a horizontal approach to energy efficiency for their development , given that this represents a profitable way of stimulating economic competitiveness and reducing fuel shortages .
I also agree that the Commission should consult local and regional representatives in order to define the direction for development in energy policy , as well as to provide financial support to local and regional projects through innovative programmes that use existing energy resources and structural funds .
Within this framework of possible action , it is suggested that major incentives are created for regions , which , up to now , have had an above-average role with regard to energy efficiency , promoting their energy independence and , on the other hand , encouraging the sharing of good practice between these regions and those having had little development in this area .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution because we are committed to respecting the environment , finding economic means of producing energy and combating climate change .
There is a need to ensure sustainable development , but economic development is also important .
These two dimensions must be reconciled with one another .
It is impossible to combat climate change without considering energy efficiency .
To this end , comprehensive and realistic objectives and penalties need to be set , so that energy efficiency is not simply based on economic benefits .
Energy efficiency mostly concerns buildings because there is a huge potential in energy efficiency in buildings .
I therefore support the rapporteur 's opinion that the focus should be on the renovation of existing buildings , since the construction rate of new buildings within the EU is in continuous decline and many old buildings can make a significant contribution to energy efficiency , if renovated properly .
in writing . - ( FR ) The energy question is a major challenge for Europe .
We need to remember how much our continent 's development owes to the relatively easy access to energy that European countries have enjoyed for over a century .
The energy question has now taken on a different aspect .
The use of fossil fuels is becoming increasingly a thing of the past .
The dual pressure exerted by the issue of global warming and the inevitable increasing difficulty in obtaining oil supplies and to a latter extent gas , is forcing us to think of new solutions .
There has been an Energy Efficiency Action Plan in place since 2006 , which deals with two particular aspects of efficiency .
In order to economise in a way that will make the EU less dependent on its international partners , it needs to tackle efficiencies in both production and consumption : less energy-hungry buildings , more economic machines , but also more streamlined production technologies that will enable us to combine competitiveness , and innovation with economies of scale .
Needless to say I supported this vital text ( including the binding objective of a further 20 % energy efficiency between now and 2020 ) , which places the European Union among the front-runners in these fields .
in writing . - ( LT ) A lot has been achieved since the adoption of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan in 2006 ; however , the political and economic context has changed quite a lot since then .
Therefore , there is a clear need to review the EU 's energy efficiency policy to align it with the current priorities and developments .
Energy efficiency is the most cost-efficient and fastest way to reduce CO2 and other emissions .
The advantages are huge in terms of both economic growth and job creation .
I believe that a thorough assessment of the achievements and shortcomings of the 2006 Energy Efficiency Action Plan should be undertaken as a basis for the revision of the EU 's energy efficiency policy .
It is becoming increasingly obvious that the EU is not on track to meet its 20 % target , therefore it is necessary to take more effective measures to promote energy efficiency .
Great attention must be paid to the renovation of existing buildings , because hitherto there has been little progress in this area .
The construction rate of new buildings within the EU is in continuous decline and many old buildings have the greatest efficiency potential , if renovated properly .
This would facilitate a reduction in the EU 's overall energy dependence .
in writing . - ( FR ) Adopted by a large majority , the own-initiative report of Bendt Bendtsen sends a welcome political signal on the issue of energy , several days after the end of the Cancún Summit and two months before the Summit on Energy on 4 February 2011 .
Energy efficiency is without doubt one of the critical issues of our fight to protect the environment .
Energy savings and energy efficiency are the most cost-efficient and fastest way to reduce CO2 emissions and improve security of supply .
In this report , we are calling for renewed efforts to achieve the energy efficiency objective of 20 % by 2020 .
However , I regret that the amendment calling on the European Commission to launch an initiative for the deep renovation of existing buildings next year did not get the necessary majority .
The report only mentions new buildings and not the issue of the management of existing buildings .
Yet buildings are responsible for about 40 % of energy consumption and about 36 % of greenhouse gas emissions in the EU .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report because there is a need to take specific measures on the implementation of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan , in particular as it is becoming increasingly obvious that the EU will not meet its target of a 20 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that energy efficiency is the most cost-efficient way to reduce CO2 and other emissions .
Furthermore , it represents a unique opportunity to support and create jobs , while lowering dependence on energy imports .
The European Parliament thus calls on the European Commission to design the new Energy Efficiency Action Plan taking into account the needs of vulnerable energy consumers .
In addition , it calls on the Member States to adopt appropriate measures and effective policies , such as national action plans or targeted social measures to reduce energy poverty and to report regularly on their actions to address this concern .
The Commission should also be responsible for presenting statistics on the development of all major elements of the EU 's energy policy .
I should like to congratulate Mr Bendtsen for this important and topical report on energy efficiency .
I voted in favour of this report , because I believe that good energy efficiency can help us to cut CO2 emissions substantially .
Various advantages may be derived from this type of political action : firstly , new jobs would be created , but it would also be possible to introduce greater involvement of small and medium-sized enterprises , the connective tissue of the Italian and European economies , which could be offered innovative development opportunities .
To do this , it would be necessary to arrange appropriate financial instruments to strengthen professional training , research and access to information .
I therefore agree with the need to review the European Union 's policies on energy efficiency and implement concrete plans to boost competitiveness .
As far as buildings and ecodesign are concerned , I agree that the focus should be on the renovation of existing buildings , since they offer extremely high energy efficiency potential , if renovated properly .
Therefore , to achieve these goals , it is necessary to promote measures , instruments and funding support from both Member States and at European level , for example through the introduction of ad hoc funds .
The report on energy efficiency rightly calls for a greater emphasis on innovative solutions such as smart grids and smart meters , for more flexible integration of renewable energy sources , and for the creation of a global strategy for heat generation .
Here we should note that the goal is for 50 % of homes to be fitted with smart meters by 2015 , rising to 80 % of homes by 2020 .
I am glad that there were no proposals for the introduction of legislative measures in the area of energy poverty .
Instead it was worded in such a way that it is clear that Member States are the ones who are best able to deal with the problem of energy poverty , and therefore this is a problem that should be resolved at the level of the Member States .
The possibility of using 15 % of the ERDF for energy efficiency programmes should also help in improving energy efficiency .
However , I do believe that energy efficiency should be made a horizontal European priority , which is financed from sources other than structural funds .
I think it was right to reject proposals for the introduction of a pan-European energy or coal tax , which would only lead to increased energy costs and would hit low-income groups the hardest .
I am also of the opinion that energy efficiency goals should not be legally binding and that we should not introduce a superficial conditionality for granting structural funds based on energy efficiency .
Energy efficiency is crucial for increasing security of supply , improving air quality , reducing emissions of greenhouse gases and increasing the competitiveness of our society .
Energy efficiency means doing ' more ' with ' fewer ' resources .
This report sets out an ambitious vision for energy efficiency through , for example , the introduction of individual goals and positive incentives .
Important elements are introduced with regard to the modernisation of energy infrastructure , such as smart networks , energy efficiency in buildings and transport , the use of ICT and the development of scientific research in the area of energy .
This report underlines the need to double the funds for scientific research , technological development and demonstration in the area of energy .
With regard to funding , the report also encourages the use of structural funds to support energy efficiency , and this will be a priority within the EU budget after 2013 .
In the light of all this , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Bendtsen , for the excellent work carried out , and for the balance achieved , and I would invite all of you to support this important report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Buildings are responsible for about 40 % of energy consumption and about 36 % of greenhouse gas emissions in the European Union .
Energy-efficient buildings should be a priority of the next revision of the energy efficiency action plan .
Today , 30 % of existing homes in Europe are unhealthy and have high energy bills .
It is therefore important not only to promote new sustanaible buildings but also to renovate existing buildings sustainably .
That is why the Member States must immediately launch a programme of deep renovations in the existing building stock to achieve a nearly zero level energy consumption in the built environment by 2050 .
There is also a link between energy efficiency and energy poverty .
We are therefore calling on the Commission to prepare a new energy efficiency action plan action to take account of the needs of vulnerable consumers .
in writing . - I would like to welcome this report on energy efficiency as it will increase energy security and it will serve to create social and economic advantages for the EU 's economy .
The S & D Group have pointed out that energy resources are not evenly distributed among Member States .
We must always consider European solidarity when legislating for energy efficiency .
It has been said that economising on energy is one of the quickest routes to energy efficiency .
Promoting energy efficiency will create employment and it will save Member State governments billions in heating costs on an annual basis .
I strongly welcome the creation of a lower carbon intensive society but we must be careful to strike the correct balance between Member States based on their capabilities and resources .
I am concerned that Member States such as Romania will be expected to perform on a level playing field with other Member States such as Sweden , who have a proven track record in the area of energy efficiency .
Financial Perspective 8 will be a critical financing tool to encourage and promote energy efficiency from 2014 to 2020 .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report on the Action Plan for Energy Efficiency because it puts forward important proposals for the environment and for the economy , specifically the presentation of European legislation that introduces binding goals to reduce energy consumption .
In 2008 , Europe committed itself to achieving , no later than 2020 , a 20 % reduction in energy consumption , and to ensure that 20 % of its energy consumption was from renewable sources .
This target is fundamental for helping Europe to meet its objective of reducing CO2 emissions , and to reduce dependency on fossil fuels , but it should continue to be exactly that , a target which the various States adhere to voluntarily .
For this to happen , rather than imposing a binding limit , it will be more important for Member States to agree on solutions that allow for greater energy efficiency and less energy being wasted , without affecting development and without this being overly costly for European industries and producers , particularly at a time of economic crisis such as now .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report focuses on energy efficiency policy within the EU .
With regard to this issue , I support the need to set binding targets .
In the Commission 's Green Paper ( 2005 / 0265 final ) on energy efficiency , it is estimated that around a million new jobs could be created in Europe , directly or indirectly .
According to this Communication , the particular beneficiaries of energy efficiency measures are SMEs , and it adds that an average household could save an average of EUR 1,000 a year through energy efficiency measures .
Mandatory energy efficiency measures are also crucial for reducing the energy deficit resulting from imports of oil and gas from the Gulf and Russia .
We already have binding targets for increasing the quota of renewable energy in the European Union to 20 % .
Within the current framework , we could only attain half of the potential without binding targets for energy efficiency .
It is also a question of legal certainty , and an important signal for directing new investment .
For the EU and Portugal I see more gains than losses with this binding objective .
In addition , if the EU 2020 objectives do not go beyond simple intentions , this strategy will not achieve anything .
Promises to increase energy efficiency have multiplied , but the European Union runs the risk of not meeting the targets that have been proposed : achieving 20 % by 2020 .
The latest data points to an actual average of only 9 % , despite the contribution that an increase in energy efficiency could make to a reduction in emissions , consumption and energy dependence .
The report contains a wide selection of elements that cover the vast field of energy efficiency quite adequately , although it indicates routes that might make it difficult to achieve successfully the objectives that it aims for .
But there are aspects with which we disagree , such as the link that is claimed between energy efficiency and what is called the Europe 2020 Strategy , which provides for the creation of a single market in energy , the promotion of market-based instruments , the European Emissions Trading System masking some of the profits from energy efficiency , and overlooking the need to defend a strong energy public sector that each State needs to promote .
Although we agree with the need for there to be community funds for implementing the objectives , we still have doubts about the practical possibility of using up to 15 % of the ERDF or using the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) for energy efficiency , given that it should be the Member States that determine their needs and priorities for the distribution of these funds .
in writing . - ( FR ) Numerous measures offering unexploited possibilities can be introduced to improve energy efficiency in key sectors such as transport and the built environment .
It is nonetheless unrealistic to set a binding target for improving energy efficiency by at least 20 % by 2020 , because there is no method of evaluation and there are no common indicators .
Instead , we should focus on specific sectoral targets , such as the commitment to reduce energy consumption in existing buildings by 38 % .
The lack of funding is a major obstacle to the renovation of buildings in the residential and SME sectors .
Instead of engaging in a battle of unrealistic objectives , the European Commission should , instead , come up with innovative solutions and stimulate public-private partnerships , because this creative ecology is a source of jobs .
in writing . - ( LT ) I approved of this report because it aims to increase energy efficiency by at least 20 % by 2020 , and thereby advance the transition to a sustainable and green economy .
The advantages are huge in terms of both economic growth and job creation .
The jobs created will be in both rural and urban areas .
It is well known that there is a huge potential for energy efficiency in buildings .
Therefore the focus should be on the renovation of existing buildings , since the construction rate of new buildings within the EU is in continuous decline and many old buildings have the greatest efficiency potential , if renovated properly .
In the cleantech industry there is a need to bridge the gap between the USA and China , on one hand , and the EU , on the other .
Both countries are far more progressive than the EU with regard to adopting legislative measures promoting energy-efficient solutions .
Therefore , measures and instruments to boost financing should be supported by the EU and Member States .
The creation of national energy efficiency funds which support Energy Performance Contracting should be incentivised through a financial instrument at European level .
Energy Performance Contracting ( EPC ) whereby a customer purchases a guaranteed energy saving creates leverage as the investment is paid back over a time span of 2-15 years .
Such a model creates jobs within SMEs , consumers save money on energy bills and emissions are reduced .
in writing . - ( FI ) When I , like the majority in my group , voted against the mandatory 20 % energy savings target , I was not taking a stand on the importance of energy saving , but the way in which it is trying to be promoted .
The importance of improved energy savings is undeniable .
Nevertheless , attempts to resolve the EU 's climate and energy security and supply problems are not , in my opinion , sustainable or prudent .
In the notorious 202020 climate and energy package the energy savings target was the only nonbinding one , as it was assumed that it would be stepped up in line with other mandatory targets , such as those for cuts in emissions and renewables .
The energy savings target was not implemented in the way we wanted , but now , rather than burden our Community with yet another binding target , one that overlaps with other binding targets , and without knowing how it will be achieved , we should examine whether those other targets were set appropriately in the first place .
When we introduce emission cuts and targets for renewables our Member States and their companies are put under pressure , and the temptation to create shortsighted , unsustainable solutions becomes overwhelming .
If on top of that we impose one more constraint , we will be in a situation where the EU will be literally sawing off the branch it is sitting on , at the same time bringing about a massive transfer of income , with no further benefit to the climate , the environment or our energy security .
In trying to do something good , we have done just the opposite .
Industry is becoming less viable globally , we are unsustainably burning wood in the name of renewable energy , and , at the same time , the problem itself , carbon dioxide emissions , is growing increasingly serious beyond our borders .
It is time to take sensible and sustainable action , and not resort to shortsighted forcefeeding with nothing rationally tangible .
in writing . - ( DE ) The EU-wide increase in energy efficiency is a central component of a sustainable European energy strategy .
It will allow CO2 emissions to be reduced and , at the same time , energy security to be improved in the most rapid and cost-effective way .
I welcome the fact that the report highlights increased investment in energy efficiency in buildings which will create new jobs in the construction sector and in SMEs and will bring possible annual energy benefits of up to EUR 1 000 per household .
The report also refers to the need to increase energy efficiency throughout the transport system by shifting from energy intensive transport modes , such as cars and trucks , to energy saving means of transport , such as rail .
I welcome the aspects of the report which call on the Commission and the Member States to give energy efficiency the attention it deserves and , at the same time , to ensure that the numerous legislative provisions relating to this area which are already in place at an EU and a national level are complied with .
At the vote , today , I endorsed the adoption of the Bendtsen report on the revision of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan .
There is no doubt that increasing energy efficiency is the most cost-effective and the fastest way to reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
The fact is that buildings account for around 40 % of energy consumption and around 36 % of greenhouse gas emissions in the EU .
This is why I think that one of the most important things which needs to be done is to increase the energy efficiency of buildings , and this should be accomplished by initiating work to renovate existing equipment and by installing a more efficient common infrastructure in buildings and heating systems .
I voted in favour of financing the insulation of buildings from the Structural Funds .
The report on energy efficiency is extremely important with a view to adopting the EU action plan in this area for the coming years .
It will have a huge impact on the methods used to cut CO2 emissions , on economic growth and on creating jobs in areas such as IT , construction and services .
I voted in favour of more effective protection for vulnerable consumers .
These consumers must benefit most from the energy efficiency improvements made .
However , more financial resources are needed to make the required investments .
Furthermore , I voted for setting up energy efficiency funds at national , regional or local level .
These funds could play a key role in developing SMEs and companies supplying energy efficiency services .
I voted against setting the legally binding target of achieving minimum energy savings of 20 % by 2020 as this element of compulsion at EU level could have an adverse impact on the single market .
I think that the transition to a sustainable , green economy will progress even without imposing excessive legislative measures .
In his report on the revision of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan , Mr Bendtsen rightly points out that national policies still do not fully exploit the potential in the field of energy efficiency .
We must therefore strengthen European Union strategies in this direction .
I voted for the motion .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report promotes the principle of energy efficiency and advocates energy labelling .
This is a good thing , although one might have wished to see the discussion extended to energy sobriety and eco-labelling .
It is also concerned about energy poverty .
This is good news .
What a pity , then , that it makes them instruments of green capitalism , that it is in favour of free competition , calls for the intervention of financial intermediaries and extols the virtues of the carbon market .
It annihilates the advances it promises .
in writing . - ( PT ) An action plan that complies with the European energy policy needs to address the following issues : moving towards a low carbon-emission energy system , ensuring security of energy supply , and ensuring the Union 's improved competitiveness and the supply of energy to all consumers at affordable prices .
Considerable financial and human effort is required in order to achieve these objectives .
in writing . - Here are 10 principal guidelines for energy efficiency .
1 .
Energy - efficient technologies ; 2 .
Transport technologies ; 3 .
Efficient use of energy ; 4 .
Energy transportation circuit security ; 5 .
Collection and storage of goods used for energy production ; 6 .
The energy exploitation of countries - suppliers ; 7 .
Forming and distribution of energy resources ; 8 .
Anti-monopoly programmes for energy consumption and energy supply ; 9 . Nanotechnologies in the energy supply sector and its development ; 10 .
Efficient energy legislation .
Unfortunately , these aspects are not covered by the present report .
I voted in favour , bearing in mind that the principal task has only just begun .
in writing . - ( DE ) Energy efficiency is an area with great potential for the future where the EU already has some experience .
In addition , the EU Member States are home to many leading technology companies .
Alongside the obvious benefits for the environment , this sector also offers opportunities for boosting economic growth and creating jobs .
However , it has become clear in the past that the EU often sets itself ambitious targets and then has problems in achieving them or misses them altogether .
This could be the case with buildings which , of course , offer enormous potential for energy savings .
It is significantly simpler to implement measures of this kind in new buildings than in existing older ones .
Listed buildings present particular problems .
Last but not least , we must not allow the situation to get out of hand by imposing measures to increase energy efficiency which are so expensive to implement that the cost of living becomes almost unaffordable .
I have voted accordingly .
One cannot but agree with the proposition of the rapporteur that ' energy efficiency is the most cost-efficient and fastest way to reduce CO2 and other emissions . '
In addition , action to improve energy efficiency contributes to economic growth and the creation of jobs .
This phenomenon can be observed , for example , in the new Member States , where the scale of the challenges to be faced is enormous .
It is also worth mentioning that European Union support for the insulation of buildings is one of the most visible features of cohesion policy .
Modernised buildings are one of the best signs of the European Union in the region .
With this in mind , I endorse the proposals contained in the report concerning an increase in expenditure on improving energy efficiency .
I voted in favour of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan , because I believe it is important to push the European Union to make progress towards a green and sustainable future .
Reducing energy consumption through system innovations in energy infrastructures and urban development is the goal set by Europe in the new action plan that the Commission will submit in February .
I also believe that the objectives must not be binding because if we speed up the timing we run the risk of financially damaging companies and individuals .
The measures for an action plan must be coherent with national plans in order to outline a common methodology for measuring energy efficiency targets .
The rapporteur , a member of the PPE Group , in his review of the energy efficiency action plan , makes a balanced proposal to attain a target of a 20 % energy saving , set by the European Council in 2007 .
The pragmatic way of implementing an energy efficiency policy proposed by the rapporteur , through individual targets and without imposing legally binding objectives , seemed to me to be the most appropriate method , in the current economic and political context , of achieving the objective in question .
However , a solution involving the introduction of mandatory targets of at least 20 % for energy reduction , an amendment approved through the votes of the socialists , liberals and greens , was passed in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) .
Within the report , for which I voted in favour , I would highlight the various community and Member State actions that support energy efficiency : the application of existing legislation in this area , energy efficient urban development , the construction of energy efficient buildings and the funding of these and other measures through the creation of national energy efficiency funds .
It should be emphasised that this European Parliament report is an important contribution to the review of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan under way within the European Commission .
Partly as a result of several improvements to the original plan , I agree with Mr Bendtsen that energy efficiency is the most cost-efficient measure to reduce CO2 and other emissions and that it represents a unique opportunity to support and create jobs , while at the same time lowering dependence on energy imports .
He notes that , according to the Commission , energy-saving benefits could amount to over EUR 1 000 per household per year .
in writing . - ( RO ) Energy efficiency is the most cost-effective and fastest way to reduce CO2 and other emissions .
The advantages are huge in terms of both economic growth and job creation in the areas of IT , construction and services .
These jobs will be in both rural and urban areas , often within SMEs , and they will be local jobs which cannot be outsourced .
The Commission is going to submit a new revised plan at the start of 2011 , which must contain the following elements : - EU binding target of a minimum 20 % increase in energy efficiency by 2020 - measures to combat energy poverty introduced in all energy policies - revision of the Energy Services Directive in 2011 - encouraging investment in smart grids and compliance by Member States with the requirement of the third legislative package on the internal market to install smart meters in 80 % of households by 2020 - Member States must set annual building stock renovation targets - the Commission must put forward policies for achieving nearly zero energy losses in buildings by 2050 - the Commission must examine innovative funding models , such as revolving funds , in order to achieve the targets in this sector .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of this report because I believe that it is important for the target of 20 % energy efficiency to be compulsory , not only for reasons of CO2 reduction , but also for in social reasons .
A large proportion of the expenditure of European households is on energy bills .
Introducing efficiency measures that reduce energy waste and help to reduce energy poverty is a socialist objective .
in writing . - ( FR ) Until such time as the crazy challenge of space solar energy becomes a reality and the entire world reaps the benefits of this almost inexhaustible electric manna , the European Union has no other choice for its current energy policy than to get its energy supply from as many sources as possible and to opt for energy efficiency .
This is a key priority of the European strategy for the next decade highlighted in the report by Mr Bendtsen , which was approved this afternoon by a majority of the members of the European Parliament .
I particularly welcome the adoption of the binding energy savings target of 20 % by 2020 , which would enable the EU to save approximately EUR 100 billion .
In order to achieve this , we are clearly going to have to do more in fields as varied as energy services , transport ( by when will we have a framework for the standardisation of electric vehicles ? ) and buildings .
The latter requires particular attention , as we know that they are responsible for about 40 % of energy consumption and about 36 % of greenhouse gas emissions in the European Union .
There is considerable energy saving potential in public buildings , for example , which would facilitate the transition towards a stable , green economy .
in writing . - This report is a powerful and timely reminder to the Commission and the Council of the importance of a binding energy-saving target ahead of the crucial Energy Summit on 4 February 2011 and as the Commission prepares its energy efficiency action plan .
Ambitious EU measures on energy saving and efficiency are essential if Europe is to respond to the challenges of energy security and climate change .
They also make economic sense , create jobs and save consumers money on their energy bills .
Until now , Member States have been reneging on their pledge to reduce energy consumption by 20 % by 2020 , by making insufficient progress .
Making the target binding will help ( as in the case of renewable energy ) to ensure that the EU governments actually deliver on this potential .
The report also calls for stronger measures to address the energy consumption of buildings , notably by renovating the existing building stock .
With buildings accounting for 40 % of energy consumption in the EU , it is essential to tackle this sector head on .
The Greens hope that the EU Energy Summit will also address this crucial issue .
The Energy Efficiency Action Plan is a cost-effective means of increasing the competitiveness of the economy and security of energy supply to the European Union .
The plan to begin improving energy efficiency is also a perfect opportunity for the development of small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Bendtsen report rightly draws attention to ways of using energy effectively and efficiently without the need to reduce its consumption , because this is continuing to rise in the Member States .
The use of new energy technologies in construction and transport allows significant savings at the level of the whole Union .
However , for such methods to come into use , an information campaign for the citizens is needed , as also is a reduction in the costs of energy-saving technologies .
It is , indeed , the high price of innovative equipment which is the greatest obstacle to its coming into use .
Adoption of binding targets for 2020 is difficult for many Member States .
We must , however , remember that each of the Member States is at a different stage of development of energy policy .
A binding renewable energy target of 20 % of final energy consumption by 2020 may prove to be too great a challenge , particularly for the 12 new Member States .
in writing . - ( NL ) I am pleased that the European Parliament has declared itself to be in favour of a mandatory 20 % energy savings target in 2020 .
Forecasts indicate that , with the current policy , Europe will only achieve an 11 % energy saving .
Meanwhile , households waste EUR 1 000 of energy a year and we annually export no less than EUR 350 billion of our European welfare to oil-rich nations .
Better insulation for houses , more efficient energy transport and more efficient appliances ensure a lower energy bill for consumers and businesses .
There are often barriers to these effective measures being taken , such as high investment costs or uncertainty about the benefits .
If the European ministers support this proposal , governments will have to step up their support for energy conservation measures .
These measures will ultimately bring in money , because the energy bill will be lower .
Energy conservation is the cheapest way for us to reach our climate target and will lead to 560 million tonnes less CO2 emissions .
Energy conservation therefore makes it even easier for us to raise our climate target a little .
Unfortunately , we are still hopelessly behind ; according to a recent report , we need to triple the European target if we are to achieve a 20 % energy saving .
It is therefore important that this target be imposed as binding on all EU Member States .
in writing . - ECR MEPs believe that energy efficiency has a crucial part to play in helping the EU meet its renewable energy and emissions reduction targets .
It also has a crucial role to play in ensuring our energy security and contributing to our economic competitiveness .
We support much of the content of this report , such as the focus on smart grids and metering , financing from the EIB and the private sector , and also the potential for R & D to further energy efficiency . ECR MEPs do not , however , support binding energy efficiency targets .
We believe that the EU and Member States are already incentivised to implement energy efficiency policies through renewable energy and emissions reduction targets , as well as energy saving targets under the Energy Services Directive .
ECR members therefore abstained on this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted against the Bendtsen report , because the figures have once again been changed and the targets are restrictive .
It is true that this is a non-legislative report , but the effects of the ecodesign directive have shown how carefully these issues must be handled .
As result of the light bulb ban , I have had to evacuate a room after an energy-saving bulb containing mercury broke , in order to avoid damage being caused to people 's health .
This is exactly the sort of thing that must be stopped in good time .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted against this report .
I welcome the approach taken by the report concerning the Energy Efficiency Action Plan .
However , I believe that imposing mandatory energy efficiency targets ' from above ' and setting obligatory modernisation and refurbishment targets for private and public buildings ( such as schools ) is a mistake .
At a time when budgets are tight in the provinces , local authorities and private households , these unrealistic requirements will put too great a strain on them .
For example , the EU Commission , whose buildings were covered by the new efficiency criteria , recently had to admit that it could not meet the additional requirements for the energy refurbishment of its building stock .
The EU must not require others to do things which it cannot do itself .
For the many medium-sized companies and , in particular , small contractors in Saxony these measures go significantly too far .
They will overburden businesses and will obviously result in job losses and in cost increases for consumers .
In my opinion , we need to take a critical approach in particular to the call for energy efficiency criteria to be applied to public procurement policy .
The right way to save energy involves educating the citizens of Europe and establishing tax incentive systems .
in writing . - ( DE ) I oppose this report .
Although it contains some proposals which are worthy of consideration , I have a low opinion of the type of gesture politics which calls for restrictive measures that are almost impossible to implement in practice .
The demands on local and regional authorities and on private home-owners to carry out energy refurbishments of their properties are particularly pointless , given the financial situation of all the parties involved .
Even the EU Commission had to admit that it could not meet the comprehensive requirements for the energy refurbishment of its building stock .
In addition , we have not yet seen any proof of the claim that energy refurbishments result in direct cost savings .
As a result of investment in the production and maintenance of the infrastructure and in renewable energy generation facilities , the cost of energy is rising faster than can be compensated for by the possible savings from energy efficiency measures .
The existing EU energy efficiency directive from 2002 has been implemented in very different ways in the individual Member States which means that there is no common approach in Europe on this issue .
Insisting on a much greater mobilisation of structural funds to pay for energy efficiency measures is inappropriate in the light of the ongoing finance debates .
I am very much in favour of a debate on energy efficiency based on a broad consensus at all political levels and involving all the relevant players and the creation of incentive systems .
However , I am opposed to regulations imposed ' from above ' for which others have to foot the bill .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Economic governance and Article 9 of the Treaty of Lisbon ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the oral question by Stephen Hughes , Pervenche Berès and Udo Bullmann , on behalf of the S & D Group , to the Council : Economic governance and Article 9 of the Treaty of Lisbon - B7-0660 / 2010 ) , and
the oral question by Stephen Hughes , Pervenche Berès and Udo Bullmann , on behalf of the S & D Group , to the Commission : Economic governance and Article 9 of the Treaty of Lisbon - B7-0661 / 2010 )
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , both your institutions have worked very hard in the field of economic governance and , today , the European Parliament is debating the six Commission proposals on economic governance .
Today , we are under the regime of the Treaty of Lisbon , Article 9 of which provides that , in the definition and implementation of its policies and actions , the Union shall , and I quote , ' take into account requirements linked to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection , the fight against social exclusion , and a high level of education , training and protection of human health ' .
This article is binding on all the institutions of the Union and on all its policies .
Yet , today , you have not carried out an impact assessment on the ' economic governance package ' on which you are asking me to deliberate .
These impact assessments are very close to the heart of the Commission when , for example , it comes to implementing legislation on electromagnetic diseases .
This is to be welcomed , but we would like the same zeal to be applied to economic governance .
Otherwise , what do we see ?
We see Commissioner Rehn explaining to us today that there would be three pillars in his strategy : growth on the one hand , economic governance on the other , and , finally , supervision of the financial markets .
But if the right hand does not know what the left hand is doing , the action of the European Union will be incoherent and European law in terms of Article 9 will not be complied with .
We therefore urge you to evaluate the social impact in terms of employment , in terms of the funding of retirement pension , in terms of social protection , in terms of the funding of public services , of the measures you are preparing to take .
What impact will the fight against poverty have on your 2020 Strategy objective , when we learn that , today , within the European Union , 116 million people were threatened by poverty or social exclusion on the basis of figures valid for 2008 ?
The reality is that the Commission seems to be applying a secret mandate asking you , in response to the concerns of some Member States , within the Council , to reform the Stability and Growth Pact to make it more binding , to provide for preventive and corrective sanctions , while ignoring the necessary investment strategy around what you yourselves have adopted , the 2020 Strategy .
We know that , as regards job creation , over the next few years the situation in terms of growth prospects will be more difficult than in the years that have just elapsed .
We are not opposed to a return to public finance scenes but we are opposed to a growth strategy that has no means of financing , with austerity plans that may have immeasurable social effects , with potential consequences in terms of inequality , and where none of the inequalities , with respect to the distribution of wealth , is addressed .
This cannot be the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon , for which we fought so hard and which you , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , have an obligation to implement .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I am delighted that the public is present .
That is good .
I should like to thank Parliament , of course , for having put this issue on the agenda of this part-session .
It allows us to address an important issue , on which a great deal of work has been done in recent months within the Council .
I am aware , of course , of the importance this Parliament attaches to economic governance and to its links with social issues in the broader sense , as set forth in Article 9 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The obligation deriving from Article 9 must be complied with when defining and implementing all the policies and actions of the Union , including , therefore , all the work on future economic governance .
I should first like to point out that , during the Belgian Presidency , the importance of the implementation of Article 9 and hence of the cross-section clause has been referred to so often .
I should therefore like to recall the conclusions adopted by the Council on 6 December on the social dimension in the context of an integrated Europe 2020 Strategy .
These conclusions call on the European Commission to strengthen and encourage the use of the existing system for the evaluation of the social impact .
It calls on the Council to produce a report on the way in which Article 9 is implemented in work and in European policies through the open coordination method .
It also calls on the Commission to seek out means of implementing social mainstreaming and thus , also , Article 9 in the context of its flagship initiative of a European platform against poverty , which should be published in the next few days .
With regard , more specifically , to the new macroeconomic monitoring and coordination mechanism , the Council does not see employment and social protection as simply outcomes affected by the new macroeconomic monitoring framework , the impact of which would have to be studied , but also as factors stimulating macroeconomic and fiscal growth in the short and medium term .
This is important if we want to avoid an unbalanced macroeconomic framework and preserve the institutional balance sought by the treaties .
The Council 's willingness to promote Article 9 in practice is also evident in the European Semester , which has to reflect , in an integrated approach , a balanced position between the Europe 2020 Strategy and the Stability and Growth Pact .
The principles contained in Article 9 must therefore apply across all these documents and legislative measures so that they become an integrated whole .
With this in mind , the Council carried out its work in two phases .
In the first phase , the work of the Council consisted in developing a European Employment Strategy , as provided for by the Treaty and the new economic governance framework .
In the conclusions adopted on 21 October , the Council defined the place of the European Employment Strategy in economic governance .
In the second phase , at the 6 December European Council , the Council adopted a new instrument for the multilateral monitoring of employment and social policies , the Joint Assessment Framework , which will make for better monitoring of the employment and social integration policies of the Member States and , therefore , ensure that better account is taken of these dimensions at European level .
These new instruments will have to be mobilised in the preventive phase of macroeconomic monitoring so that adequate attention is paid to the situation of the labour markets and to social problems which could jeopardise Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) .
They will , of course , also be central instruments for the thematic monitoring of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The Council also recalled that it intended to contribute both to thematic monitoring , based on the five key objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy , and to macroeconomic monitoring , since both these frameworks are closely linked .
And , in response to the request of the Belgian Presidency , the Social Protection Committee delivered an opinion on the social dimension of the Europe 2020 Strategy , in which it stresses the need for synergy among the priorities of the Europe 2020 Strategy and the indivisible whole formed by the objectives set by the European Council .
I would also note that the Council referred to Article 9 in other conclusions : the conclusions on pensions and the conclusions of the Council on social services of general interest .
Madam President , honourable Members , our discussion this afternoon allows us to address issues relating to economic governance and , in particular , its social aspects .
As President-in-Office of the Council , I will naturally listen carefully to your speeches and I look forward to a fruitful exchange of views , which will help us all in the subsequent negotiations .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , Article 9 of the Treaty of Lisbon , to which you are referring , really defines the specific features of the European social economic model .
When you read our Europe 2020 Strategy you can see it explicit reinforces this very model of Europe by bringing together efforts to improve performance in areas such as labour participation , lifelong education , labour adaptability and mobility and social inclusion .
However , this is not a sufficient answer at this time of severe challenges , when the climate of crisis in Europe is affecting negatively , or even dramatically , the real economy , public finances , the labour market and the quality of life in Europe .
To address the challenges revealed by the crisis , the Commission has launched several policy initiatives .
To reinforce the stability of our financial system , the EU has agreed on a new architecture for financial regulation .
This has been debated in Parliament .
Secondly , to address the challenges to public finances and macroeconomic imbalances , the European Commission has proposed a comprehensive strengthening of economic governance in the European Union , the legislative package you referred to in your question .
The package includes , as you know , proposals to address excessive public debt more seriously than in the past by defining a satisfactory pace of debt reduction .
It also proposes minimum requirements for national fiscal frameworks to ensure that they are in line with Treaty obligations as well as a monitoring system for macroeconomic imbalances such as large current account deficits or bubbles in the housing market .
It underlines prevention and prudence to ensure better preparedness in times of economic downturn .
To ensure the credibility of the new framework , the Commission is proposing a wide range of sanctions that should start kicking in at an early stage .
The philosophy behind the proposed legislation is that it should help Member States to follow disciplined policies and lay the basis for stable long-term growth performance , which is critical to the welfare of European citizens , while making an important contribution to the prevention of future crises .
Given the current economic situation it is really important to have this economic governance framework in place as soon as possible .
As to the impact assessment , the government reforms were prepared by far-reaching analysis in the EMU @ 10 study in 2008 .
Also , in preparing and following up the Commission communications announcing the new governance structures of the so-called EU semester that were adopted in May and June 2010 , the Commission discussed its proposal with many stakeholders alongside the European Parliament and the Council and promoted vigorous , broad-based debate of the issues .
And of course , we was developed the proposals in the light of past performance and lessons learnt .
And what are the major lessons ?
The major lesson is that preventive action is much more valuable than imposing corrective sanctions on a state that is already in difficulties .
Therefore our emphasis is on influencing positively the national policy mix responsible - and here is the real responsibility - for the trade-off between real economic revival and growth , and austerity and consolidation of public finances .
Europe needs both .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , following Mrs Berès 's question , I should like to focus on the economic model on which we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) base ourselves : social market economics .
That is to say we must indeed put all of our efforts not only into ending the crisis and combating poverty , but more importantly into ensuring the social inclusion of some of our fellow European citizens who are today left by the wayside .
This social inclusion must be addressed today , on the one hand to ensure that these fellow citizens can get back into work , which means creating jobs to fight the crisis , and on the other hand - and this is extremely important - to ensure that in the years to come we can have training programmes - initial training initiatives and lifelong learning initiatives - in every Member State , which will enable our fellow European citizens to adapt to the jobs of the future , to the new qualifications that we will require , and to the rise in the level of qualifications expected in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
On the basis of Article 9 , therefore , we can clearly see that , beyond everything that is being done at the financial systems level , there is also an extremely important contribution to develop to ensure our fellow citizens are trained and able to fully become stakeholders in society because they are active in this society , and active means trained and ready to take on the jobs of the future .
I therefore call for Commission policies to comply with this objective , otherwise we will lose sight of the objective of a Europe with strong social cohesion .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , representatives of the Council and the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , over the last 50 years our economy 's interdependence has increased , along with the interdependence of our economic policies .
The eyes of citizens are on the European Union ; they know that the process of European integration has placed many aspects of their lives under the responsibility of the EU institutions : many decisions are made jointly .
Many of the Member States ' traditional instruments have moved to European level , and everyone recognises that economic policies are an issue of common interest at European level .
The European Union is therefore the focal point of this crisis : all eyes are on the EU .
We are not , as some say , in a ' post-crisis ' scenario .
At most we might be in a ' post-recession ' scenario .
Predicted growth for this year will be low and uneven , and the problem is that next year forecasts are still indicating that growth could decline slightly .
The number of people unemployed in the European Union is currently 23 million .
This crisis has opened up a significant social gap , and , moreover , it has put pressure on public finances and even threatened the future of the euro .
It is essential that we strengthen the economic governance of the European Union in order to respond to the crisis and ensure the future of the EU project .
In order to tackle these common challenges , we need to restore growth and employment , change the economic model and promote global sustainable development , and we must do so while ensuring the future of the European social model .
From the first economic crisis in 1929 , we learnt that the public authorities have a commitment to restoring growth and employment ; from the second economic crisis , which was the rebuilding of Europe following the Second World War , that the new Europe should be built on foundations of social justice .
Neither of those lessons must be forgotten , and both of them must play an integral role in the future of a sustainable Europe .
Article 9 of our Treaty on the Functioning of the EU states that ' In defining and implementing its policies and activities , the Union shall take into account requirements linked to the promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection , the fight against social exclusion , and a high level of education , training and protection of human health . '
It is not , therefore , just a question of austerity .
Austerity could cause the economy to contract .
We need policies that also promote growth , in other words responsible policies .
It is also not a question of growing first and distributing later : we have learnt that distribution contributes to growth .
It is also not a question of making progress first and later providing for the basic needs of citizens : we have learnt that education , health , social security and public services are essential in order for societies to progress .
If they are not in place , they are costs that are a burden on the future of our society , and it is not possible to have a healthy economy in a sick society .
We therefore raise the following questions : must the future legislative framework on economic governance be in line with the model of a social Europe and Article 9 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU ?
Does a true impact assessment exist ?
Finally , is what we really want for President Barroso to fulfil his commitment to there being a social impact and to clearly state that Europe needs a new social pact , in terms of both fiscal and employment standards , a model that ensures employment , fairness , environmental responsibility and global development ?
Any other reform will be insufficient .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , when I was canvassing for a ' yes ' vote for the Treaty of Lisbon , I gave Irish citizens 10 reasons to vote ' yes ' to Lisbon .
One of those was the social clause , Article 9 .
On several occasions in this Chamber and elsewhere I have asked the Commission and the Council to now apply Article 9 in their proposals on economic governance and , of course , in their response to the current economic crisis , which is a real test of their commitment to the social clause .
In Ireland we see the evidence of this response , where the minimum wage has been cut by one euro an hour in the last week , and where invalidity payments and payments to blind persons have also been cut .
What now do the phrases ' the fight against social exclusion ' or ' the guarantee of adequate social protection ' contained in Article 9 signify to those citizens ?
Of course , you may say that this is an internal matter for Ireland , but it is not .
The parameters for austerity in Ireland were set by the EU , and our government will send monthly reports to you .
Will you remind them of Article 9 when the report comes in about the cut in the minimum wage ?
Why has this happened ?
This has happened because Irish banks and European banks engaged in reckless lending and borrowing right under the noses of the ECB .
The interest rates you are now charging to Ireland for borrowing , according to today 's newspapers , are 3 % more than were charged to Latvia , Romania and Hungary .
Representatives from the Court of Auditors say that there is no precedent for the EU charging such a margin on loans .
Can I ask you to confirm or deny this situation ?
If it is true , please explain to me , so that I can explain to Irish citizens , how the social clause is working for them .
This situation is specific to Ireland , but if it is a template for other Member States in trouble , then Article 9 is dead in the water .
Madam President , I will be brief .
If we look at the policies being implemented today , broadly speaking there is an 80 % cut in expenditure and a 20 % increase in new revenue , and I think that is being generous .
Everybody knows very well that when there is an 80 % cut in public expenditure , the first ones to pay the price are the most vulnerable people in our societies .
I should therefore like to share my indignation with you by drawing on two contrasts : the first being the contrast I see between economic governance , on the one hand , and the EU 2020 Strategy on the other .
Economic governance requires harsh , immediate action and stringent rules that are binding .
The EU 2020 Strategy indeed has good intentions , in particular to reduce poverty , but it is a soft , voluntary option and governments will only follow it if they really want to and have the time .
There is nothing binding about any of that .
I feel that is a contrast that is untenable and therefore incompatible with the spirit of Article 9 .
The second contrast exists between the issue of economic governance , on the one hand , and the issue of public expenditure on the other .
Public expenditure must be reduced quickly otherwise we will be heading for catastrophe .
The debt must be reduced within a maximum of 20 years and , if possible , even sooner than this but without an impact assessment we are not giving it much thought .
When it comes to generating new revenue - because in any case a budget is made up of both revenue and expenditure - with taxes on financial transactions , taxes on energy , and a consolidated basis for corporate tax , we say , ' Wait , an assessment is required , we must consider the impact , we must not do too much .
Let us think about it , let us take our time , let us assess ... ' .
I really do not understand why on the one hand we have to charge full speed ahead without worrying about the impact , whereas on the other hand we move slowly and take the time to think , while , in the meantime , the people are paying the price .
These contrasts , I think , demonstrate to everyone that Article 9 does not hold as much weight as the articles on economic convergence in the Treaties of the European Union and it is , I believe , a contrast we must resolve if we wish to win back the trust of our citizens .
Madam President , I want to ask the Commission if it would give the House a specific definition of how it intends to implement Article 9 .
We constantly hear about macroeconomic monitoring .
We never hear it talking about macro-social monitoring of what Member States are doing in pursuit of European social policy and objectives .
I want it to tell us if it intends to use this simply as an impact assessment , i.e. that it hopes its measurements will have no social impact .
That is not good enough , because Article 9 is intended to promote the objectives of the European Union as outlined in Article 3 of the Treaty .
It is not good enough simply to have no impact - it must have a positive impact .
This is the obligation on the Commission and it must implement the treaties .
I also want to address the issue of social services of general interest , on which I am a rapporteur .
There is absolutely no doubt whatsoever that the current crisis exit strategy which the Commission is pursuing is going to destroy social services of general interest in the Member States .
You need only look at the Memorandum of Understanding which the Commission has concluded with the Irish Government for a demonstration of that .
It is stated on page 2 that a reduction of current expenditure in 2011 of just over EUR 2 billion will be implemented , including social protection expenditure reductions , a reduction of public service employment numbers , a reduction of existing public service pensions on a progressive basis , other expenditure savings of over EUR 1 billion , and a reduction of close to EUR 2 billion in public capital expenditure against existing plans for 2011 .

What other impact can that have than to decimate services of general interest , and in particular social services of general interest ?
So where is Article 9 ?
Where was Article 9 when the Commission was negotiating this deal with a Conservative Irish Government on the point of collapse ?
I would also ask the Commission , when it is going to present this Memorandum of Understanding it has signed off with the Irish Government before this House ?
It is obliged to do so under the Treaty of Lisbon .
When are we going to see it ?
When are we going to have an opportunity to discuss it here ?
One of the other aspects of this agreement which I mentioned this morning is the insistence by the Commission that the minimum wage in Ireland be reduced by EUR 2 000 a year .
I repeat , the minimum wage .
The Treaty of Lisbon declares that we must have adequate social protection , that we must encourage people to stay in work , that we must eliminate poverty traps , etc . , etc . , etc . , and yet we reduce the minimum wage by EUR 2 000 a year .
What will that do other than drive more people out of work into the safe haven , relatively speaking , of welfare dependency ?
These are questions which the Commission must respond to .
We do not want any more flannel .
No more plámás .
No more Eurospeak .
We want clear answers on how the Commission is going to apply Article 9 of the Treaty in relation to economic governance and , in particular , on the arrangements it is making with Member States with regard to the crisis exit strategy .
( IT ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , there is no doubt that remaining alert to the matter of economic governance is an absolutely right and proper aim of the European Parliament .
Article 9 , mentioned in the question , is absolutely consistent with the need to take everything concerning the individual citizen into the greatest consideration .
Today , no more than a few hours ago , an important piece of legislation was passed , recognising citizens ' rights to take the legislative initiative , to give primacy to their right to citizenship .
Greater stability means more controls , it means intervening promptly and effectively , and it means making the most of competitiveness .
Toughness must be combined with efficiency and substance .
Social protection is closely linked to a real will to create jobs in a situation , such as our own , of particular difficulty .
For this reason , we need to talk about this - and talk about it meaningfully - with all the stakeholders .
( EL ) Madam President , may I say that the question of economic governance and the targets it sets , especially as put forward under the Treaty of Lisbon , raise specific questions as to whether a policy is being applied that is socially correct , whether an economy is being applied that targets green growth and whether an economy is being applied that prevents against unemployment , especially among young people .
I should like to refer to the Republic of Cyprus , which is now under observation .
The measures taken do everything except offer a way out into proper social policy and social standing , especially the measures which conflict with the interests of the young generations growing up on the island .
( EL ) Madam President , the new report on employment in Europe in 2010 highlights the fact that young people have borne the burden of the crisis and that young people are facing more and more problems , with unemployment mainly affecting the 15-24 year age group .
It is not enough to establish the problem ; we need to resolve it .
We have 3 million unemployed in the European Union .
Commissioner , tell me please , what are we to do about it ?
I consider that the efforts you have made to record the problem are positive , but the problem needs to be resolved and you have an historic role to play .
What is worrying for Greece , the country I come from , is that unemployment among young people up to the age of 24 has reached 27.5 % , an astonishing and very dangerous number ; and what is most worrying is that unemployment rates are not falling as more formal qualifications are obtained .
As you know , employment is not merely a livelihood ; it is the basis of human dignity .
We need to give our young people dignity .
( DE ) Madam President , there have been recent reports in the media about the directors of the failing German bank HRE being entitled to huge pensions after only working there for two years and on the basis of contracts which were drawn up after the bank had already received massive amounts of state aid .
This confirms the belief of the citizens of the European Union that money is simply being thrown at the banks , while strict austerity programmes are being imposed on ordinary people .
Article 9 of the Treaty of Lisbon refers to ' a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection ' .
For those people in Europe who have been hard hit by the financial and economic crisis and who are now being forced to make savings , this sounds like adding insult to injury .
For example , when the pension reform in Hungary is rolled back and the citizens have to transfer back to the state pension system or lose 70 % of their pension rights , it is clear that an icy wind is blowing through the EU .
In the debate in plenary on the future of the euro area , the President-in-Office of the Council explained that events in Dublin had highlighted the importance of an economic policy control mechanism in the EU .
In my opinion , completely the opposite is the case .
We have too much centralism and too much conformity .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , to defend what is called the European social economic model we have to adjust the European model to reality , namely the global challenges and the crisis in Europe .
If we want to defend the model , it cannot remain the same .
A major assumption , which has already been stated , is as follows - this is a basic philosophy : consolidation and the regaining of the confidence of the markets is the basis for stable , sustainable growth and jobs .
That is critical to the future welfare of European citizens .
Referring precisely to the questions from Ms Harkin and Mr De Rossa - Mr De Rossa 's being Irish-oriented - we are setting the same rate as the IMF in this respect .
We are not obliged to make our Memorandum to the Irish Government open to the public .
I have to say that there is nothing more anti-social than to produce deficit and debt , which will be charged to future generations of European citizens .
There is nothing less responsible than banking practices that are transferring the banking problem into the sovereign debt problem .
These are anti-social , irresponsible actions and we cannot blame the Commission for them .
We recognise that there is a clear tension between the austerity being undertaken in so many countries and its impact upon social inclusion and the level of poverty .
We recognise that and therefore we need impact assessments and discussions .
Such a discussion has been conducted here in Parliament .
Again , our basic philosophy is that prevention is what is valuable .
Prevention means that we should influence the policy mix at the national level .
The policy mix at national level is mainly responsible for the trade-off between austerity and growth .
This is the major responsibility , but we are to influence this policy mix at national level in such a way as to discourage building the future of Europe upon debts and deficits because that does not lead anywhere .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you will have understood from my first speech , the Council is well aware of the obligations pursuant to Article 9 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union regarding the need to take account of the overall aspect of the requirements associated with promoting a high level of employment , ensuring adequate social protection and combating social exclusion , as well as achieving a high level of education , training and protection of human health .
These obligations are and will be duly respected in all of the Council 's work .
Given the universality of this obligation , it is also required in the field of economic governance .
It applies to the results contained in the report by the task force chaired by President Van Rompuy , which the October European Council fully endorsed .
It also applies to the six legislative proposals that came out of the work of the task force , which were tabled by the Commission on 29 September .
Nevertheless , compliance with the obligations in Article 9 does not require a formal social impact assessment procedure .
Our obligation , which applies to both the Council and Parliament , especially since it is up to our institutions to lay down the policies and work of the Union by adopting legislation in this field , is to take account of these requirements .
That is what the Council will do .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( EL ) The package of economic governance measures proposed by the Commission makes provision for stricter discipline in the Stability and Growth Pact and budgetary supervision , by proposing penalties for ' undisciplined ' Member States .
In other words , it is a worse version of the recipe which led the EU into the crisis and recession and drastically exacerbated its social problems .
The path marked out by the Commission , with the demand for institutional changes , is exacerbating social and regional inequalities .
Consequently , the very unfortunate social repercussions addressed by my fellow members in their questions are a known fact .
Moreover , we are already seeing these repercussions in practice and the workers are paying for them , not only in certain countries in the South , but in the entire EU also .
The European Parliament must stand up against this policy which , apart from including harsh austerity measures and cuts to workers ' rights , is undermining its role and the role of the national parliaments .
In other words , it is undermining the role of the elected representatives of EU institutions , which should , however , demonstrate greater awareness in their demands of the citizens ' fight .
Human rights in the world 2009 and EU policy on the matter ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Andrikienė , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2009 and the European Union 's policy on the matter .
rapporteur . - ( LT ) Madam President , Madam High Representative , I am very pleased to see you here today participating in this particularly important discussion .
In particular because these are the first political debates that Baroness Ashton has participated in since the launch of the new European External Action Service .
The Annual Report on Human Rights in the World adopted by the Council of the European Union and EU policy in this field are the basis of this discussion and the European Parliament resolution , on which we will vote tomorrow .
We cannot hold Baroness Ashton responsible for those actions that are discussed in the above report , that is 2008-2009 , because at that point she had not yet assumed the post of High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
We understand the great responsibility that lies with you , both now and in the future , and I would like to assure you that we in the European Parliament will do all we can to ensure that the European Union 's objectives in the area of foreign policy are realised .
Baroness Ashton , the Treaty of Lisbon has been in force for a year and the European External Action Service became operational barely a fortnight ago .
In its report today the European Parliament sends a clear signal to all EU institutions .
The European Parliament has clearly expressed its position that in the new European External Action Service the primary focus should be democracy-building and human rights protection across the globe and that this should be reflected both in the structure of the service and its funding .
There could be a Human Rights and Democracy Directorate , an international law directorate or a structure with another name but the same content .
What we should avoid is the marginalisation of human rights issues or their exclusion from the main EU agenda and the structure of the EEAS .
With the same aim in mind , the European Parliament proposes to create special representatives for human rights within the context of the service , who would work in specific countries or regions , especially those where the EU does not have diplomatic representations .
These special representatives would have a clear mandate to defend human rights in the countries where they work .
I would also like to stress once more the need for a Brussels-based Working Group on Human Rights ( COHOM ) , all the more so because an absolute majority of EU Member States support this idea .
The report on which we will vote tomorrow , here in the European Parliament , discusses and assesses EU policy , the work of the entire European Union and its institutions , covering a whole range of topics and issues , including the abolition of the death penalty , the fight against terrorism and human rights , children 's rights , combating violence against women , the situation of human rights defenders in various countries across the globe and freedom of religion or belief .
We are discussing and assessing the functioning of the European Union in international fora , such as the United Nations , the United Nations Human Rights Council and the cooperation of the European Union with the International Criminal Court .
My colleagues in the European Parliament played an active part in the preparation of the report we are debating and it was adopted in the Committee on Foreign Affairs by a huge majority : 50 ' for ' , none ' against ' and two abstentions .
It is appended with a list of specific human rights violations in various countries , to which the European Parliament has drawn attention .
These are actual names , countries , human destinies and lost lives .
I would therefore like to end my speech by mentioning a few specific severe cases of human rights violations .
Of course , having taken part in the ceremony , you are aware that today the European Parliament was supposed to award the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to the Cuban dissident Mr Guillermo Farinas .
We were unable to do this because representatives of the Cuban Government refused to allow Mr Farinas to come to the European Parliament .
We trust that in exercising your responsibilities , you will take this fact into account and will find a means of expressing our position , our disappointment and our regret and opposition in this matter to the Cuban Government .
I would also like to draw your attention to another painful case that we discuss in our report .
Russia 's Khamovinicheskii Court was supposed to pass sentence on one of them today , but for reasons that are unclear it postponed the announcement until the end of the month .
This is the trial of Mikhail Khodorkovskii and Platon Lebedev , which in my opinion mirrors the rotten state of the judicial system and the absence of the rule of law in Russia .
Baroness Ashton , I would like to urge you not to forget these cases and to make efforts to ensure that justice in Russia becomes the rule rather than the exception .
I believe that the current opening up of Russia and President Medvedev 's aims to modernise Russia are a very good opportunity to achieve the implementation of this objective .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , honourable Members , on Friday we celebrated International Human Rights Day .
This year 's theme highlighted the work of individuals and organisations worldwide who fight human rights violations , specifically discrimination .
Over this past year I have met Nobel Prize winner Shirin Ebadi on Iran and frontline award winner , Afghanistan 's human rights commissioner for women Dr Soria Sabhrang , and other human rights defenders across the world and I will continue to do so .
As I have expressed previously , I fully expect my colleagues in Brussels and the heads of our EU delegations to do the same .
Six months ago I stood before you to present a first vision of how the European Union should conduct its policy on human rights .
Today I want to set out how work has been proceeding since then and how I see the way ahead now with the support of the European External Action Service .
But first of all I am very grateful to Dr Andrikienfor her report which responds to the EU 's annual report on human rights and sets out the European Parliament 's vision for how we can make our approach to human rights in the European Union more effective .
This is an ambition which I strongly share .
The range of EU action and challenges we face are well reflected in the report before the House today : attacks on human rights defenders , sexual violence , use of new technologies to curb freedom of expression , to name but a few .
I want to pay tribute to Dr Andrikienfor bringing together more than 400 amendments in this impressive , informative and extremely useful report .
The report covers a lot of ground and I want to pick up three important developments of recent months .
First and foremost , the EU has been working hard to advance the cause of human rights on the multilateral stage .
In a successful session of the UN Human Rights Council , the European Union held a common position on potentially divisive resolutions concerning the Gaza flotilla and the Goldstone report .
At the General Assembly Third Committee , the EU also achieved its chief objectives : resolutions on Burma , DPRK and the death penalty were all passed with increased majorities - as was the Canadian resolution on Iran - and the EU resolution on eliminating religious intolerance again met with consensus .
Secondly , as announced in June , work has begun on a review of EU human rights policy .
It has been an inclusive process for which I sought input from Member States ' parliamentarians , notably Ms Hautala and the Subcommittee on Human Rights , as well as civil society NGOs and academics .
I will be asking the service and my senior team in the months ahead to consider the key themes arising from these consultations and how best we can put them into practice .
I will count on Parliament 's continued support in this endeavour .
Third , work has begun on streamlining the patchwork of policies which have grown up over the past ten years and which make up the EU 's human rights policy guidelines : toolkits , other instruments , the guidelines we have got for promoting and protecting human rights .
There are good reasons why policy has grown in such an organic way , but it seems like a good time to take stock and to move on and , for that ongoing work on the review , I see three lines of action .
First of all , the need for Europe to continue to speak up for human rights on the global stage .
We are working to strengthen our action at the United Nations and to resist attempts to dilute universal standards , the basis of our action .
We need to find innovative ways of working with third-country partners to promote our shared values , as we have done successfully in the UN General Assembly vote on the death penalty resolution .
We are also investing to ensure that our own record stands up to scrutiny .
Second , we need to tailor our approach to individual situations .
That means establishing local human rights strategies for each country , reviewing our priorities and the most effective use of our assorted tools , for example by sharing experiences on child protection on the Internet or how best to tackle child labour .
Third and finally , human rights should be visibly at the centre of EU external action .
That means working human rights into the activities of all parts of the External Action Service , as well as the whole range of EU external action : trade , development , CSDP and so on , and at all levels .
That will be built into the structure at headquarters as well as throughout our delegations in order to be able to monitor the human rights situation and promote an effective realisation of EU human rights policy goals .
Human rights are the core of our EU identity and they go to the heart of what we do around the world .
We have developed strong sets of mechanisms for promoting these values in different contexts with different partners ; in the multilateral context and through support for civil society ; funding specific human rights projects in over one hundred countries .
Nearly ten years on from the very first EU communication on human rights , and with the establishment of the new service , I want to ensure our human rights policy is effective , innovative and targeted : the silver thread that runs through all of our external action and a gold standard for our foreign policy .
That is why I particularly welcome today the contribution in this report and I would also end by congratulating Guillermo Fariñas on the award of the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( LV ) Madam President , Mrs Ashton , I should first of all like to thank Mrs Andrikienfor her successful report , which was adopted practically unanimously in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Thank you also to Mrs Ashton for her measured speech .
The report on human rights in the world testifies to the critical situation in even those countries with which the European Union has for many years been conducting dialogue and consultations on human rights .
For example , the report emphasises that Russia has still implemented only the first point of the six-point agreement on Georgia .
Half a million people are still unable to return to their homes in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
The European Union must seriously resolve such situations , which is why I call on the High Representative to pay special attention to the resolution of the issues to which I have referred .
It would be intolerable for the European Union to spend vast resources in terms of time and funds on human rights dialogue and yet fail to obtain good results .
It is therefore clear that significant improvements need to be made in the European Union 's policy on human rights .
First , by implementing a precise human rights strategy that defines not only tasks , but also structure , which ensures regular evaluation of outcomes and a review of operational tactics .
Second , the European Union 's evaluation of the human rights situation must be based solely on experience and defined criteria .
We must not alter our opinion under pressure from some third country or under the influence of economic interests .
Third , we must establish regular consultation at European Union level with non-governmental organisations .
Securing human rights and democracy must be the priority of the External Action Service and an unequivocal criterion in bilateral agreements with third countries .
Thank you .
Madam President , this report is really huge , a massive undertaking .
It in fact almost exhausts the subject of human rights and , at the same time , it has flaws because of its qualities ; that is to say it is dense and it can sometimes take a long time to read .
The rapporteur is certainly not to blame for this but rather the 423 amendments , which she had to digest .
It is therefore a feat on which we must congratulate Mrs Andrikienė .
The report , however , also highlights the fact that human rights , at the centre of European policies , is complex and multi-faceted .
Consequently , when the European Parliament asks you , Baroness Ashton , for a special rapporteur on human rights , a directorate-general for human rights , special training for the staff of EU delegations abroad , and , among these staff members , a person very specifically responsible for monitoring human rights in the country in question - if Parliament wants these arrangements , it is certainly not to bureaucratise this field but rather that there is a lot of work to be carried out .
Although this report does not overlook the serious problems and violations that continue to shake the world , it is not a litany of horrors either .
On a positive note , it rightly emphasises the efforts made , and does not hesitate to recommend courses of action and topics of discussion to embark on .
In conclusion , it really reflects the importance and substance of the work carried out by the European Union .
The European Union has developed a set of tools that can really contribute to promoting democracy in the world .
It has yet to convince its interlocutors that respecting human rights does not impede growth and international trade , and that it is not a millstone around one 's neck in external relations but rather that it brings added value in terms of stability and prosperity .
Baroness Ashton , you have taken up the cause of human rights very well and made your mark at the end of this first year after the Treaty of Lisbon .
on behalf on the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and all those MEPs , who provided amendments and participated in discussions , for their interest and efforts to create and improve this report on Human rights in the world and EU policy on the matter .
I believe that the rapporteur and colleagues from the Subcommittee on Human Rights and the Committee on Foreign Affairs took this challenge and met it superbly .
The ideas and assistance that we received from the representatives of non-governmental organisations also helped to improve the report .
I would therefore urge all MEPs to vote in favour of this report , which following lengthy debates , amendments and discussions represents an accurate reflection of the position of the European Parliament as regards human rights .
On the subject of the amendments tabled , I would urge my colleagues not to expand on issues which have already been discussed at length in committee .
It is true that human rights problems abound and there are also a lot of countries that could be mentioned and called upon to act .
However , the value of the report lies in its brevity .
By endlessly developing the report it would lose its effectiveness and so to me some of the amendments being debated seem unnecessary .
At the same time I would like to draw colleagues ' attention to some important amendments which did not feature in the previous version of the report .
These include the amendment tabled by my group on Sodium Pentothal calling for assurances that the production and sale of this substance , which can be used to carry out death sentences , is only permitted for medical purposes .
The adoption of this amendment would be an important step in the fight against the death penalty throughout the world .
I would also urge colleagues to support another amendment tabled by our group calling on the European Commission to take further action to implement the 2007 Human Rights report 's commitments to strengthen efforts to combat violence .
This document is not just a set of guidelines for the European Commission , the Council and Member States , but also a very strong , clear message for the European Union 's neighbours , partners and other countries , where human rights are not sufficiently respected and defended .
I hope that all interested countries and institutions will pay appropriate attention to this report and will adopt its valuable recommendations .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would like to welcome the High Representative to the European Parliament today .
I would also like to warmly congratulate Mrs Andrikienfor her work .
It was excellent team work , which is why it could be adopted nearly unanimously in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I was very fortunate to have been invited this autumn to participate in the discussions between the Member States on how the EU human rights policy could be made more effective and more coherent .
I believe that we have now a historic opportunity to review our human rights policy , as you have indicated , Baroness Ashton .
My suggestion is that this process should be as inclusive and as open as possible .
I would very much recommend that you send a communication in due time - not too late , of course - to Parliament and the Council , so that we can have real high-level discussion and engagement .
Today it is very important to be reminded that the Treaty of Lisbon places respect for human rights at the core of the Union 's external policy .
For this reason , we need to have the proper structures in place .
We know that you , the High Representative , are committed to human rights and democratic structures at headquarters .
Could we please be told what that might mean in practice ?
Are you able to give us the commitment that you gave Parliament in the summer ?
I would also strongly urge you to go for the decision to establish the Brussels-based COHOM , which is the EU Council working party on human rights .
If we need to have more coherence - which we do - we definitely need to have this permanent structure in place .
Lastly , I would like to thank you for your efforts in bringing the Member States together last Friday in Oslo for the Nobel Peace Prize ceremony .
I have reason to believe that , without your efforts , it would not have happened .
It is a very good basis for our human rights work so that the Union will have a clearer , louder and more effective voice in the world .
Madam President , I , too , would like to add my voice to the expressions of thanks for the rapporteur .
We enjoyed very good cooperation , which has resulted in what I think is a very good report .
I think one thing which should be stressed is that Christians still constitute the most persecuted religious group in the world , and they are suffering discrimination , being attacked and often even being killed in almost every part of the world .
At the same time , the world is remaining silent .
We , too - the European Union- are still doing too little .
I am very grateful to Mrs Ashton for her reaction in many individual cases recently , but this matter should continue to be reiterated .
Countries in our neighbourhood , such as Egypt and Algeria , should feel that we cannot extend our political dialogue without including the subject of religious minorities in these countries .
Countries such as Sudan and Iraq should be made very clearly aware that we will not agree to develop aid programmes or free trade agreements until the fundamental right to religious liberty is respected there .
Much has changed for the better on this matter in recent years , but we need to be permanently engaged in the defence of religious liberty around the world , because no one will do this for us .
In the last few days in the European Parliament we have been able to meet bishops who have come here from Iraq , from Mosul and Baghdad , to share their experiences .
I think we should give them not only a feeling of solidarity , but a guarantee of security for the future , so that they have the feeling they have someone to whom they can appeal for help .
Otherwise , we risk our own credibility , because if we are not able to look after our friends , we lose credibility in the eyes of the world .
Madam President , our sitting seems to be particularly devoted to human rights .
This morning we adopted the Gál report .
We also adopted a report on the trafficking of human beings and another on the European protection order ; the rights of victims in other words .
I will put on the same footing the rejection of the single permit , by which the European Parliament rejected a proposal that was far too discriminatory towards foreigners .
I shall not go back over the Sakharov Prize .
I have already expressed my opinion .
For me , however , this report falls within the same two-speed vision , the same narrow prism through which some fellow Members regrettably view human rights .
Here are a few examples : I am committed to freedom of religion as well as to the freedom to believe or not to believe .
Many non-believers are also persecuted throughout the world .
Our rapporteur rejected amendments to introduce the concept of freedom of thought , freedom of faith and freedom of religion , even though it exists in international law .
Why are there 15 paragraphs on freedom of religion , primarily focusing on Christians , and only six paragraphs on freedom of expression ?
There is no mention of trade unionists .
Why is there this double standard , which always consists in mentioning the same countries : Iraq , Iran , Russia , Belarus or Cuba , when the situation in many African countries is hardly ever mentioned , and especially not in the Maghreb , where those supporting human rights and democracy are terribly targeted , particularly in Libya and Tunisia , amid almost universal indifference ?
There is no mention of Colombia either .
I hope that this debate will enable us to make progress .
I believe that by balancing our positions and adapting what we say and do we will progress towards a truly universal conception of human rights .
There is still a lot of work to be done and I have listened to you carefully , Baroness Ashton .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Andrikienė , for accepting some of my amendments on religious freedom and I congratulate her for the successful drafting of this report .
More and more tragic events are happening that concern the freedom of believers throughout the world : the number of obstacles to freedom of worship , assaults and murders is growing year by year .
These criminal acts concern believers of all religions , particularly Christians .
Paradoxically , religious freedom is becoming an increasingly sensitive subject instead of being one of the most natural and unquestionable freedoms .
For all these reasons , I reiterate the proposal already put forward earlier to establish a specific , accurate and annual report by the European Parliament to monitor the status of religious freedom in the world .
This report would provide the information needed to plan appropriate and preventive political interventions .
Madam President , generations of Soviet school children grew up learning that Comrade Stalin had invented the internal combustion engine .
It appears that European school children will grow up learning that the EU is a defender of human rights - but what have you actually done , beyond rhetoric ?
The rapporteur highlights the weakness of the EU 's policy towards the Burmese junta , a weakness that is tantamount to appeasement .
The rapporteur tells us that the EU is very concerned indeed about human rights abuses outside the EU - but what about the forced deportations of Roma from Belgium in 1999 during the premiership of Guy Verhofstadt , who now sits here as an MEP ?
What about the forced deportations of Roma from France this year ?
But maybe words are all we can expected from the External Action Service .
In Brussels last week , Amnesty International raised concerns over the lack of a human rights unit within the External Action Service .
Words are very fine , but action might be more helpful to the oppressed and suffering peoples of the world .
Last week in committee I accused the Belgian Presidency of being a ghost presidency .
To my astonishment the Presidency agreed with me , saying that was exactly what they want it to be .
So can I ask Baroness Ashton to attend the next meeting of the Subcommittee on Human Rights - and not just in spirit - on 10 January , where she can take part in an exchange of views on the human rights and democracy network and explain to us exactly what the word ' action ' means to her .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Andrikienė , rapporteur for the report on human rights in 2009 .
It was not an easy job , because the state of respect for human rights continues , unfortunately , to require our attention and engagement .
In our report , we repeatedly call on various countries and institutions to take specific steps intended to increase the degree of respect for human rights .
It seems to me that we ought to check more often whether these institutions do in fact carry out what the European Parliament has requested .
Otherwise , in a year 's time we are going to have to repeat many of today 's remarks .
We are right to demand respect for fundamental rights , but this is still not enough .
We must also be effective - we must be able to persuade executive authorities to be effective in implementing our instructions .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal for the European External Action Service to have a directorate for human rights and democracy and to create the position of High Representative for Human Rights .
The main principle of a consistent European Union foreign policy should be the promotion of democratic values and human rights .
This is probably the most important political message of the report .
If it should prove possible to achieve this , successive annual reports on respect for human rights in the world would get shorter each year - and may this be the case .
( PL ) Madam President , thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to speak .
We are analysing material , today , which is clearly composed of two parts or two areas .
The first area is an attempt to evaluate respect for human rights in 2009 , and the second is the European Union 's policy in this matter .
For we have to say whether progress was made in the world last year in terms of respect for human rights .
Unfortunately , the answer to that question is not in the affirmative .
In 2009 , there definitely was no progress in terms of respect for fundamental rights .
I am thinking , here , of the fact that capital punishment is still in use , and that torture continues to be used in many countries .
I am thinking of the use of violence against women , and also of the fact that there are still hundreds of millions of children in the world who are being forced to work as slaves .
The second matter is about the Union .
There is no dispute over values or objectives .
The basic dispute , and what we are worried about , concerns the fact that we want the work of the Union in the area of protecting human rights to be more effective .
I would like to agree with all the suggestions about this which are found in the report .
If these recommendations of ours were put into effect , the work of the Union in the area of protecting human rights in the world would certainly be a great deal more effective .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Andrikienė 's report is a remarkable reference document for all those who speak out on human rights .
It is good to share lessons with our partners in the rest of the world on the subject of human rights .
Although some countries are still living in the Middle Ages as regards compliance with human rights standards , Europe would be well advised to give up on adopting too arrogant a stance .
The European Union 's criticism of the authorities of countries that continue to violate human rights would be even more credible if our 27 Member States were to agree , without exception , to enforce all the judgments of the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
Where do we stand on this ?
Is it not time to make a solemn commitment so as to avoid leaving the slightest doubt over our desire to respect the authority of the bodies that we ourselves created ?
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , the EU has an extensive range of measures which can be used to improve human rights policy in a number of countries .
The EU is a regional power which should be calling in multilateral forums for human rights policies to be implemented and ensuring that there is a greater focus on making progress in this area .
Following the launch of the European External Action Service , will we take this opportunity to consider whether EU human rights policy is having the desired effect ?
I hope so and I welcome the review of existing human rights policy announced by Baroness Ashton .
However , I am very concerned that it will not be possible to make appropriate use of the structures which are planned for human rights activities within the External Action Service .
There is a real risk that there will be even fewer resources available than there have been in the past and that we will have no visible , audible or effective European human rights policy .
The human rights department which is being established threatens to become a mere front if human rights policy is not represented in any way at the highest level .
The mainstreaming of human rights will not on its own produce the required results .
We need a substantial team of experts with links at the highest level and the requirement for everyone involved to take the issue seriously .
Only then will mainstreaming be possible in all areas of policy and at a central decision-making level .
It would be completely incomprehensible , unprofessional and retrogressive to focus only on mainstreaming .
Those people who are suffering from violations of their most fundamental rights expect a new and effective human rights policy from the EU and not simply the application of administrative procedures in this area .
Madam President , I congratulate the rapporteur , Laima Andrikienė , for her balanced and sensible approach to this report .
My group , the ECR , is fully committed to promoting fundamental human rights throughout the world .
However , we also recognise that human rights often need to be balanced with realpolitik .
Why else would the EU be developing a strategic partnership with China , whose government shows scant regard for freedoms we consider to be essential ?
Equally , the EU has a moral duty to provide development and humanitarian aid to developing countries , even those with a lamentable human rights record , such as Pakistan where women and religious minorities in particular suffer from institutionalised discrimination .
I am nevertheless pleased that this report highlights countries that have been of particular concern to me during my career - Vietnam , Cuba , Venezuela , Iran , Zimbabwe and North Korea .
The issue of impunity in Russia for human rights offenders is rightly also raised .
The central theme running through this report is that democracy , human rights and economic freedom go hand in hand .
However , I do have doubts when this Parliament invokes international law in condemning certain distasteful practices , when the legal basis for this is far from clear .
I notice , for instance that , in a Parliament resolution to be debated tomorrow , caning in Malaysia has been declared as clearly against international law , when such a statement is legally questionable .
We must stick to the facts to remain credible as an institution .
( NL ) Madam President , our commitment to the observance of fundamental rights means little without personal involvement and that is what Mrs Andrikienė 's interesting report clearly encourages .
My specific concern in this regard is ' religious freedom ' .
I would like to mention three current breaches of the fundamental right of religious freedom as a way of urging the Council and the Commission , who are here combined in one person , you , Madam High Representative , to give a voice and , thus , a face to these and all other persecuted citizens caught up on the diplomatic agenda .
For me , there are three urgent cases : 1 .
Dr Fan Yafeng , a prominent Christian human rights lawyer and pastor of the Beijing house church , who has been under house arrest since 1 November 2010 and who has for weeks been weighed down by the chicanery and machinations of the Chinese intelligence service .
Action point for Europe : lift the house arrest on Dr Fan .
2 .
Aisha Bibi , a Pakistani Christian , sentenced to death under Pakistan 's blasphemy laws on highly dubious charges .
In a recent personal conversation with me in San Francisco , the Pakistani Minister for Foreign Affairs did not want to agree to more than a thorough police investigation into the charges based on blasphemy laws .
Action point for Europe : bring about the release of Aisha Bibi and the abolition of blasphemy laws in Pakistan .
3 .
Yusuf al-Qaradawi , leader of a house church in Iran , sentenced to death on ' apostasy ' charges .
Action point for Europe : bring about the release of this minister and end permanent state surveillance of house churches in the Islamic Republic .
Ladies and gentlemen , Council and Commission , Madam High Representative , unfortunately there is no lack of homework for you .
( DE ) Madam President , when China calls for a boycott of the Nobel Peace Prize ceremony and the governments in Iraq and Afghanistan , which came to power with Western military aid , both heed its call , this is for me an obvious example of the problems which regimes of an Islamic nature have with human rights .
In this context , the increasing persecution of Christian minorities in the Middle East and the cases of discrimination and intolerance of Christians in Europe are highly disturbing .
We can no longer ignore the growing problems in Muslim communities in the EU relating to forced marriages , honour killings , violence against women and the call for Sharia law .
In my opinion , we should also strongly oppose the sort of cultural relativism which , under the pretext of respect for foreign cultures and traditions , tolerates the fact that the right to freedom , equality and codetermination of people in some parts of Muslim cultural areas is being restricted .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , overall the report by Mrs Andrikienreport is an excellent report , which the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists & Democrats in the European Parliament have worked hard on to provide ideas of the utmost value .
Human rights have constituted one of the fundamental pillars of the European Union since its creation and respect for them is an essential point that the European Parliament must encourage every day .
Wider acceptance of human and fundamental rights , globalisation and changes in our society require a new and different outlook that does not fit any of our existing canons .
It therefore becomes essential to guarantee equal access to natural resources , as one of the fundamental rights of each individual .
In the coming years , climate change will lead to an enormous number of refugees fleeing the poorest areas of the Earth and it is our duty to begin to take note of these potential migratory flows so that we can establish appropriate policies that will enable respect for the dignity of these people to be guaranteed .
The expression ' climate refugee ' has not yet entered the vocabulary of current international law .
Naturally , we remain committed to the fight against desertification , just as we do to adjusting to climate change .
These are the topics I have attempted to add to the text of the report , so that a serious debate can be opened on the issues .
Madam President , we are celebrating a significant day with the award of the Sakharov Prize today , but we have a lot more work to do than that .
I would like to highlight a few elements from this comprehensive and well-drafted report .
There is the necessity to fight for justice over impunity , whether through the ICC or otherwise .
It is not only important to bring perpetrators to justice , because this is often a long-term process , but in the meantime , for those who fear that violations of human rights are unnoticed or in fact tolerated by liberal democracies , starting to hold individual human rights violators accountable is an acknowledgement of the suffering and of our credibility in the EU .
In this report we ask for sanctions on Russian officials responsible for the death of Mr Magnitsky and for Iranian officials involved in the systematic censorship , rape , crackdown and executions of citizens who have done nothing other than act according to their inalienable and indeed universal human rights .
( NL ) Madam President , we have seen over the past few decades that the human rights situation has improved in a number of places in the world .
I am thinking of South America and Eastern Europe , where this has been linked to democratisation and increased prosperity .
Unfortunately , we have seen no progress in countries where Islam is dominant - on the contrary .
In Egypt , Iraq , Iran , Pakistan , Somalia and other such countries , more and more Christians and other religious minorities are becoming the subjects of oppression .
In those countries , the extremists are leaving no stone unturned .
Charges of blasphemy , prohibition of conversion to Christianity , harassment on a daily basis , murder , all that is happening .
Often , these actions are directed against communities who have lived in these countries much longer than the Muslims .
Madam President , four out of every five people who are persecuted for their faith are Christians and the situation in Muslim countries is the most serious .
I call on the European Union and its Member States to do more to combat this religious persecution and , Madam Ashton , I am asking you specifically , how is your policy going to address this ?
( EL ) Madam President , I must congratulate Mrs Andrikienon the integrated report which she tabled .
I would remind everyone that the Ancient Greeks said ' man is the measure of all things ' 2 500 years ago .
Two centuries later the Romans said ' man is a wolf to his fellow man ' .
I want to see if the Ancient Greek saying is philosophical rhetoric or if we have progressed .
We have certainly progressed , except that we have not reached the desired result in terms of safeguarding human rights and , unfortunately , the economic and financial crisis which broke in Europe and worldwide has caused a huge problem and has mainly hit the poorer sections of society , thereby depriving them of the human right of fundamental self-respect .
Madam President , Baroness Ashton , we need to go beyond words ; we need to take action , we need to take the measures needed for social protection , to combat social exclusion and , most of all , to find employment for young people .
I would remind you once again : employment is not a livelihood ; it is a means to self-respect and dignity and conditions of peace in Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , a civilisation is measured not only by its technical progress and prosperity , but increasingly by its respect for human rights .
This is a quotation from a programme on the subject of human rights in the 21st century and should serve as a warning to us .
The credibility of the EU in this area should not be taken for granted and our policies are not immune to being measured on the basis of double standards .
The European External Action Service offers us the opportunity to follow up with actions the words which we approve every Thursday afternoon at the latest .
Human rights must be reflected in every area of EU foreign policy .
I welcome the comprehensive review of the effectiveness of all EU instruments in this area , because we are obviously not lacking the political will to make strict demands , but simply the will to implement them .
- ( SK ) Madam President , the European Union is based on values such as freedom , democracy , equality , the principles of the legal state and adherence to human rights .
If the Union also wants to play a significant role in the promotion of human rights worldwide , however , it is essential that it develops a coherent foreign policy , to which all Member States should make a determined contribution .
The coming into effect of the Treaty of Lisbon is a unique opportunity for significant progress in human rights and democracy , which from now on should become a central element in various areas of foreign policy in particular .
The decision to incorporate human rights into the structures of the European External Action Service is therefore of clear and decisive significance .
I firmly believe , however , that creating the role of special representative for human rights would contribute towards greater cohesion , and above all to the necessary visibility of the external actions of the EU in this area .
I would like to end by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Andrikienė , for her excellent work on the annual EU report on human rights 2008-2009 , which provides a detailed summary of the diverse activities of the European Union in the area of human rights and democracy in the world .
Madam President , thank you to the rapporteur for producing an excellent report .
Baroness Ashton , I am extremely glad that you are now in office , because your record has shown that you have absolutely no hesitation in standing up for people who have no voice and whose rights are taken away .
Human rights , of course , know no national boundaries .
They know no national borders .
They are universal .
Yet the universality of that respect is failing across the world .
We have agreements with countries such as the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries where the rights of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people are criminalised .
They are not respected and , indeed , even within the Cotonou Agreement there is a question as to whether there should be respect for the rights of LGBT people .
This is why we need a strong human rights directorate within the External Action Service , to ensure this policy coherence across development , trade and foreign affairs - as you said in your statement .
We have free trade agreements where Article 2 , the human rights clause , has never actually been enforced .
Parliament makes recommendations and , I am afraid , the Council backs away .
So we look to you to give a very strong lead in defending human rights with all those countries that we have relations with .
I should also like to express congratulations on the adoption by the Council in 2009 of the LGBT toolkit .
The toolkit enables the EU 's External Action Service to work for the fundamental rights of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people .
I wish you well , I trust you and this House has every confidence in you .
Madam President , I speak as the European Parliament 's Vice-President for Democracy and Human Rights and thank Ms Andrikienfor her excellent report .
In her speech Lady Ashton talked about the new structures within the EEAS - or at least she did not talk about them .
When I founded the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights many years ago , I believed it was necessary to have a structure to deliver democracy and human rights .
That still exists .
Incidentally , the Commission wanted to abolish it and mainstream human rights and democracy through all external programmes .
Lady Ashton does not talk about mainstreaming in her speech , but I fear that , when she talks about a silver thread so thin that it risks breaking at the first pressure , she is talking about a sort of filigree foreign policy .
I think we need more than that .
We would like to see - as others have said , right around the House - a directorate for human rights and democracy within the EEAS and , possibly , a special representative .
Like Mrs Hautala , I was in Oslo last week and I would like to just reflect on one single point .
There were about a thousand people - I sat just behind Mrs Pelosi - united across the Atlantic : politicians , diplomats , civil servants and NGOs , happily united around the European Union .
When there was a standing ovation , it was unanimous - no wave , no fragmented approach .
Everybody stood up , because we stood as Western civil society behind a set of principles .
So in the future , when the EU projects its soft power , it must also project principles .
We look to you , Baroness Ashton , to bring those forward .
( PL ) Madam President , Mrs Andrikienė 's report is , indeed , lengthy , but it is my profound conviction that the report does not exhaust all the issues concerning respect for human rights in the world in 2009 .
It devotes a particularly small amount of space to the growing phenomenon of the persecution of Christians , which is now happening not only in third countries , but also in Europe .
The European Union has enough political and diplomatic instruments both to prevent these phenomena and to express categorical and resolute condemnation of them .
A second matter about which the Union should not remain silent is the question of respect for human rights in Russia .
It seems to me that the cooperation agreement currently being negotiated with Russia is the perfect moment to raise in a firm and specific way the question of respect for human rights in that country .
For we must not forget the people who are being persecuted in Russia - the politicians , representatives of non-governmental organisations and businessmen who are being persecuted just because they have the courage and strength to demand the truth about the operation of their country .
Madam President , whilst we all unite in condemning flagrant human rights abuses in countries such as Iran and China , we must start distinguishing these from the grossly over-the-top EU-inspired human rights industry .
The public are now bamboozled by this human rights fest .
There is the EU Fundamental Charter of Human Rights in the Treaty of Lisbon ; there is a European Court of Human Rights over there , which seeks to give British prisoners the vote - even murderers and paedophiles .
There are excessive EU employment rights and American-style rights too for damages , and national legislation such as the UK 's disastrous Human Rights Act , which allows foreign terrorists and criminals to stay in Britain because their rights are now seen to be more important than those of the decent citizens they threaten .
The truth is the noble cause of human rights has too often descended into a deep trough , with millionaire lawyers growing rich defending the spurious rights of terrorists , criminals and the greedy .
This has to stop .
( DE ) Madam President , the fact that the EU is increasing its activities in the field of human rights and that the issue of persecution and discrimination against Christian minorities is specifically addressed in these reports represents a step in the right direction .
Christians suffer acute persecution in many countries , some of which have close contacts with the EU .
Examples include Egypt , Iran , Iraq and , of course , Turkey , where Christians are in some cases fighting for their very survival , both in economic and in physical terms .
We do not need a new post , such as the planned Special Representative for Human Rights , to force these countries to show more tolerance and to protect their minorities .
This will give rise to unnecessary costs and is not guaranteed to be effective , because we already have enough means of applying pressure .
We must take specific measures .
We must ensure that no treaties are signed with the EU and no financial aid is provided without a commitment to respect human rights and to protect minorities , in particular Christians .
Ladies and gentlemen , financial arguments are very powerful , especially when humanitarian arguments do not work .
Most importantly , they are well understood throughout the world .
( HU ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , first of all , let me congratulate my colleague , Mrs Laima Andrikienė , on her excellent work .
The number of letters of amendment , which had reached record proportions , imposed a considerable task on her , which she handled excellently and in a very elegant way , and the result is an exceptionally good report .
I am delighted to say that the report places emphasis on the most vulnerable groups that require the greatest degree of protection , such as children , indigenous people and national minorities .
I very much hope that our messages formulated in the report will be met with openness as regards the structure of the External Action Service and the future High Representative for Human Rights .
We expect High Representative Ashton to ensure that human rights have a special place in the new structure , and that in addition to providing the necessary organisational conditions , the entire work of the External Action Service should be inspired by human rights mainstreaming .
The spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon has created a new moment , one that will require us to take more consistent action in this area as well , and the failure to observe this spirit should not be permitted to undermine the credibility of the EU .
As the rapporteur for the report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union I am particularly pleased that this debate has been brought before the plenary of Parliament at the same time , and that the report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union that was adopted today , as well as the report on human rights that is currently under debate , convey the message that we consider the protection and consistent application of fundamental and human rights and the avoidance of a double standard to be equally important in and outside the EU .
( PL ) Madam President , I am pleased by two things .
Firstly , because human rights have become an integral part of the work of the European External Action Service , and this is a very good thing .
The apparatus of the European External Action Service should be used for this very purpose - to promote human rights and to protect human rights defenders throughout the world .
The second thing which pleases me is this : as a member of the Delegation of the European Union to Russia , I am very pleased to see that in this report there are sections devoted to respect for human rights in Russia and that particular human rights defenders have been mentioned .
This support from Brussels and Strasbourg for people who are fighting for human rights in Russia is extremely important , and I think this report deserves support if only because it treats these people with such respect .
I think we should move in this direction , and I appeal to Mrs Ashton to do this .
( PL ) Madam President , the debate on the report on human rights in the world has coincided with sad events which confirm that human rights are constantly being violated .
Winners of the Nobel Peace Prize - Liu Xiaobo - and the Sakharov Prize - Guillermo Fariñas - were not able to receive their awards , because they did not receive permission from the regimes where they live to leave their country .
Yesterday 's visit to the European Parliament by bishops from Iraq is proof that we still have a huge problem with the persecution of religious groups .
The persecution of Christians in the Middle East , including the recent terrorist attack on the cathedral in Baghdad , shows that new methods of violating fundamental rights are appearing , and the Union should react appropriately and effectively .
I would like to add my voice to the appeal of the President of the European Parliament , Jerzy Buzek , to make the problem of the safety of Christians in Iraq a priority .
We cannot agree to Christians being treated as second-class citizens .
How , too , can we continue accession negotiations with Turkey , if the only Christian seminary in the country remains closed ?
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the EU 's diplomatic service offers the chance to improve the work of the Union in the field of human rights .
This work should concentrate on strengthening international cooperation and raising the level of security .
Promoting democratic values and human rights should be the main principle of a consistent European Union foreign policy .
( IT ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , as Vice-Chair of the Committee on Development , I am engaged with the problems of many countries , especially in Africa , where human rights are routinely violated and trampled underfoot , if not altogether forgotten at times .
I returned just last Sunday from an official mission to the Democratic Republic of Congo where , in addition to my usual institutional meetings , I wanted to meet representatives of non-governmental organisations operating in the country and visit some of the centres where they work .
I must say they really do some great work .
I met victims in a country where rape is seen as an instrument of war , where armed groups continue to practice mass rapes and other systematic crimes against civil society , especially against women , old people and children .
I wanted to mention the example of the Democratic Republic of Congo because this was a very recent experience for me .
In general , however , I would like to call for the need for strong and ongoing condemnation of brutal violations of women 's rights .
The international community must significantly increase funding for campaigns to protect women from rape and other forms of violence , such as genital mutilation , which is also a serious violation of human rights and the physical integrity of women .
( IT ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the creation of the European External Action Service is a historic opportunity to address issues of human rights and democracy .
It must ensure , in particular , that respect for and promotion of human rights are central to the various parts of the European Union 's external policy .
Greater synergy between the European Union delegations and embassies of Member States is desirable , with the aim of adopting one human rights strategy per country , given that the specific details vary greatly from country to country .
The death penalty , which is practised in many parts of the world , is one of the most inhuman forms of law enforcement .
The use of capital punishment is of concern in Belarus , the only country in Europe that still applies the death penalty .
It is important to put an end to the types of human right violations suffered by women , including female genital mutilation .
All political means should also be brought to bear to support the United Nations General Assembly resolution calling for an international moratorium on female genital mutilation .
I conclude by calling for greater efforts to be made by the Commission and the Council to circulate the European Union annual report on human rights .
( HU ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , I would like to emphasise that although the European Union has achieved unprecedented integration between its Member States in several areas , in the codification of human rights it is significantly lagging behind other international organisations .
I fully support the statement calling on Member States to sign and ratify all fundamental human rights conventions of the UN and the Council of Europe , as well as the attached optional protocols .
Of these , I would like to highlight the Council of Europe 's Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , for which the future signing of the Convention on Human Rights by the EU could serve as an example .
I believe that a better coordination of the work of the international organisations having jurisdiction in the field of human rights is of similar importance , and could be the sole guarantee for the assertion of the formulated rights and obligations .
( EL ) Madam President , the European Union defends human rights in the world , in keeping with its principles and values .
However , a great deal needs to be done and the Treaty of Lisbon has improved our efficacy in this sector .
All of us here in the European Parliament are convinced that action for human rights defenders must be continued .
Proper application of the instruments that already exist may provide a framework for protecting them .
Top priority must be given to ratifying all international conventions against torture and any other form of inhumane treatment .
Including the human rights clause in all trade agreements with third countries and monitoring its application are basic measures for exerting pressure and we must insist on them .
I think special reference should be made to essential protection of the rights of women and girls , including protection of their sexual and reproductive health .
Madam President , as part of our debate today on human rights in EU internal and external policies , I would like to make a special point on the situation of women in conflict zones and in particular in Congo , Gaza and Iran , where this question should no longer be overlooked .
Women , as well as children , are the ones suffering most from the devastating consequences of conflict situations .
We should not allow breaches of human rights affecting women to be a side issue : the EU should prioritise the defence of women 's rights in its foreign affairs and humanitarian policies .
Human rights considerations - and in particular the status of women - in a large number of third countries are too often sacrificed for the sake of the economic interests of some EU Member States .
We need , and we demand today , appropriate and concrete steps to make the EU 's principles in its action within and outside the Union a real tool of human rights promotion , with a specific focus on women 's rights .
( PT ) Mrs Ashton , how do you feel when governments like the French and Portuguese turn back demonstrations when there are visits by Chinese dignitaries to their capitals so that they are not seen by the dignitaries when they visit these countries ?
Wasn 't the idea of having a High Representative so that Europe could speak with one voice on human rights abroad , for example in China ?
Do you not think that this is speaking with more than one voice ?
Out of curiosity , why do you always sit next to the Council ?
What is the philosophy or constitutional theory behind this choice ?
A third question : I would like our European diplomats to see human rights as a daily priority , not a second , third or fourth priority , but the first priority .
What will you do to ensure that some of our diplomats think about human rights as a full-time job , every day ?
Would it not be good to have , as several colleagues here have already suggested , a directorate permanently dedicated to this ?

Madam President , when we heard the recording from Mr Fariñas from Cuba this morning , I was impressed by the fact that he identified himself and his colleagues as a ' non-violent ' opposition to the Cuban regime .
I think it is particularly important to respect the rights of people who neither commit violence , nor encourage violence in others .
However , before we become too pious about this , we must face up to the fact that in some EU countries people such as Mr Geert Wilders in the Netherlands are prosecuted for having dissenting political opinions or heretical opinions of academic subjects without a hint of encouragement of violence .
Moreover , a political party without any violent connections has been banned in Belgium .
An attempt to ban a party in Germany failed in the constitutional court , only because it was revealed that the evidence had been fabricated by state agents .
In the UK , a state body has been pursuing a civil action against our own party , with the express purpose of closing us down .
( IT ) Madam President , Lady Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , human rights and European Union policy are at a crossroads .
Mrs Andrikienė 's report should certainly be encouraged and supported as it specifically states what concrete actions still need to be taken .
The EU European External Action Service can carry out its activities effectively , relying moreover on the acknowledged sensitivity of Member States , but we need a comprehensive and decisive policy that has the necessary bite when required .
We must truly protect human rights : young people , women , old people , the disabled , people with particular religious and political orientations , and those with different sexual orientations must be protected , just as people 's rights to freely express their own thoughts must be protected .
Today , however , Parliament has enacted some important measures and we therefore believe that any programme that is genuinely aimed at protecting human rights can only be developed truly and effectively through strong , concrete dialogue with third countries .
( EL ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , it is a pleasure to listen to the High Representative for Foreign Affairs of the European Union state in no uncertain terms that we are in favour of the application of fundamental freedoms and human rights and that , as the European Union , we have to do everything we can to safeguard the application of principles and freedoms that are common to the entire world , so that we can perform this positive role .
You know our position : that we desperately want a special service for human freedoms and , more to the point , supervision and representatives .
However , I would say , Baroness Ashton , that we need to look inside as well as outside .
Coming as I do from Cyprus , I would point out that we have two hundred thousand Greek Cypriot refugees deprived of their fundamental human rights ( access to their homes ) and that we have a Turkish Cypriot community oppressed by the Turkish occupation .
Set up your service .
A word of advice and a request : send your first representative to the Republic of Cyprus .
( SV ) Madam President , one of the candidates for the Sakharov Prize , Dawit Isaak , is still being held in prison without trial in Eritrea .
He has now been imprisoned for 3 370 days .
Accession to the European Convention on Human Rights will provide a greater opportunity for the EU also to demonstrate in earnest its commitment to , and defence of , human rights outside the EU 's borders .
I appeal to you , Baroness Aston , to use this opportunity to increase the pressure on Eritrea to release the European prisoner of conscience , Dawit Isaak .
We must now show that we mean business and we need to have a clear message for the President of Eritrea .
It has to be an essential requirement that all of the negotiations conducted with Eritrea lead to the release of Dawit Isaak .
I have confidence in you .
Just as Mr Cashman said :
I believe , I trust in you , Lady Ashton .
( PL ) Madam President , I would , firstly , like to thank Mrs Andrikienfor her report .
I would also like to say that human rights are in a new situation after the Treaty of Lisbon .
The question is how we will use this instrument .
We should do this not only by talking directly about human rights , but by including them in other contexts , such as where we talk about trade policy with numerous countries .
Are these human rights important to our partners ?
I think that reactions to what the European Parliament says , or , for example , to today 's award of the Sakharov Prize , show that Parliament 's views are important , because they are being heard .
I would also like to talk about the rights of Christians in the world .
It seems to me that there are now so many examples of the persecution of Christians , that we must react decisively .
I think , too , that it is important to cooperate with , amongst others , the Council of Europe , the UN , the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the ombudsmen and human rights representatives both of the Council of Europe and of numerous Member States , because there are many , very good examples of the effect of their work on changes in attitudes to human rights .
Madam President , although the report encompasses many significant issues , I would just like to touch upon the case of Sergei Magnitsky .
His tragedy represents a great number of similar cases that have not come to our attention yet .
It is essential to make it very clear to the Russian authorities that such incidents must be investigated in compliance with the principle of the rule of law .
Instead , the investigators and prosecutors involved in the death of Sergei Magnitsky have been promoted and rewarded .
Such a course of action is simply an incredible perversion of justice , and the European Union and its Member States must not close their eyes to this .
We should bear in mind the international commitments of the Russian Federation .
Therefore , colleagues , I encourage you to support Amendment 25 , which proposes to impose sanctions on 60 Russian officials involved in the case until a proper investigation of the death of Sergei Magnitsky is conducted .
( PL ) Madam President , as a member of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , I would like to extend hearty congratulations to Mrs Andrikienfor writing a really good draft report .
Furthermore , as Chairman of the European Parliament delegation for relations with Belarus , I would also like to express my great satisfaction that the report contains references to the situation in that country .
I am thinking , in particular , of the references to how freedom of association is permanently restricted in Belarus , and this includes the freedom of association of national and ethnic minorities , and also how the work of religious organisations is restricted .
I am pleased , too , that the report also reflects the restricted freedom of access to the Internet , and the fact that Belarus is a kind of shameful leader in this field in Europe .
I am hoping , too , that Mrs Ashton , who is present , today , at this debate , will make every effort to ensure that the dialogue on the subject of human rights , which was begun with Belarus last year , brings tangible results , particularly where we are talking about ending the repression of human rights defenders and independent Belarusian journalists .
Madam President , I would like to address an issue that has been raised by many colleagues , and that is the suppression of the rights of Christians .
I very much wish , in the name of consistency , that colleagues would be equally interested in repression of the rights of representatives of other religions , because we are very often told by other countries that we are one-sided and biased , so I think this is a question of real coherence and credibility .
I would like the guiding line of the EU human rights foreign policy to be the avoidance of any double standards , and I hope that the European Parliament will stick to that .
Lastly , can I ask Baroness Ashton if she is going to respond to the many questions that we have about the new human rights structures in the EAS , since these will be assembled in the very near future .

Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , I should like to thank everyone for all the contributions to this debate , which I found extremely useful .
Can I just say that I am on the Council side now but I was on the Commission side earlier today ?
I move between the two , and we do keep a record to make sure that I move between the two , so you must just catch me when I am here .
Again , I would like to thank Ms Andrikienvery very much for the work that she has done , and congratulate her on the report , which has been extremely helpful .
I am going to respond on three particular areas .
I will begin with the issue which Ms Hautala raised right at the end and which a number of colleagues have mentioned .
Let me start by being absolutely clear : I talk about mainstreaming because I have seen , too often in my life , human rights relegated to the corner of an organisation and done as an afterthought in a way that is not going to make any kind of difference .
I am not suggesting that is what the EU has done before .
I am suggesting that I am determined to make sure it cannot happen again .
As you will see in the structure when we finalise it , and we have not yet done so - human rights will be fully recognised in the structure and we are going to make sure we have the expertise that colleagues here have asked for within the structure .
But I do not want it to sit in a corner .
I want it to be part of everything that we do : a silver thread , not a filigree thread , a silver thread that is strong but that shines and is there for everyone to witness .
That is what I want to achieve in my time in office and I feel 100 % committed to trying to achieve that .
It will take time and there will be things we cannot do as well as I would wish , but we will absolutely do our best .
It matters to me , however , that this Parliament understands what I am trying to do and that I am trying to make sure that it is everybody 's responsibility .
Yes , it should be monitored ; yes , we need expertise ; but it is not down to just a few people within the EAS .
It is the responsibility of everybody .
That is the first thing to say .
The second thing is that you will see the structures very soon , and it is in there .
It is there for you all to witness as part of what we will be doing .
On the working group chairs , we are going to put forward our proposals for appointments .
I will be appointing the working group chair who will be responsible for human rights , and that will enable them to pick up the point that was made about whether capitals should have people gathered from the capitals or whether it should be based in Brussels .
We will pick that point up in that conversation .
Finally on structures : we have already done the training programme for new heads of delegations , and one session was about human rights .
They are very clear about their responsibilities and about my and your expectations in that regard .
So please accept that it is part - and a fundamental core - of the structure , but I will be determined to make it everybody 's responsibility .
The second point was about the breadth of the issues .
I recognise what a number of people have said about religious faith and I accept that this is an important issue .
It was , in fact , part of our discussions at the Foreign Affairs Council this week as well .
Colleagues have also mentioned the need to address the rights of women , of children and of lesbian , gay , transgender and bisexual people .
I read into all that was said , about the different people and the different countries , the fundamental point about human rights , which is this : for them to apply to you , you simply need to be human and here .
Those are the criteria for human rights and that is , again , how we will approach this within the External Action Service .
They belong to everybody .
The third thing I wanted to say was just a bit about some of the things we are beginning to see happen and in which we are playing a part .
This is particularly true on some of the work that we are doing internationally .
The International Criminal Court this year saw four countries recognise and ratify the statute .
That is very important because we played a part : I personally wrote to the ministers in every country that had not yet ratified , asking them to do so .
These were countries which responded directly to us and which have ratified .
Equally , I would mention the importance , in the UN General Assembly Committee , of trying to extend support for the moratorium on the death penalty .
I think this is a core and fundamental part of the work that we should do .
It is universal , it is something we all believe in , and it is the way forward that we should be practical in what we do .

So three areas : firstly , making sure the structures are right and the people know and understand the core work they need to do ; secondly , ensuring that we cover everyone in the work we do on human rights ; and thirdly , ways in which we can make a difference .
The final point I want to make is how I think that , more than anything , we have to look , within the review , for practical and innovative ways of getting our messages across .
I want us to be really creative in working with people on the ground in different countries where we meet human rights defenders - and I do wherever I go .
I want us to be innovative and creative in finding new ways of raising these issues of human rights , new ways beyond what is so important in any event : the statements that I make , the statements that we make as 27 Member States and the statements that we make as the institutions of the European Union .
It is about finding ways in which we can do as much as possible to address the concerns .
It is about individuals , organisations and the collective will to be able to make a real difference .
rapporteur . - Madam President , first of all I have been told that the English interpretation of my speech was not accurate , and I am very sorry about this .
Immediately after this discussion I will translate my speech into English myself and will send it to all the colleagues concerned and also to the High Representative .
Secondly , I would like to thank all the colleagues who participated in today 's debate for their positive assessment and for their critical remarks .
With regard to my colleagues Mr Obermayr and Mr Poręba , who spoke about Christian minorities in different countries , saying that this issue is not addressed in the report , I would like to draw their attention to paragraph 126 among others .
We have a chapter that deals with freedom of religion , and Christian minorities are also mentioned in some specific paragraphs .
On a final note , I would like to assure Baroness Ashton that Parliament will continue to scrutinise closely the work of the European External Action Service and will criticise inaction or the ineffectiveness of action taken in the area of human rights .
In this year 's report , we clearly state that we are not satisfied by the fact that the EU still does not have clear benchmarks for assessing whether actions on human rights have produced results .
We have also expressed our disappointment at the lack of progress achieved by the human rights dialogues and consultations .
Baroness Ashton , Parliament has come a long way to find common ground on human rights issues , especially the most sensitive ones .
This shows that Parliament stands united in the promotion of democracy and the protection of human rights in the world .
It also shows that the days when Parliament would merely applaud the Commission or the Council are over .
Parliament is now a serious player in the area of human rights .
All actors operating in this field will have to take note of that .
I would like to thank all those who have taken part in this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( DE ) The fact that the EU wants to increase its activities in the field of human rights and that the issue of persecution and discrimination against Christian minorities is specifically addressed in this report represents a fundamental step in the right direction .
Christians are still suffering acute persecution today in many countries , some of which have close contacts with the EU .
To give just a few examples : In Egypt , Iran , Iraq and Turkey , Christians are fighting for their very survival , both in economic and in physical terms .
We do not need to establish a new post , such as the planned Special Representative for Human Rights , to encourage or even to force these countries to show more tolerance and to protect their minorities .
This will give rise to unnecessary costs and is not guaranteed to be effective .
We have enough means of applying pressure in the case of business interests and international trade relations .
We must take specific measures .
We must ensure that no treaties are signed with the EU and no financial aid is provided without a commitment to respect human rights and to protect minorities , in particular Christians .
Financial arguments are among the most powerful and they are understood throughout the world .
Respect for human rights is one of the foundations of democracy and is the main value on which the idea of the European Union is based .
This is why human rights occupy a special place in the work of the Union and of our Parliament .
In its annual report on human rights , the European Parliament stresses its commitment to protecting these rights throughout the world .
Since 1988 , Parliament has awarded the Sakharov Prize to people and organisations with a record of particular distinction in the fight for human rights .
We will be introduced to the winner of this year 's prize this week .
In the context of the report for 2009 , I appeal to the Member States to sign and ratify all the main UN and Council of Europe conventions on respect for human rights .
In order to be effective in the fight against violations of human rights around the world , we have to act together and in accordance with the principles of law and order which are accepted internationally on this matter .
Therefore , it is important for the Union , as a leader in the field of the defence of human rights , that the Member States comply with international obligations in this area .
The lack of respect for the rights of defenceless children is particularly repugnant .
This is why I stand for a definitive ban on child labour and for additional funds to be allocated to the fight against using children for work .
It is horrifying that in the 21st century there are 215 million children in the world who are being forced to work , including around 115 million who have to perform hard slave labour .
We cannot allow the economic crisis to make the situation of these children worse .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has today adopted the necessary sanctions against the Russian officers involved in the trial and the death of Magnitsky .
Russia , a State that is not a State with a rule of law and where human rights are flouted on a daily basis , does not deserve the attention that France pays to it .
Therefore , I strongly condemn the sale by France of a Mistral class warship to Russia and regret this action .
in writing . - Mrs Andrikienė 's report is a step in the right direction .
The EU-Russia relationship is indeed special and should stay special , but not unusually special .
Russia is bound by its own commitments to protect human rights and to defend its citizens against State abuse .
The Magnitsky case , referred to in the report , follows the murders of Politkovsaya , Estemirova and Barburova .
This is a pattern , not a succession of tragic accidents beyond the abilities of Russia 's judiciary .
And yet , murder after murder , the Russian authorities tell the outside world that this time the guilty will definitely be found and punished .
What is the result ?
Zero , nil , nothing !
The Russian State Duma even accused the European Parliament of interference in Russia 's internal affairs and used a bunch of lies to smear the Andrikienreport .
If Europe is to maintain its credibility as a defender of democracy and human rights , the Andrikienreport should be adopted as it is , with no special provisions for Russia 's constant abuses .
A resolution in the Canadian Parliament already backed a travelling ban and the freezing of the accounts of those linked to the Magnitsky case .
We should follow suit and send Russia a clear and resolute message .
Enough is enough !
in writing . - The European Union 's continued protection of human rights has paid great dividends worldwide and we must further our efforts in this age of globalisation .
Admittedly , this is a slow and sometimes tedious process , but it is important that we expand our goals and look at real world scenarios in order to develop efficient strategies .
Furthermore , I wish to voice my support for the protection of human rights defenders and policies that will provide for the continued spread of democracy to those countries that have yet to make this change .
As we have seen with the recent Nobel Prize and Sakharov Prize winners , protection of these human rights defenders is of the utmost importance and these measures are a step toward that end .
Parliament 's efforts to spread democracy and protect human rights continue to make progress , and in today 's globalised world we know about injustices at a faster rate .
This access to information makes it easier for us to monitor and react to situations around the world .
We must therefore take advantage of this and continue our efforts to ensure that all people are given the fundamental rights that we have worked so hard to preserve .
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
A new strategy for Afghanistan ( debate )
( FR ) - The next item is the report by Mr Arlacchi , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a new strategy for Afghanistan .
rapporteur . - Madam President , the report that we considered today has been approved virtually unanimously by the Committee on Foreign Affairs of this Parliament .
It is the result of one year 's work by a team which I led and is based on extensive consultations in Kabul and Brussels .
This report is an attempt to explain a paradox : why has so little been achieved in Afghanistan , in spite of nine years of international involvement ?
Since 2001 , military operations inside that country have cost more than EUR 300 billion and several thousand human lives , and at least another EUR 40 billion have been spent on the civilian side : in total , more than 30 times the current Afghan GDP .
In spite of this huge effort , Afghanistan is still the number one producer of narcotic drugs .
It is still one of the poorest countries in the world , where - for the majority of the Afghan population - life is short , brutal and nasty , as it was in our continent five centuries ago .
There are more victims of maternal mortality alone in Afghanistan than the war : over 20 000 a year as against 2 300 .
The answer to this paradox is not simple .
The opium problem and the strength of the insurgency must be taken into account , along with the belief in the illusion of a quick military victory , which dominated the early years of the international presence .
Moreover , the legitimacy of the central government has been overestimated , as has the efficiency of international aid in the reconstruction of the country .
This report does not try to simplify all these matters .
It accepts the challenge in its full dimension , and this document is an attempt to suggest new directions for our policies .
The report approaches the subject from a European standpoint .
This means that the Afghan crisis is considered from an angle that does not simply mirror the American perspective on it .
European values and principles matter .
They influence the way the Afghan problem is seen by European citizens , and they do not believe in a military solution in principle , because more than 65 years ago we abandoned the idea that war and occupation of foreign lands is good solution .
Today 's EU is built on an aversion to war , and this report reflects this feeling .
On the specific issue of Afghanistan , EU citizens strongly support a civilian approach as an alternative to the use of force .
Our approach is not naive ; it is not , as has been said , Venus 's softness against Mars 's strength .
It is instead the power of reason , of human solidarity , applied to a crisis like the Afghan one that cannot be approached with a simplistic solution and mentality .
This report proposes a strategy that does not exclude the limited use of coercive means .
The security of the people of Afghanistan from terrorists and criminal attacks is a prerequisite for development , and this Parliament believes that the combination of peace-keeping interventions , multilateral diplomacy , domestic peace negotiations , effective poverty reduction measures , the establishment of democratic institutions and the protection of women 's rights are the pillars of a new , winning strategy in Afghanistan as elsewhere .
I hope that the strategy which is outlined here will be implemented carefully by the new system , and I take this opportunity to invite Baroness Ashton to join Parliament in this endeavour .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , I want to begin by honouring the memory of Richard Holbrooke , a dedicated diplomat , a champion of peace and a man I was proud to call my friend .
I want to pay tribute to the honourable Member Mr Arlacchi for the comprehensive report and for work that I know he has done which has provoked a rich debate in this Parliament over the last few months .
For my part , I look forward to working very much with him and other colleagues in Parliament in the months ahead as we enter what I would describe as a crucial phase in our engagement in Afghanistan .
As Mr Arlacchi said , the problems that face Afghanistan in a sense concern all of us .
Violent extremism extends beyond the region .
Drugs grown and produced in Afghanistan find their way to the streets of Europe .
Our engagement is spurred by the need to prevent Afghanistan becoming a safe haven for terrorism and criminal activities .
But it is equally important that we promote a better , more secure and prosperous future for the people of Afghanistan .
Without that , there will not be a solution .
In response to these challenges I want to begin by saying , as I have said many times in other places , that the European Union is in Afghanistan for the long term .
We have an assistance programme up to 2013 - and , I am sure , beyond - and we have now increased the baseline of our assistance to EUR 200 million per annum , which is up from EUR 150 million per annum previously .

With that funding we are able to continue to support health and social welfare as well as governance and the rule of law , and despite the fact that security concerns are in the forefront of all our minds , I believe we have had some noticeable success in key social sectors .
I have already mentioned in this House the health sector where , for example , 80 % of the country now has some form of access to primary health care , compared with less than 10 % in 2001 .
It is also true that health indictors in Afghanistan are still amongst the worst in the world , so we have a long way to go .
That said , we know from the UN figures that , compared with 2001 , 40 000 fewer babies are dying each year in Afghanistan , and that is due to considerably improved prenatal care .
We also continue to channel as much of our assistance as possible through the Afghan Government structures to ensure that we get Afghani leadership of the reform process .
About 50 % of our assistance goes either through national programmes or through trust funds that directly support the Afghan Government .
This is good for donor coordination , good for building local capacity and good for reinforcing Afghani ownership .
It sets a good example for many other donors too .
But there is always room for improving international coordination .
We need to do more and we need to do it better .
But looking at what the European Union does , I think we have made real progress , significantly enhanced by the arrival of our new EU Special Representative Head of Delegation Vygaudas Ušackas , who arrived in Afghanistan in April .
Our political messaging is more coherent , and we are enhancing the coordination of our development efforts within the EU through the action plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan , which was approved in October last year by the Council of Ministers .
The action plan brings the instruments that are being deployed collectively and by individual Member States in line with our policy priorities - especially those arising from the Kabul Conference , which I attended in July .
Aligning our efforts and our approach is a key aspect of the plan .
It identifies areas where we as the European Union believe our action will be most effective .
Indeed , European Union development ministers under my chairmanship were discussing precisely these issues last week in Brussels .
That brings me in a sense to the key message I want to give today , namely that the implementation of our existing strategies needs to be the priority .
The strategic framework is in place in both the military and the civilian spheres .
Together with both Presidents , I participated in the ISAF meeting in Lisbon last month , where the transfer of security responsibility under the NATO transition plan was agreed .
I have met with General David Petraeus three times in recent months and , while much remains to be done , I am confident that the current strategy is beginning to have a real impact .
On the civilian side , we had the successful Kabul Conference .
The Afghan Government is to be applauded for the organisation and the focus of the event in July .
It was not the usual roll-call of requests and donor pledges .
Rather , the agenda focused on how best to prioritise our existing resources and commitments , channelling our efforts into agreed national programmes that have been developed by the Afghanis themselves .
These national priority programmes paved the way for transition across a range of different sectors and we need now to support them , which is precisely what our action plan is doing .
We all know that there can be no sustainable military exit from Afghanistan without a civilian framework for stability that can keep the country together .
More effective state institutions , better governance , access to basic services , justice and the rule of law are just as important as hard security .
We will thus reinforce our efforts to strengthen Afghan capacity and will work with the Afghan Government to foster effective and accountable state institutions , especially at the sub-national level .
Indeed , in all the areas we are engaged in - rural development , law enforcement , border management or tackling the narcotics trade - we will work to build up local Afghan institutions , putting the emphasis on promoting the rule of law and governance and on fighting corruption .
On the question of Afghan institutions , I want to end with a word on Afghan undertakings .
Our efforts on development will only become sustainable once the Afghan Government becomes more accountable and inclusive .
We need to encourage them to take such a long-term view .
At present , half the human capacity in the country is marginalised , and yet we have seen from other examples in the world that the engagement of women in the governance and development processes is fundamental .
I was struck by this untapped potential when I met with women 's groups in Kabul last July .
This will remain a key aspect of our engagement in Afghanistan , be it in the political support to women MPs in the new Afghan Parliament or through our support to women 's participation in local development projects such as the widely-recognised National Solidarity Programme , which we have been funding through the World Bank since 2002 .
As I close , I am grateful to the honourable Member , Mr Arlacchi , for highlighting so many important issues in this report .
I believe it comes at a really opportune moment with so much at stake to both our military and our civilian commitments .
Madam President , Afghanistan has no longer a great deal of choice .
Firstly , the status quo is no longer a realistic option insofar as the NATO forces are announcing one after another their withdrawal from Afghanistan , yet we do not yet know whether the country is able to guarantee its own security .
Secondly , would a return to the pre-2000 situation be an option ?
Furthermore , if we create a pocket for terrorist networks , we would expose the country once again to a trial of strength with the foreign armed forces .
Thirdly , should power be entrusted to the moderate Taliban ?
I am unable to say what I think about this option , as no one can tell us what a moderate Taliban is .
Let us ask the Afghan women who have emerged from hell and have just rediscovered some freedom .
Fourthly , what remains is to pursue efforts to consolidate what has been achieved and to continue to fight for more democracy and greater development .
Karzai , who is seeking to be the embodiment of that option , has come up against a major obstacle , namely his own person .
Until there is a credible alternative , that is the only option remaining to us .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , our key position in this report is the counter-insurgency strategy in the EU action plan , and I thank Mr Arlacchi for understanding this .
This strategy must be given time to work according to the timetable set by President Obama , with 2014 as the deadline for the complete Afghanisation of military and police operations .
The final stage will certainly be political , with an agreement reached through negotiation by all Afghani parties to the conflict .
Contact with the Taliban is an Afghani affair , but this should begin when the insurgents cease to feel in a position of strength .
Aid distribution and the use of private contractors need to be rethought so that they benefit the local population - and certainly without paying protection money to local insurgents for the supply routes .
Equal importance should be accorded to narcotics - alongside security - for the sake of the lives of European young people .
We are strongly against paragraph 71 , which condemns the use of drones - an integral part of the counter-insurgency strategy .
What are the European soldiers in the field going to think if the European Parliament condemns such an effective weapon in their fight against insurgency ?
I urge colleagues to vote against the third part of paragraph 71 .
Madam President , Baroness Ashton , the European Union is involved in a number of missions in Afghanistan on the basis of United Nations resolutions .
Too many young soldiers from Europe have lost their lives in Afghanistan .
A large number have been seriously injured or are suffering from the mental stress caused by military service .
Thousands of civilian aid workers from Europe risk their lives every day to help to bring about a better future in Afghanistan .
All of them and all of us have a right to know how Europe 's commitment in Afghanistan can be bought to successful and lasting conclusion and how long we will continue to have a military presence in the country .
What needs to be changed or improved and what are the objectives of the new EU strategy for Afghanistan ?
We need to make greater efforts in the area of civil reconstruction .
We must at last make progress with retraining the Afghan police force and judiciary .
We know that there will not be a military solution and , therefore , we must increase our efforts to bring about a political solution to the conflict , by means of the EU and a common foreign policy .
We must show determination and push forward with the internal reconciliation process in Afghanistan and include moderate members of the Taliban .
We need to put in place specific initiatives , in particular at a regional level , to stabilise the situation .
This involves , in particular , effective means of combating drug cultivation and trafficking .
Our strategy includes good proposals .
We call on the Afghan Government to demonstrate that it has the will to introduce a better system of governance which is free from corruption .
However , the new EU strategy can only be successful if it no longer plays a passive role , but actively involves the neighbouring countries .
Baroness Ashton , we are putting our hopes on you , we are relying on you and you have our full support .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SL ) Madam President , thank you for remembering ambassador Richard Holbrooke .
It is right that we should remember him today as we speak about Afghanistan , in gratitude for what he did to promote peace .
For the world , for the European Union and for us all , Afghanistan is a problem with which we would be able to deal relatively quickly and efficiently if the times and the methods were different .
It is obvious today that , as we are exploring other avenues , this problem cannot be solved by military means .
This report , which was prepared by Professor Pino Arlacchi , a sensitive connoisseur of Afghanistan and of the dark side of global politics , is helping to make those other avenues possible .
Nonetheless , we see new victims , both civilians and uniformed combatants , dying every day .
The report provides an insight into information on missed opportunities for investment , irregularities surrounding and abuses of humanitarian aid , profits made by international drug trafficking networks and the illusions which military leaders have been under .
Today , it is clear that Al Qa 'ida 's presence in Afghanistan is no longer the central problem .
However , it is a problem which will export the fight against international terrorism into the neighbouring countries and regions for as long as fighting in Afghanistan continues .
The report warns that real and long-term solutions in Afghanistan , such as those that will raise human rights , the position of women and prospects for children closer to the standards with which we are familiar , will only be possible if the Afghan authorities , religious leaders and civil society are actively and strongly involved .
We need to be more confident than before that they are able to build a society and a state on foundations that are close to their definition of freedom and their traditions and values .
This report is a valid attempt at defining the key problems and possible solutions for Afghanistan .
The report is an incentive for a responsible and creative European Union policy in Afghanistan .

Madam President , Mrs Ashton , may I take this opportunity to thank Mr Arlacchi for the constructive atmosphere in which we have worked .
This report offers a very honest , very fair analysis of the shortcomings in the international intervention in Afghanistan since 2001 .
We approve its key message : there will be no military solution .
The war is having a huge cost .
The war is costing human lives both amongst the soldiers and the population and it only serves to strengthen the Taliban .
The only solution is a political one .
What the Afghans are waiting for is real investment in their country 's development , in support for good governance , in the creation of a judicial system .
The problem of fundamental rights , most importantly women 's rights , remains intact .
The very recent report of the United Nations mission in Afghanistan demonstrates the inability of the Afghan Government to fully safeguard the rights of women and girls .
I quote : ' As long as women and girls are subject to practices that harm them , degrade them and deprive them of their rights , little significant or lasting progress can be made in Afghanistan ' .
In order to safeguard the rights of Afghan women , not only do we need written legal and constitutional guarantees , but more importantly their rapid and appropriate application .
The National Assembly has little influence in the country , the bulk of the power being concentrated in the hands of President Karzai .
If it is not too late , unfailing support , to strengthen democracy and the state of law , must come from the European Union to the various institutions and , in particular , to the parliament that has just been elected .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , for the past year I have served as personal representative of the chairman-in-office of the OSCE Kazakhstan , preparing a detailed report on the key environmental issues affecting central Asia .
I have sent you a copy of my report , Baroness Ashton .
One of the key issues which affects the whole of Central Asia is of course the question of transboundary water utilisation .
As you know there is great and constant tension between the upstream and downstream nations in central Asia involving water use .
But one aspect of this problem emerged during the course of my investigation that has , I think , been missed by many decision makers in the west .
The mainstay of the Afghan economy is agriculture and any rebuilding of the economy in a post-conflict Afghanistan will mean massive investment in agriculture , encouraging for example farmers to switch from growing heroin poppies to growing pomegranates .
That in turn will mean a huge additional utilisation of already scarce water resources .
In other words , by helping to resolve the current conflict in Afghanistan , we could inadvertently create a series of mini-Afghanistans downstream as acute water shortages are exacerbated .
We must take care to ensure that any new irrigation schemes are properly designed , with concrete-lined channels and reservoirs , and droplet irrigation systems similar to those used by farmers in Spain .
In addition , any major energy projects involving hydroelectric power plants must be carefully designed and constructed to ensure that they do not create any disadvantage for downstream water users in neighbouring countries .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Madam President , the United States and NATO-led war in Afghanistan is an unmitigated disaster for the Afghan people , an estimated 30 000 of whom were killed last year alone .
It is also a disaster for the young men and women forced to join and fight there in the armies of NATO and the United States , of whom perhaps 500 have already been killed this year .
As the Arlacchi report makes very clear , after nine years the economic and social situation in Afghanistan is extremely dire .
The number of people living in poverty has increased dramatically .
What a scandal this is , considering that USD 300 billion have been obscenely wasted on weapons of mass destruction and war and lost in corruption over that time .
The US invasion of Afghanistan was undertaken not to advance the interests of the Afghan people but the geostrategic interests of the United States in Central Asia , which of course is rich in energy , oil and gas .
Foreign armies must be withdrawn and such wealth as exists in Afghanistan should be taken from the hands of the Karzai government , corrupt landlords and warlords and put democratically in the hands of organisations of peasants , workers and the poor to really utilise those resources and develop them for the benefit of the people .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , as rapporteur in charge of drafting the European Union 's position on Iran , I have focused , in the resolution on Afghanistan , on the Islamic Republic 's role in the Afghan theatre of war .
However , the resolution deals with the interesting influence of Iran only very fleetingly and also , in my opinion , with little regard for reality .
Meanwhile , the crucial question remains : how does the European Union assess Iran 's actual influence in Afghanistan and what political consequences does it anticipate from that ?
For this reason , I will put three questions to Madam High Representative and I would like to think , Madam Ashton , that you will answer these in writing .
I , too , would prefer to get specific answers .
1 .
To what extent does mass deportation of Afghan refugees on the part of Iran have a destabilising impact on the western part of Afghanistan ?
I am thinking here of Nimruz and Herat .
2 .
Do you share the official Afghan view that Iran is attempting to infiltrate foreign terrorists into the country under the cover of these deportations ?
3 .
What kind of assistance is the European Union providing to the Afghan authorities in terms of receiving large numbers of refugees from Iran , in order to prevent Teheran from politically abusing this sensitive humanitarian issue and from instrumentalsing it in order to make Kabul independent and put it under political pressure .
Madam President , this report demolishes the lies of the British political class about the Afghan War .
I do not know the names of any of the innocent Afghan victims of this wicked war , but I do know that it has nothing to do with British interests .
And I know the names of the 18 brave young men from my constituency who paid with their lives for this madness in the last year alone .
Corporal Simon Hornby , Liverpool ; Warrant Officer David Markland , Lancashire ; Kingsman Sean Dawson , Stalybridge ; Corporal Harvey Holmes , Hyde ; Corporal Terry Webster , Chester ; Lance Corporal Andrew Breeze , Manchester ; Marine Steven Birdsall , Warrington ; Marine Paul Warren , Preston ; Sergeant Steven Darbyshire , Wigan ; Private Alex Isaac , Wirral ; Private Douglas Halliday , Wallasey ; Colour Sergeant Martyn Horton , Runcorn ; Private Thomas Sephton , Warrington ; Sergeant David Monkhouse , Cumbria ; Sapper Darren Foster , Carlisle ; Lance Corporal Jordan Bancroft , Burnley ; Kingsman Darren Deady , Bolton ; Guardsman Christopher Davies , St Helens .
What a criminal waste of brave young lives !
It is , of course , no business of the European Union what wars Britain should or should not fight .
That is for the British people and our elected representatives in our House of Parliament in Westminster to decide , just as it will be for us to decide one happy day to put Messrs Blair , Brown and Cameron on trial for war crimes , because Afghanistan , just like Iraq , is a criminal war .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I share with the rapporteur the idea that the huge problems still present today in Afghanistan should be approached in a new way , in other words with a different definition of priorities compared to what has been done so far .
I share his satisfaction with the fact that the Afghan President , Mr Karzai , has set a target of 2014 for the beginning of the period in which only Afghan National Security Forces will conduct military operations in all various provinces and the Afghan Government 's to commitment to a phased exercise of full authority over its own security .
All this , however , should not mean that the international community abandons the Afghan cause .
The partnership with Afghanistan should instead be strengthened in every way .
Firstly , we need to promote investment in the economy because this really would mean investing in the country 's stability .
This must be done in the right way , in other words by establishing a model of cooperation based on an inclusive dialogue between social organisations and local institutions .
However the key issue , as the report correctly states , is the fact that there can be no stability or peace in Afghanistan without the state first of all guaranteeing security for its citizens on its own responsibility .
On this topic , I call on the rapporteur , Mr Arlacchi , to revise , if possible , perhaps through an oral amendment , the passage on the use of drones on the ground and make it more operational .
In other words , it is one thing to say ' it is forbidden to use drones ' and it is another thing to say ' we will limit the use of this technological instrument as far as possible ' , and then maybe add ' in order not to impact the civilian population ' .
I am sure we can reach a compromise , I believe that Mr Arlacchi has the insight and the resources to do so .
We will willingly support him in this work .
( BG ) Madam President , what we are discussing today is probably one of the most important reports on external policy and security for 2010 .
I would like to congratulate Mr Arlacchi for his efforts and the results he has achieved .
We can judge the results of our current Afghanistan policy by the shocking figures on rising infant mortality , falling life expectancy and growing illiteracy and poverty .
By comparison , five days of war cost the same as it would to eliminate poverty , and a week of war costs the same as 6 000 schools .
I am aware that comparisons of this kind are not straightforward , but they give us an idea of the quandary we currently find ourselves in .
At the same time , numerous reports have shown grave shortcomings , embezzlement and corruption in the distribution of international aid .
Since 2002 , the European Union and its Member States alone have poured in over EUR 8 billion with no palpable result .
No less alarming is the fact that the selection and training of recruits for the Afghan police force does not even meet the minimum standards : 90 % of the police force is made up of illiterate citizens ; and one-fifth are drug users .
I mention this because we cannot speak of a new strategy for Afghanistan unless we open our eyes to the real facts .
There are no easy solutions or prescriptions , but we urge everyone to be aware that the only solution is a political solution , one which emphasises a strong engagement with Afghan institutions and citizens in their country 's development which will have an effect over the long term by creating stable prerequisites for halting opium production and eliminating poverty .

( SV ) Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Arlacchi , who has done an excellent job on this strategy .
I think it is a splendid demonstration of the challenges we are facing , but also of the mistakes we have made up to now .
I hope that we can learn from this document in order to improve our action in Afghanistan .
There are a few elements that are worth considering in more detail .
Firstly , there is the somewhat radical , but important idea of actually holding serious talks with the so-called ' moderate Taliban ' .
This is surely the only solution .
At the same time , I believe that many of us would find it difficult to define exactly what and who a moderate member of the Taliban actually is .
I believe , therefore , that we have grounds for holding a debate on this matter , and I think that recent events have shown that this is not really clear for any of us .
Another matter that I would like to address is the question of the money provided in aid and how that money is developed .
I think it is a positive development that we are going to have the courage to channel it through the Afghan Government 's budget in future .
After all , this is probably the only way to go about it , although I think it needs to be done with due consideration .
We also have reason to demonstrate to the electorate in our own Member States that we are monitoring this and that the misuse of aid will not be too significant .
Last but not least , I think it is a good thing that Pakistan 's role is mentioned , because this is also vital .
I think we all agree about that , and here the international community has an important role to play in putting pressure on Pakistan to do what it should be doing .
Finally , I would like to say that I come from a country where , as things stand at the moment , the debate about Afghanistan solely concerns whether or not the Finnish troops should stay there , and this is not particularly constructive .
There is no discussion of the substance of the matter , only whether or not the troops should be there .
The same applies to our neighbouring country of Sweden , for example , and therefore such initiatives as this serious strategy provide a sound contribution for future debate .
( PL ) Madam President , four years ago I was an observer at elections to the Palestinian Authority , and I do mean the Palestinian Authority .
I remember the illusory opinion of one of the more important people in the European Parliament .
That person said to me : ' Why , the people from Hamas are basically nice , cultured , friendly people .
Perhaps we should negotiate with them . '
Today , I hear the same .
I hear , today , that perhaps we should negotiate with the moderate Taliban .
Only , the question arises - who are the moderate Taliban , and is this not too flexible a concept ?
I would caution against taking such a line .
It is clear that a great many soldiers are being killed in Afghanistan - including soldiers from my country , from Poland - far too many of these soldiers are being killed , our strategy is costing too much money , and NATO 's strategy is also questionable .
However , I would not throw the baby out with the bathwater , and I warn against dialogue with people who in reality have objectives which are completely different objectives from ours .
( FR ) Madam President , I am aware that Mr Arlacchi knows Afghanistan well .
Of the members of this Assembly , he is probably one of those who know this country and complex region best .
However , let us be clear , this text , in its current state , poses a serious problem .
I do not agree with all our Members who are delighted and pat themselves on the back for this text .
I shall tell you why .
I find that this text firstly has the major shortcoming of wanting at all cost to make us , Westerners , responsible for the ills Afghanistan is experiencing .
I will give you three examples .
Firstly , Mr Arlacchi writes that health conditions have deteriorated , almost by chance , since we have been there .
That is astonishing .
Mrs Ashton stated quite the opposite .
Nobody noticed this .
My second point is that in Recital B , read it ladies and gentlemen , Western forces are forces of occupation .
Those Member States in this Assembly who have lived through occupations will know what a word like this means .
My third point , on paragraph 71 , concerns the question of the drones : ladies and gentlemen , I was an officer in Afghanistan two years ago , as a military doctor .
I treated German , British , Polish , Italian , French , Allied Afghan soldiers .
I even treated the Taliban .
I can tell you that if tomorrow you were to say to our soldiers ' You cannot use drones ' , that would be tantamount to telling them ' Make contact with the enemy , take risks ' .
I do not know whether it is our responsibility as politicians to say that to our men .
I am not under-estimating the complexity of the situation .
I know that war is cruel , but we must , I believe , put a stop to this anti-militarism , this simplistic anti-Americanism , this self-flagellation of Western forces which turns them into the source of all the Afghan ills .
I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that everything is much simpler than that .
The enemy is the Taliban , not the Americans and not the Western forces .
All of this is very complex but we must be careful about how we present matters .
Madam President , I would like to join Lady Ashton in paying tribute to Richard Holbrooke .
I admired him for Dayton , met him once for a fascinating dinner in Brussels and was very much impressed by him .
( NL ) Madam President , no strategy that is , primarily , of a military nature stands any chance of succeeding in Afghanistan .
The number of our troops there has grown from 20 000 in 2001 to 150 000 now and , yet , insecurity has only increased .
We are seeing more civilian casualties , more dead soldiers and a coalition army which , if my fellow member Mr Juvin will excuse me for putting it in this way , an increasing number of Afghans are now really seeing as an occupying force .
The strategy should focus on rebuilding the country , local government , the judiciary , education , health , and that includes for women , rural development , but without opium .
The coalition must take its own principles seriously .
We have heard some fine words about combating corruption , but nothing has been done about the corruption in and around the presidential palace .
That is making the Afghans disillusioned and that has to change .
The anti-corruption efforts of the Afghan police should be bolstered by the European Union , which must set to work by instituting public prosecutors .
Afghanistan cannot do without reliable administration .
( PL ) Madam President , it will not be possible to establish an efficient programme of assistance for Afghanistan without stabilising its internal situation .
The main pillar of these measures must be to guarantee security and victory in the fight against rebel forces .
To this end , it is necessary to increase the commitment of European states as part of the NATO mission and to strengthen Europol forces which , as we know , have not yet reached the numerical strength which was announced .
It is also essential to cut Taliban forces off from their bases in Pakistan and Peshawar .
In its reports , the US State Department has shown that a significant source of finance for the operations of the guerrillas is the trade in narcotics .
This is another area for action from the European Union , which should increase the funds available for encouraging farmers to stop growing poppies .
I do not think the idea contained in the report which talks about support for General Petraeus 's programme is warranted .
Funds should be obtained on a regional basis , but authority must be central .
Further break-up of Afghanistan may lead to ' Somalisation ' of the country and its division amongst the fighting tribes .
( EL ) Madam President , the state of Afghanistan is an extremely interesting issue for the international community , not only because there are military forces there , but also because forces have been deployed and will be deployed there in future that will launch terrorist attacks and create problems for the international community .
The truth of the matter , and we should accept it , is that there have been forces such as these , fundamentalists and terrorists , in Afghanistan since the 14th century .
Twenty-four years ago , Baroness Ashton , this parliament voted through a report by the Committee of Inquiry into Drugs containing a special section on Afghanistan and predictions about the present situation which , unfortunately , have proven to be true .
The drug problem cannot be suppressed with crops .
The UN crop programme has failed in practice .
Opium from Afghanistan , which ( according to the specialists ) is considered to be the best , funds all activities in Afghanistan , Pakistan and elsewhere .
It therefore needs to be eliminated but , more importantly , as you said , development efforts are needed , efforts in health , in reducing infant mortality ; in other words , we need to show these people a model that they will like , that they will love and want for their future quality of life , that they can integrate into their perception of life .
Of course , a model such as this will help women , because the state to which the Taliban reduced women is a monumental issue .
Women are already in a terrible situation and under terrible pressure in Muslim countries .
Here , things are even worse .
The European Union needs to stay , Baroness Ashton , and your interventions need to be continuous and to keep their European face , precisely as you yourself said .
( PT ) Madam President , Richard Holbrooke , to whom I also pay a heartfelt tribute , said before he died , " We must end the war in Afghanistan ” .
The fact is , that this country is vital for European and global security , and it is for this reason , as Pino Arlacchi 's report details very well , that we need to correct the huge errors committed in the move to investing in ' Afghanisation ' and putting the human safety of the Afghan people first , which involves a responsibility to protect on the part of the foreign forces present .
Let us not deceive ourselves : the rule of law and democratic institutions cannot be constructed by corrupt warlords , discredited in the eyes of the people .
Ending the war in Afghanistan also depends on the control that the democratically elected government has over the military power of its neighbour Pakistan , a nuclear power on the margins of the Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) .
Provided they end their policy of burying their heads in the sand with regard to these fundamental political questions , Europeans within the European Union and NATO may be able to help end the war in Afghanistan , and also the descent into hell in Pakistan .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I join you in remembering Richard Holbrooke .
If my own political group had been responsible for drafting this report , our approach would undoubtedly have been very different to that followed by Mr Arlacchi , although I am grateful for the passion with which he has followed the Afghanistan file for so long .
Due in part to the numerous and crucial amendments tabled by our political group , this report is now less ideological and certainly capable of recognising the critical points encountered over this nine-year period as well as recognising the positive points and the most effective lines of development to be followed in order to help achieve a restoration of full sovereignty to the Afghan authorities .
While it is true that a military response alone is not sufficient , we must once again forcefully reiterate , on the one hand , that in recent months there have been significant military successes - we need only think of the operations in the areas of Almondo and Kandahar - and on the other hand , more incisive action against the insurgents is also an essential prerequisite to calm down the Taliban forces that we wish to bring to the negotiating table .
We can only be proud of this military engagement , which has seen the sacrifice of thousands of young soldiers of the International Security Assistance Force contingent , among them many Europeans and many young people from my own country , because it is not only a military commitment but also a commitment to reconstruction .
We are taking schools , bridges and civil works to these unfortunate lands , which will help with the development of the devastated areas .
Despite the compromises achieved , I believe there are still some critical issues in the report , particularly those already mentioned on the use of drones .
I believe it is a serious mistake to deprive ourselves unreservedly of the possibility of using this tool that is proving very useful in some areas of the north-east of the country , where it is more difficult to root out and defeat the Taliban forces .
I hope that the rapporteur sees fit to rethink this point , otherwise I will join my group in voting against the report .

( SL ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Arlacchi on his courageous report .
Today , as we rightly remember the diplomat Mr Holbrooke and what he did for peace , especially in the Balkans , allow me to quote his statement on the money spent on combating drug trafficking in Afghanistan ( USD 1.61 billion ) .
Quote :
' The most wasteful and ineffective programme I have seen in and out of government ' .
( SL ) Unquote .
This is similar to all that has happened in these ill-fated ten years of war in Afghanistan .
I have no time to go into why we fell into the Bush administration 's trap , but it is a fact that our citizens expect us finally to put an end to this madness , which has cost us over EUR 300 billion and countless human lives .
While , back in 2001 , some were all too keen to go to war , it is now time to take the difficult risk of peace .
Our citizens expect us to do so .
They also expect a political solution and want us to put less confidence in a military solution .
( RO ) Madam President , I am delighted that a consensus was reached on this report by the political groups within the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The resulting text is much more persuasive than the initial proposal .
The situation in Afghanistan still requires considerable improvements after nine years of international intervention .
Socio-economic and security indicators have not visibly improved and decisions have often been made without sufficient Afghan involvement .
This is why I think that it is neither a framework nor instruments that are lacking .
In actual fact , we need a strategic plan in line with the commitments made to Afghanistan .
The EU must assume , alongside NATO , its role in leading an international effort which will aim to treat Afghanistan as a sovereign state .
I must stress that the only political and diplomatic solution is to increase the involvement of the Afghan Government .
In this regard , I think that one of the report 's key elements is the support expressed for the new counter-insurgency strategy .
The Lisbon Summit outlined the move to the transition phase , involving the gradual handover of responsibility for security to Afghan forces by 2014 .
In keeping with the commitment it made right at the outset of the mission , my country will not withdraw its troops until Afghan territory is completely secure .
I must also mention here the important contribution made by Russia in agreeing to our troops and equipment crossing its territory in transit .
I wish to end by stressing the need , once the transition has got underway , for ISAF troops , who will complete the operation , to be relocated to the areas where the security situation will continue to be uncertain .
This measure is of paramount importance to the Romanian troops stationed in southern Afghanistan .
Instability will remain in the region , in spite of the successes achieved in ISAF operations .

( RO ) Madam President , I would first of all like to say that I support the view presented earlier by my colleague Mr Juvin , and I would like to begin my speech by mentioning that I am sorry that the report does not contain ' European Union ' in its title .
I do not believe that we have to speak on behalf of the global community , but only on behalf of the European Union .
I have therefore endeavoured to highlight this as well in the amendments which I have tabled .
This obviously does not mean that we have to ignore the cooperation with our allies , especially , as my colleague Mr Juvin mentioned , with the United States .
I do not think that there is any great need for us at the moment to focus on a completely new strategy .
I believe that it is better to implement the strategic vision set out during the NATO Summit in Bucharest two years ago .
In this regard , I do not think that it is about devising a new strategy , but about being consistent in relation to this strategic vision .
On the other hand , we certainly need to acknowledge and learn from the mistakes which have been made in Afghanistan by the military coalition .
However , we must avoid the pitfall of seeing the pre-intervention situation through rose-tinted glasses .
As has already been emphasised , it is important for us to stress that one of the main objectives of our strategy in Afghanistan is to get rid of the Taliban groups from this country .
However , we must also highlight the positive aspects of intervention , especially of the Petraeus plan .
Nowadays , Afghanistan is a country where women enjoy more rights , more children go to school , more factories are open and more roads are being built .
This can be attributed to the way in which we have conducted ourselves in this country .
The integration of civilian measures such as education programmes and programmes for eradicating poverty and reconstruction and development is a vital step in safeguarding peace in Afghanistan .
Finally , I would like to stress the need for a pragmatic vision , as proposed by my political group .
Let us not forget that more than 400 amendments were made to the Arlacchi report .
( FR ) Madam President , I wish briefly to say three things .
Firstly , I believe , counter to what has been said , that the European Union ought to have its own strategy .
In Afghanistan , we have men , soldiers , troops who are engaged , we have resources , considerable resources that we have provided and we need to have our own view on matters .
Secondly , I believe that it is absolutely necessary for the international community 's money to benefit the Afghans .
This , unfortunately , has not been the case for 10 years , and it is something that we can witness on a daily basis on the ground .
I think that this is probably in part the responsibility of the NGOs and the humanitarian organisations .
However , and the report possibly does not state this sufficiently , it is also largely due , I fear , to government corruption and to a government which , it must be said , is neither very fair nor very effective .
Thirdly , there is the question of political dialogue .
Indeed , there have been attempts to engage in this with the Taliban for a number of years .
This is not new .
I personally believe that dialogue is necessary .
However , I believe that it will be very difficult because to hold a dialogue at a time when we are in a position of weakness on the ground and the withdrawal of troops is at an advanced stage , will , of course , be very complicated .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , now that the several amendments have been approved , we agree with Mr Arlacchi 's report and with the priorities that were highlighted in the report for the future development of Afghanistan .
In particular a transparent financial aid system , the training of domestic police forces , the fight against drug trafficking and the coordination of international aid are the main points of political and military strategy that have been further strengthened .
It is important to stress again the need to ensure control and stabilisation of the area in order to weaken the action of Taliban forces and revitalise peace processes .
I conclude by emphasising the contribution that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has made to achieving a shared text and I would also like to pay homage to the efforts and sacrifice of the soldiers of the International Security Assistance Force for their presence on the ground in the defence of freedom and the local populations .
- ( SK ) Madam President , in my opinion , armies cannot bring peace and prosperity , and this also applies to Afghanistan .
We should give some thought to the fact that while some of our fellow Members , chiefly from the EPP , worry about whether we will support a certain type of aircraft - I am no military expert and have no idea what this debate is about - then I believe we should pay far more attention to what Mr Arlacchi is talking about in this report , as it is very important .
He is talking about the situation of women and children in that country .
We should definitely focus more on supporting non-discrimination against women and the fight against discrimination .
We should also focus on the fact that many children in Afghanistan do not have the opportunity to go to school , for example , and many are living below the poverty line .
In my opinion , if we fail to support projects on education and health , and if we continue to invest in military solutions to this conflict , we will get nowhere .
Madam President , Mr Arlacchi 's report is well researched and informative .
My slight criticism is that he seems to bemoan the fact that Afghanistan is not a liberal democracy run by a coalition of Greens and Liberal Democrats in Brighton .
The horror story of Afghanistan has involved the deaths of 346 British soldiers , many more allied soldiers and thousands of innocent Afghans .
During that period , infant mortality and maternal mortality have soared and life expectancy has fallen .
He tells us than in 2001 no poppies were being grown in Afghanistan , whereas now , after nine years of conflict and allied influence , Afghanistan supplies more than 90 % of the heroin in Europe .
To point out that there is some discrimination against women is to get things slightly out of proportion .
The answer is to support our troops by stopping the war and bringing them home to guard our own people against home grown but imported terrorists .
( RO ) Madam President , while both women and children are undoubtedly an important topic , what is important , however , in Mr Arlacchi 's report is its clarity .
I mean by this that it presents the legitimacy of the international intervention in Afghanistan to us and does not question it .
However , it is a natural and politically responsible step to discuss the effectiveness of this intervention .
The reason is that , sentimentality aside , an intervention lasting 10 years can cast a complete shadow over the effectiveness of the political decision taken on this issue .
I believe that each one of us is responsible to those who elected us for coming up with an answer to this question .
I welcome the clarity of this report also because it mentions matters which we generally avoid discussing for a variety of reasons .
I believe that it is a report which merely provides a starting point .
We must have the courage to carry out a regular analysis and evaluation of our actions , admit where we have made mistakes and , when we have made them , we must find other solutions .
This is what acting both responsibly and democratically is all about .
- ( SK ) Madam President , we know from experience that assistance through external intervention works if the majority of the population support such external aid .
After years of intervention in Afghanistan , we see that the Afghans do not understand us , do not want our help , and do not understand our civilisation or our cultural values .
In Slovakia we have a saying that ' he who accepts no advice cannot be helped ' .
I do not want to say that the Afghans cannot be helped , but I cannot vote for methods that are explicitly forceful and violent .
We should above all focus on how to change our assistance and how to structure it so that it meets the needs of the Afghan people .
I believe it is really necessary for us to gradually withdraw our armed forces and hand over power to the local administration and local politicians , and then to help the people of Afghanistan through the local politicians in such a way that they can identify with the values of our civilisation and understand us , and then perhaps they will be willing and able to accept our help .
Madam President , our commitment to a stable self-governing Afghanistan , capable of preventing the re-establishment of a terrorist sanctuary there , is strong and long-term , having been reasserted by both the EU and NATO .
However , precisely because our commitment is a long-term one , I would foresee at least three major challenges .
The first is that the kind of state model we provide for Afghanistan does not fit the Afghan tradition .
As the Afghans have to adjust , so too do we , helping them to get an achievable state model combining modernity with the Afghan tradition .
The second challenge is that the security situation might well continue to require our international military involvement beyond 2014 , when the Afghans will take over .
We should be ready seriously to contemplate either extending the deadline or facing the consequences .
Finally , the third challenge will be provided by the running-out of our public 's patience , which might force us to speed up our present timetable to avoid the alternative of simply declaring victory and going home .
That would ruin our credibility .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , I will just make a couple of concluding remarks .
First of all , I would like to thank the European Parliament .
This has been an interesting and diverse debate , and I commend you for the continued interest and energy that you put into our engagement in Afghanistan .
That has been very well demonstrated by the discussion today .
As I said at the beginning , I believe Afghanistan is important for all of us and for our citizens , and that the European Union must rightly remain a key player .
I hope that I spelled out at the beginning the priorities and plans for the period ahead , together with the recognition of the balance that needs to be struck between channelling resources through the Afghan Government and recognising the importance of ensuring that we battle corruption appropriately , in order to safeguard the resources that we have .
We remain engaged in key sectors : in health ( as I have described ) , the police , justice , rural development and the sub-national governments - and of course the rule of law is essential .
Moreover , as I have described , a focus for all these programmes is to ensure that we build up capacity in the local Afghan structures and that the government 's priorities in combating the drugs industry and reducing corruption continue to be fully addressed .
I also pointed out in my speech the importance of engaging and involving women at all levels of Afghan society and , indeed , in the political structures .
I took note of Mr Stevenson 's report and agree that water and irrigation , as in so many parts of the world , are increasingly an issue .
Mr Belder , I promise I will reply to you , as you specifically asked , in writing .
I will conclude by again thanking Mr Arlacchi for the report .
I very much look forward to continuing the discussion on the key points at issue in that report and beyond .
I end by echoing what was said about Ambassador Richard Holbrooke , and the fact that his final words as he went into his last surgery were on Afghanistan .
That is very typical of him .
How I will miss him .
rapporteur . - Madam President , this has been an extremely interesting and lively debate .
I just want to make a couple of observations .
The first is that I am very happy there has been no criticism by anyone of the four main points of the report .
The report asked for reform of international aid , elimination of opium poppy cultivation , better coordination of police training , and support for the peace process .
All the observations have been on other issues and I am happy that , after one year of discussion in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , colleagues have confirmed their support for the structure of the report - which is not ' the Arlacchi report ' .
Following its approval by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , this is the committee report that has been approved almost unanimously - with 60 votes for , and one vote against .
It also includes several compromises agreed on by all the political groups , so it is very important , too , to refer to the real text of the report , which is the final one .
To Mr Juvin , I would say that there is no mention of occupying forces in Afghanistan .
That was the original text .
The final text says ' coalition of international forces in place ' in Afghanistan .
This part of the report has been changed by the amendments .
The most important issue is drones .
This is not a report on drones .
There are just two lines of a compromise between the political groups on the issue of the use of drones .
I believe that an agreement could have been reached sooner on that , but I trust my interlocutors and all the different positions , and I trust the compromise we reached .
There is no call in the report for prohibition of the use of drones .
There is moderate criticism of it , but I believe that an agreement between groups can be found on that .
I thank you , and I also thank Baroness Ashton .
I hope she will take full account of the content of the report , which is a very concrete one and calls for an exit strategy from Afghanistan .

( HU ) Madam President , I apologise for speaking now , technically , and I am not putting my question to Mr Arlacchi , but would only like to respectfully address a small reminder or question to Madam President .
I am an independent Member , and we have very little opportunity to speak .
Today I did not even have the opportunity to speak .
I came in one hour early for this debate , very politely went downstairs , and indicated to the staff there that I would like to speak .
I accept this , it is understandable that there was no time for this today or in this debate , and I will of course submit my speech for today 's sitting in writing .
What I would welcome and what I would like to ask of Madam President is to accord more attention and empathy to independent Members , who unfortunately only have this much opportunity to speak .
Thank you very much , and I wish you fruitful work .


( FR ) Madam President , to correct what has been said , Mr Arlacchi is quite right , the final text proposed to us no longer contains , in Recital B , the words ' occupation force ' .
Quite simply , the translations , and particularly the French translation , were not correct in the latest version , and the French translation , until this morning , still contained the expression ' occupation force ' , hence the speech by my colleague Mr Juvin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The strategy presented and approved in Lisbon entails a gradual transfer of control over the area , region by region , from ISAF responsibility to Afghan armed forces .
Its success depends on what action Pakistan will take , which is part of the problem and will also , inevitably , be part of the solution .
Moreover , I do not believe that we can ignore the increasingly obvious involvement of Iran in Afghanistan .
The recent events linked to this involvement are a cause for disquiet .
I believe that this strategy must go hand in hand with larger , more high-profile civilian projects , which will support the development of these regions where poverty is ubiquitous and the presence of ISAF and US forces has not brought about any fundamental changes .
After our withdrawal , we cannot leave behind us the same problems which resulted in the Taliban 's rise to power during the last decade .
I hope that this new strategy will work and enable Afghanistan to regain peace and stability .
The strategy pursued so far on Afghanistan has not brought the expected results .
I was pleased to learn of the establishment of a calendar for NATO involvement in Afghanistan and of the signing of a declaration on long-term partnership with the country during the NATO Summit in Lisbon .
The EU , too , is presenting a more consistent and better coordinated approach to the region , which takes account of civil aspects and the significance of regional cooperation .
We should continue to support reforms intended to combat poverty , discrimination against women and the production of opium .
Our efforts must concentrate on increasing respect for human rights and law and order , building a state of law and integrating Afghanistan fully into the international community .
They should also include building and reforming the administration and the public service corps by training programmes , help with construction and the use of existing infrastructure and advice from the EU .
Afghanistan should participate in establishing and implementing priorities which will help to build civil society and ensure that Afghans assume responsibility for the country .
At the same time , we must remember to ensure the security of those we send to Afghanistan - the trainers and members of the armed forces whose job it is to see that these plans are put into effect .
We cannot agree to ending the use of remote controlled aircraft , as this would cause a significant reduction in the safety of these people .
Our strategy should take into account both the security of the citizens of Afghanistan and of our representatives , who are working for the development of the country .
in writing . - ( DE ) The report on a new strategy for Afghanistan presents the absolutely necessary critical picture of the situation in that country .
The report makes it clear that the NATO strategy of solving complex political and military problems by military means has failed .
Therefore , it calls explicitly for a new strategy from the international community with a focus on civil reconstruction .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament , in contrast to many parliaments in the Member States , is sending out a clear signal with this report that the conflict must be brought to an end and that a change of policy is needed in order to achieve sustainable political , economic and democratic development in Afghanistan .
We must support the fundamental message of this report .
However , I disagree with the assessment that the Afghanistan strategy produced by the most recent NATO Summit can bring about a successful outcome .
I call for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan .
The European Union Police Mission ( EUPOL ) has failed and should not be extended or developed .
The roll-call votes on the paragraphs relating to some of these issues have allowed me to express my disagreement with the report .
I also regret the fact that the report does not take a more critical approach to the tendency to give military strategies a higher priority than civil reconstruction and does not pay sufficient attention to the human rights situation , in particular with regard to women .
Outcome of the NATO Summit in Lisbon ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the outcome of the NATO Summit in Lisbon .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , the NATO Summit in Lisbon was a success for NATO and indeed for its Secretary-General .
I was very pleased to have participated in some of its discussions .
I will outline to honourable Members what I think are the important results achieved , focusing particularly on EU-NATO relations and I will not touch on the more internal NATO issues .
In Lisbon , the Heads of State and Government agreed on a new strategic concept , a vision for the alliance for the next ten years .
NATO preserved its core tasks of collective defence and deterrents and recognised the importance of crisis management and cooperative security .
Lisbon also paved the way for important decisions for NATO in a number of key areas such as missile defence , cyber defence , NATO reform and NATO 's contribution to stabilisation and reconstruction .
In relation to Afghanistan , which we just discussed and which is also an important area of cooperation between the EU and NATO , decisions were taken on both transition and on long-term partnership .
I am going to focus on how Lisbon will in my view improve EU-NATO relations .
This was also on the agenda of the Defence Ministers ' meeting which I chaired last week and which was also attended by NATO Secretary-General Anders Rasmussen .
NATO is a key strategic partner for the European Union .
I welcome the recognition by NATO Heads of State and Government of the important contribution the European Union brings to security and stability .
I would like to underline the strong political commitment to the strengthening of the EU-NATO strategic partnership expressed by all , especially from President Obama .
I have been very actively engaged with Member States and allies and the NATO Secretary-General in order to reinforce EU-NATO relations .
My participation in several NATO high-level meetings , including the Foreign Affairs dinner at the NATO Lisbon summit , which also focused on EU-NATO relations , has been instrumental in this regard .
Earlier this year I took the initiative of sending NATO a set of concrete measures to reinforce EU-NATO cooperation .
Many of these measures have already been implemented in the European Union with the support of the Secretary-General of NATO .
This generated opportunities for informal discussions on issues of common interest , as well as more EU political dialogue with all NATO allies .
My ambition is to pave the way to even more progress .
I received a mandate for that at the European Council on 16 September .
In Lisbon , Secretary-General Rasmussen received a similar mandate to work with me on reinforcing EU-NATO relations .
One area of progress is EU-NATO cooperation on capability development , an area where we are achieving promising results , particularly on the military capability development , which is necessary for both enhancing military capabilities and maximising cost effectiveness .
More than ever we have to ensure complementarity and avoid duplication .
On 9 December , EU Ministers of Defence warmly welcomed the progress that has been achieved in strengthening cooperation with NATO .
We have already worked together , for example on helicopter availability , and we have now defined the building blocks on counter improvised explosive devices and medical support .
These are both vitally important areas of work with real operational consequences for our troops serving in the field .
Just to give a couple of concrete examples .
In the field of helicopter availability , we already had two exercises in France and in Spain .
Similar exercises are planned for the next four years .
In that context , we trained a 114 crews , that is over 1 300 personnel with 58 helicopters .
As an immediate result , 63 trained crews were deployed in Afghanistan .
Another example , this time in the field of countering road-side bombs , is the counter improvised explosive devices , where the European Defence Agency is in the final phase of purchasing a forensic laboratory which could be deployed in Afghanistan next year .
We have also continued to improve cooperation through the productive interaction between the European Defence Agency and the allied command for transformation .
Overall , my goal remains the development of true organisation-to-organisation relationship between the European Union and NATO .
The meeting of Ministers of Defence last week paved the way to move forward towards that goal .
Pending wider solutions , it is essential that we can count on solid arrangements between us when we are deployed together in the same theatre .
We owe this to our personnel .
It is also essential to be able to continue to work effectively to support the Member States and the allies to develop critical military capabilities , building on the successful work we have launched already .
I would argue that this is even more important in the current context of the economic backdrop .
We will all need flexibility to be able to take this forward and to find solutions .
I will move forward in a concrete and pragmatic way working on behalf of all 27 Member States .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the NATO Summit has shown that the cooperation between NATO and the European Union which was discussed there is highly important .
NATO remains essential to the collective security of Europe and it is an important means of tying in America .
The summit has made it clear that the missile defence system , which is now safeguarding the whole of Europe as part of a joint NATO project , is an important step towards further cooperation .
However , it also became obvious , and the debate on Afghanistan is an example of this , that there is a high level of civil and military cooperation in an area where the European Union can make a significant contribution .
I believe that we need to develop this accordingly .
However , we must understand that no progress has been made in one decisive area , because the necessary cooperation , which needs to be organised much more effectively , has been vetoed by NATO 's partner Turkey .
Baroness Ashton , I believe that it is extremely important that this question is addressed in the context of the accession negotiations with Turkey .
We should not make NATO and the cooperation between NATO and the European Union into an instrument for use in a dispute with a Member State of the European Union which is not a member of NATO .
For this reason , I believe that the fact that Turkey has not yet taken the necessary steps is having a decisive impact on our ability to act .
Of course , I welcome the fact that the question of arms cooperation indicates that collaboration with the European Defence Agency is possible , with the cyberspace issue , in particular , being of great significance for the agency .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , the NATO Summit in Lisbon has acknowledged the new realities , challenges and non-conventional threats of the post-Cold War world .
On that basis it has tried to establish a new balance between the alliance 's regional and global involvement .
A global NATO , or a NATO with a global role , is a must . Certain consequences are implied .
Firstly , the European Union must prepare itself to assume more responsilities as far as European security and defence are concerned .
This means not only developing and updating our European security and defence concept but also developing our military capabilities .
Secondly , the European Union has a duty to prepare itself to face global challenges and to behave like a truly global player .
This means that we have to redefine our global interest and targets , and increase our military capacities to an extent which will allow us properly to share the burdens of global defence with our American allies .
Thirdly , we have a duty to include in our strategies concerning relations with other global players ideas which will lead towards a system of partnership for defence , with capacity for aggregation within a global defensive pact .
In coping with all these duties , the European Union should not only preserve its strategic connection with NATO but should also be able to make its intellectual and political contribution with regard to maintaining NATO 's ability to deter , and its ability to defend Member States against any aggression , in a context different from the one which determined the birth of the alliance .
Madam President , I believe that the Lisbon Summit is the first since 1999 to make a beneficial contribution in terms of a strategic vision for the Alliance .
I think that a more important consideration in this century is that not only the existing threats and security interests but also , in particular , the ability of defence budgets to offer effective military solutions raise for discussion the issue of a bipolar world .
It was time for a broad analysis to be carried out of the direction in which the Alliance is heading , and certainly if compatibility with Russia is an aspect of it .
However , I must stress that , in my view , compatibility with the European security project is also vital to NATO .
The Afghanistan issue seems to have given a sufficiently large boost to the Alliance and I am pleased to note that Russia has agreed to become involved in NATO 's efforts in Afghanistan .
I hope that this complex problem of Afghanistan will not be one of the causes for concern with regard to this alliance 's future effectiveness .
I also welcome that the European Union has raised the issue of anti-missile technology for discussion .
I believe that we will have to discuss at EU level the effectiveness of this anti-missile shield .

Madam President , Baroness Ashton , the NATO Summit in Lisbon is of great importance for the EU and for Parliament , because we can only manage European security successfully in future if NATO , the EU and other organisations , such as the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) , each make a contribution and cooperate effectively .
However , until now the results of the summit in Lisbon have essentially been glossed over .
I would like to say , with just a hint of irony , that although NATO has a new strategy , it still does not know where it wants to go .
The overblown fantasies of NATO as the world 's police force have been discarded and that certainly represents a certain amount of progress .
It is taking a slightly more modest approach , but there is still not enough clarity .
Let me demonstrate this using some examples .
1 .
One example is arms expenditure .
The Member States of the European Union want to reduce their arms spending by means of permanent , structured cooperation , but NATO is signing uncovered cheques for missile defence .
The Secretary General says that the amount is EUR 200 million , but all the experts believe that the missile defence system is more likely to cost between EUR 40 billion and EUR 70 billion and we do not even know how it will be managed .


2 .
A second example is nuclear disarmament .
President Obama 's Global Zero vision in Prague was impressive and we welcomed it .
Europe was no longer in agreement even at the conference on the non-proliferation treaty , but NATO is determined to hang on to its nuclear deterrent , like a blind person clinging to a lamp post .
Former world powers , in particular , obviously find their nuclear weapons much more attractive than an ambitious European policy for nuclear disarmament .
3 .
The third example is peacebuilding and civil conflict resolution .
The European Union has achieved a great deal in this area .
Then along comes NATO and also wants to be involved .
The next thing that NATO expresses an interest in will be development policy .
Unfortunately , it has a split personality in security policy terms .
Let us bring this to an end .
Let us ensure that we produce a white paper in a year 's time which makes it clear what sort of security policy we want in Europe .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , NATO remains a fundamental element of Europe 's collective security and so does the bridge it builds with America .
At the Lisbon Summit , NATO redefined its place at the heart of the Euro-Atlantic security architecture for its new strategic concept .
My role as Vice-Chair of this Parliament 's delegation to the NATO Parliamentary Assembly has made me more convinced than ever of the value of NATO and of EU cooperation with it .
I am full of admiration for the work of NATO ISAF troops in Afghanistan but regret the lack of participation by some of our allies with restrictive caveats on military engagement , in a situation where defeat , or cutting and running prematurely on the part of NATO , would have incalculable consequences for Western security and for lasting peace in the region - destabilising Pakistan in particular .
Even at a time of austerity , when many Member States are cutting their defence budgets , winning in Afghanistan must be our priority .
I was also recently in Kosovo , where I saw for myself the valuable work being undertaken by NATO troops in KFOR .
NATO 's operation Ocean Shield is working well off the coast of Somalia to combat piracy , although it is in danger of duplicating the work of the larger EU Common Security and Defence Policy mission Atalanta .
I welcome coordination between the two .
I also support NATO enlargement to Georgia and Ukraine one day .
The Cold War is now gone and the threats we face are increasingly asymmetric and global .
I welcome the new approach by NATO of looking at the broader picture , from cyber security to the threats posed by climate change and food security , but the rationale for NATO is as strong today as it ever was when the organisation was first founded 61 years ago .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , the NATO Summit took place in Lisbon , and so I would like to say a few words about what happened in my country in connection with this Summit .
The Portuguese authorities denied entry to the country to European citizens , for one reason only : these citizens were carrying written material that was critical of the Alliance .
The least we can say about these events is that what happened in Portugal was an arbitrary regime , real thought police .
A regime that was so special that it prompted the Portuguese Government to buy five million euros ' worth of anti-riot gear , which did not even arrive in time for the Summit .
These are the priorities of a government that is facing an enormous social crisis .
In the Europe we dream about , freedom of expression is a fundamental value .
The Europe we dream about does not bow down before military organisations that write their history with blood .
The NATO Summit has resulted in the legitimacy of its military intervention anywhere on the planet .
It has also resulted in the European Union becoming subordinate to North America 's military strategy and interests .
Thirdly , it has consolidated the militarisation of access to energy sources .
Finally , military defence has instituted a development model that causes environmental imbalance and disturbs the social crisis .
As a result , I would like to say , Madam President , that in my opinion , with this Summit we lost democracy , we lost freedom , and we lost so that some could win with war .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , thank you for using my full name .
I think we should celebrate the fact that NATO 's Lisbon Summit has strengthened protection for our peace and democracy , in direct contrast to the Treaty of Lisbon which is already doing quite the opposite .
But NATO is threatened by the savage cuts being imposed on European armed forces .
These are deeply dangerous .
It is unforgiveable that the UK Government is slashing spending to below the 2 % base level every NATO member is meant to honour .
It is a false economy too , because defence spending brings good jobs .
Today the British Harrier jet is removed from service .
This month we lost the carrier HMS Ark Royal prematurely with the loss of 6 000 dedicated personnel .
The USA cannot be expected to carry this burden with less and less contribution from us .
We should be under no illusion that the Americans could pull out of NATO , as top British General Dannatt has warned , and leave us to an emboldened Russian bear still prepared to launch cyber attacks against Estonia and to systematically probe British sea and air defences , in disturbing echoes of the Cold War .
( DE ) Madam President , a historic breakthrough at the NATO Summit has been mentioned .
Although the dispute between Germany and France over nuclear disarmament has been settled , the fact is that we will not be able to do without nuclear weapons in future .
This would lay the NATO states open to blackmail from Teheran or Pyongyang .
A world without nuclear weapons and even without dictatorial regimes will remain an illusion while some states are only taken seriously when they join the ranks of the potential or actual nuclear powers .
It is also regrettable that the summit managed to avoid the subject of what will happen in the Middle East after the planned withdrawal of US forces from Iraq , which is an unpleasant topic for the United States .
The much-quoted reversal of Russia 's foreign policy trend has proved , after a closer look , to be just a clever tactical move .
There were declarations of intent relating to terrorism and cyber war , rather than genuine concepts .
In my opinion , the NATO Summit was far from being a breakthrough .
( ES ) Madam President , the new strategic concept of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) , which emerged in Lisbon , was established in order to seek to respond and adapt , firstly to a new context , in other words the disappearance of the system of blockades and the end of the Cold War .
Secondly , it was established in order to adapt to the new configuration of threats , and particularly to globalisation and the fact that our armies do not have apparent enemies and our enemies do not have armies .
Based on this new strategic concept , while taking into consideration Article 5 of the Treaty of Washington regarding mutual assistance , there are three aspects that I am interested in .
Firstly , how to shape this strategic alliance with Europe : Baroness Ashton , I would like to ask you whether you think that Turkey should participate as much as possible in the actions and the development of the common foreign and security policy .
Secondly , regarding the ratification of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty ( START ) by the United States Congress , do you think that this new strategic concept will be affected if it is not ratified ?
Finally , what are your thoughts on the subject of the anti-missile shield ?
Do you think that this notion in any way compromises the goal of reducing nuclear arsenals ?
It seems that there are opposing views on this among the Member States .
( IT ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the new strategic concept developed by NATO contains important , positive changes to meet the challenges of the 21st century in a manner consistent with the values of the Atlantic Pact .
In particular , we welcome the revival of the strategic partnership with Russia , the explicit formulation of the goal of a world without nuclear weapons , the recognition of the importance of a stronger European defence , the reaffirmation of the principle of collective defence and , at the same time , the statements that NATO does not consider any country to be its adversary .
There are still , however , problems and contradictions that this far from new concept does nothing to dispel .
Firstly , there is no clear and unambiguous commitment to the elimination of tactical nuclear weapons , which are still deployed in Europe even though they are strategically anachronistic and economically increasingly unsustainable .
Secondly , the European Union 's role in the strategic concept is still insufficient and the planned civilian crisis management capabilities are at risk of pointlessly duplicating those of the European Union .
We are aware of the political problems that hinder more effective EU-NATO cooperation , but this cannot get in the way of developing an operational perspective , complementarity and synergies that are a match for our ambitions .
Helicopters , medical support and explosives represent significant progress but are not enough : we need vision and an active commitment and we call on you , Baroness Ashton , to deploy them both with strength and clarity .
Madam President , Anders Fogh Rasmussen , Secretary-General of NATO , stated that the NATO-Russia Council Summit which took place in Lisbon provided a historic impulse to improving NATO-Russia relations , which I very much welcome .
Although the NATO-Russia Council Heads of State and Government agreed on a joint ballistic missile threat assessment and decided to resume missile defence cooperation , President Medvedev announced after the summit that Russia will take part in the envisaged joint missile defence system only as an equal and fully fledged partner involved in information exchange and resolving whatever problems .
I would like to point out that equal partners must take equal responsibilities .
There are some significant differences between NATO and Russia when defining security .
While Russia perceives classical military threats to security , NATO on the other hand emphasises the lack of democracy and violation of human rights as a security threat .
In order for Russia to be more closely involved in joint projects within the framework of NATO , I would expect Russia to mainstream democracy , human rights , civil liberties and the rule of law .
To have an equal partnership , NATO and Russia must be on an equal footing on such relevant issues .
Madam President , I would like to welcome Baroness Ashton here .
We have been listening to her comments on other issues and I think they are very interrelated .
It would seem strange now to be very specific , but I would like to mention the further development of CSDP in the framework of general cooperation with NATO .
I think that we really need an outside review of what has happened so far .
You mentioned , on human rights , that it is time to take stock and move on .
I think we need exactly the same with regard to the missions that we have had so far .
I think you have an opportunity to start anew .
You can look back and have an external expertise and a review in order to define more what our priorities really are and what capabilities we need .
I would just like to mention that we have headline goals for 2010 , but now we are at the end of 2010 and we are far from reaching them , including on the civilian side .
The question is how we should move forward and I think it would be good to have a view .
Secondly , I really urge you to use the synergy post , which I hope will now be created in the framework of the setting up of the External Action Service , to strengthen the civilian management capabilities in your service .
We have not had the chance to create new posts but at least should use them to strengthen this area .
My last point , very briefly , is that there is a debate now going on regarding crisis response and national disaster response .
I think we have to be careful there to keep the neutrality of the EU humanitarian response , even if it is sometimes difficult in crisis areas .
I think this is an important issue .
( PL ) Madam President , NATO has , indeed , emerged from the Lisbon Summit in a stronger position .
Article 5 has been revived and does not preclude the ability to mount a defence against a ballistic attack .
The provisions of the new strategy must now be put into effect .
The plan of action on the transatlantic missile defence architecture should be completed not later than the middle of 2011 .
This should also be backed up by money , including from the European partners in NATO .
The signing by Russia of a new START treaty must not mean restrictions on building the NATO antimissile architecture .
In addition , cooperation with Russia in this area must not mean a weakening of the defence of Central Europe .
( PT ) As stated in the conclusion to the NATO Summit that took place in Lisbon , NATO is proving itself to be a military alliance , a nuclear military alliance determined to intervene rapidly and in large numbers in any part of the world , at any time and under any pretext , asserting that it has a single and robust set of political and military capabilities , capable of dealing with any type of crisis : before , during and after conflicts .
As a worrying global threat , NATO states that it is affected by , and it can affect , political and security developments beyond its own borders and that it will therefore become actively involved in improving international security through partnerships with relevant countries and other international organisations .
It is an assertion that reveals two objectives : on the one hand , to assert itself as a type of core from which dependency relationships radiate out , enabling its presence , pressure and intervention by its forces all around the globe .
On the other , to strengthen the path of interventionism and the merger between international security and the internal security of states , thus aiming for the destruction of international law , a direct affront to the role of the United Nations Organisation in its approach to international security issues .
Commanded by one of the powers , the United States , it also aims to strengthen its European pillar , the European Union , considered to be a single and essential partner of NATO .
So the NATO that left Lisbon was larger , more powerful , more dangerous and more covert ; but the threat is considerable , and the response of the Portuguese people was more than thirty thousand people marching through the streets of Lisbon , fighting against and demanding the disbandment of this organisation which is considered to be so essential in defending peace .
- ( SK ) Madam President , even if the negotiations of NATO member state representatives in Lisbon have resolved a number of serious topics regarding security risks in today 's world , the significance of some of the conclusions and decisions will surely have a more dramatic effect on the current political world .
The cautious new attempt at cooperation between NATO and Russia in developing a missile defence system in Europe represents just such a change in security policy , indicating that both the US and Europe may find a powerful new partner in Russia , which perhaps also realises that terrorist groups and militant regimes built on extremist ideologies have become the greatest threat to the peaceful and dignified life of civilised democratic society .
High Representative Ashton , it would be a good thing if we could also translate the words of President Obama , when he said he saw Russia as a partner and not an enemy , into a positive new impulse in the field of economic cooperation .
At a time when European industry is struggling with problems to do with insufficient outlets for its products , an open and solvent market space in the Russian Federation might offer opportunities that would be helpful to both partners - Russia and Europe - in their internal economic problems .
( DE ) Madam President , what will the EU 's responsibilities be with regard to security and defence in the context of the new strategic concept presented by NATO ?
The EU defence ministers have touched on a sore point .
The EU does not have adequate capacity or capabilities .
However , the financial crisis and budget constraints are increasing the pressure within the EU and NATO to concentrate military capabilities .
The terms ' sharing ' and ' pooling ' describe what is now needed .
As soon as the Member States have investigated what is possible , the European Defence Agency must be the main focus of the joint development of capabilities .
In addition , the Commission must expand its cooperation with the European Defence Agency to include EU-funded research and development projects .
Do you share my view ?
Because I had no speaking time on the previous subject , I would like to ask a question about the topic of promoting democracy .
I would like to find out from you how much money has actually been spent on the democracy and human rights instrument without the consent of the governments of the countries in question .
I also have something to say about election observers .
In this area we are inconsistent and sometimes even cowardly .
After parts of the Commission and some Member States had pushed for an election observation mission in Ethiopia and the report by the head of the mission could not be presented in Addis Abeba , it was completely hushed up in Brussels .
What I would like to know is : What has happened to your public protest ?
You now have the opportunity to say something on this subject .
Madam President , indeed both the new strategy concept and the summit declaration recognise loudly and clearly that the EU is a major , and therefore indispensible , partner of the Alliance .
The current international challenges confronting NATO and the EU , their simultaneous presence in a number of theatres of action and , moreover , the increasing complementarity between their respective roles require that the relations between the two organisations be strengthened .
In that regard , and taking into account the necessary collaboration in theatres of action and - inevitably - the revision of the Berlin Plus agreements , both organisations expect more concrete results from the discussions between the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative and the Secretary-General , in accordance with their respective mandates and , in that respect , the time has come to be imaginative in finding the right political compromise to allow for an unblocking of the current mechanical deadlock and permit both organisations to achieve their truly collaborative potential .
( ES ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , you are perfectly aware that my parliamentary group is against the existence of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) .
My group is entirely against its existence , among other things because we do not support any state in the world - or any group of states , such as the NATO military alliance - being able to use force without a specific mandate from the United Nations Security Council .
In 1999 at its Washington Summit , NATO approved in its strategic concept the possibility of using force without a mandate from the Security Council .
This is a backward step , and a head-on attack on the system of international law that took so much to construct following the two world wars .
We do not , therefore , agree with this philosophy .
We do not share it with NATO nor with any state that claims the right to use force without that express mandate .
Moreover , it has a direct impact on what were civil responses to problems that generate insecurity : organised crime , terrorism , and so on .
They had never been matters requiring a military response , but rather a civil one through the international police sphere and the judicial sphere .
We do not therefore consider that they require a military response , nor the associated risk to natural resources and uncontrolled mass migration .
These are not matters requiring a military response .
The biggest causes of death in the world are hunger and poverty - the biggest weapon of mass destruction - and a military force such as NATO cannot fight them .
Madam President , the question is whether we are happy with the Lisbon outcome and I have a very mixed answer .
It is insufficient , although it goes in the right direction .
Could we have expected more ?
I think yes , but if you compare it to where we were two , three or four years ago , it is much better .
Clearly there is unused potential in relations between the two , but there are more words than deeds and we need more deeds than words .
For the moment , there is a lot of talk about rapprochement , but these are declarations rather than concrete steps .
At the same time , there is increasing complementarity between the two .
There is a certain expertise and there are capabilities on the Union side .
The Union specialises more on soft power , NATO more on hard , military power , but both sides evolve .
The EU has gone a long way since St Malo to affirm its role in security and defence , and NATO in turn has acknowledged the need to broaden its purely military domain by a softer dimension and has already taken the decisions .
Hence both are coming closer , hence complementarity is growing .
Why not use it ?
The real stumbling block is the relationship between Turkey and Cyprus and the unsolved problem of Cyprus .
The role of the Union is to take the lead , to undertake initiatives , to suggest to NATO means of closer cooperation , to pass from words to deeds , and I take the example of the recent letter by the Polish , German and French Foreign Ministers , to which Lady Ashton did react , as a good starting point in the right direction .
Closer EU-NATO cooperation via political will on both sides and the strengthening of CSDP , but there is also a role for , and a job to be done in , the capitals of both NATO and EU Member States .
( PT ) Madam President , what is contained within the NATO Strategic Concept , adopted in Lisbon , with regard to the doctrine of nuclear deterrence is not new , it is old .
The Alliance has decided to retain nuclear weapons as the ultimate deterrent power .
Ironically , this contradicts calls by President Obama for a world free of nuclear weapons and the disarmament promised during the last NPT Review Conference .
The Alliance should lead by example , but this will not deter nuclear proliferation - tragically , it will encourage it .
And in times of financial crisis , it diverts resources required for other threats with which we are confronted .
What use are nuclear bombs against terrorism without address or sender , against piracy in the Indian Ocean , against organised crime , cyber-attacks , or chemical and biological attacks ?
The Council of the European Union issued a statement this week about the need to increase our efforts against nuclear proliferation .
Mrs Ashton , what plans do you have to play this card within NATO , where 21 of the 28 allies are also members of the European Union ?
And what do you have to say to the two nuclear powers that are members of the European Union and that have also been most resistant to attempts at change by the NATO Strategic Council in connection with this existential question for the whole of humanity ?
( EL ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , I think that we are living in an absurd world and that you have been elected to play a role in it , in order to mitigate this irrationality absurdity .
As everyone has noted , the war in Afghanistan cost over USD three hundred billion .
The cost of eradicating poverty in Afghanistan is equal to the cost of five days ' war .
The cost of just one week 's operations is enough to run six thousand schools .
USD three hundred billion could have been used to build two hundred thousand schools .
The same money could have been used to build thirty thousand hospitals .
Do the sums and you will see .
I am talking about hospitals costing USD ten million each .
Do we need more information in order to understand that we are living in an absurd world ?
If we divided this money between all the families in Europe living below the poverty line , there would be enough money for every family . Does anyone believe that ?
Twenty thousand three hundred and fifty-five euros each for twenty-seven million families .
Where does this absurd road lead ?
It leads to ΝΑΤΟ .
I therefore call upon Baroness Ashton , who has a leading position in the European Union , to play a catalytic role , so that this organisation is abolished from the inside .
( FR ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , I share your opinion on the Lisbon Summit which has come up with a new strategic concept which is satisfactory overall .
However , we should nonetheless recognise , in all honesty , that the poor relation of this text is , in view of the potential of this strategic partnership , the European Union-NATO relationship , which should be a great deal more ambitious .
You rightly noted the successes and progress of capability development .
You noted successes , obviously , in the case of Afghanistan , where we are managing to reach compromises on the ground .
However , it is unsatisfactory that we do not have a structured political dialogue with NATO , apart from the single case of Bosnia We all know that the problem is that of Turkey .
We are going to have to deal with it seriously , no doubt pragmatically , and I hope that the efforts you are making with Secretary General Rasmussen will bear fruit .
I briefly want to say that the problem of duplication is often advanced to highlight the weaknesses of the European Union and to limit the European Union 's aspiration to be ambitious .
This is a false problem because there are not two armies in our Member States , a NATO army and a European Union army .
There is an armed force in each country and it is up to the country to choose whether to place its troops under the NATO banner or the European Union banner .
Let us stop scaremongering with this notion of duplication .
I would like to say a word about complementarity : it is essential and must be applied intelligently .
I would not want to see complementarity becoming an imperative with the European Union becoming the Red Cross of what would be a NATO armed force .
The European Union must keep its military capabilities , hold onto its military ambitions and must retain its ambition in the case of the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) as was pointed out in the tripartite Franco-German and Polish letter .
( ES ) Madam President , the Lisbon Summit certainly served to modernise the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) and adapt it to the new security challenges .
We must welcome the fact that the new strategic concept adds new challenges , such as terrorism , combating the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , cyber-defence and energy security .
It is also to be welcomed that the new concept highlights the need to strengthen the strategic relationship between NATO and the European Union .
However , a clear division of tasks needs to be determined , in order o be efficient and not duplicate efforts in times of crisis .
The Treaty of Lisbon was a step forward in the common security and defence policy , which we must now consolidate .
The objective is clear : the European Union must be capable of mobilising the necessary civil and military capacity to be able to take on its international responsibilities , and the common security and defence policy should make a significant contribution to Atlantic security .
What is not clear , however , is how this cooperation with the Alliance is going to be organised in order for it to be genuinely effective .
It would be significant , Baroness Ashton , if you could tell us something more in this respect .
( PL ) Madam President , Mrs Ashton , the question has , in fact , been asked in this discussion , today , as to why in the European Parliament - an EU institution - we are talking about the NATO Summit .
The answer is obvious .
Most of the Member States of the European Union are members of NATO , so the European Union means us and in most cases NATO also means us .
It should , therefore , be noted that , for NATO , development of European Union-NATO cooperation was one of the most important matters discussed at the summit in Lisbon .
The decisions of the NATO Summit , and also the declarations , for example , of the President of the United States , confirm that NATO is not resisting the common security and defence policy , but is trying , rather , to find a way of cooperation which is beneficial to both institutions .
Therefore , we , too , must seek to cooperate and work together instead of engaging in senseless competition and expensive duplication of structures , especially today at a time of financial crisis .
I hope the decisions made at the NATO Summit and the letter from the foreign ministers of France , Germany and Poland , which has been mentioned , here , will persuade us - the European Union - to begin a serious debate on the common security and defence policy .
Poland - I am a Member from Poland - will certainly support you , Mrs Ashton , in this work during the Polish Presidency .
We must make use of the mechanisms and opportunities which the Treaty of Lisbon gives us .
This is a great challenge for us .
Finally , I would like to say that I welcome the NATO declaration on openness to cooperation with Russia , a declaration which also stresses NATO 's readiness to be open and to receive new states , such as Georgia , for example .
Madam President , the European Union is a unique and essential partner for NATO .
As a document of the new strategy concept puts it , NATO and the European Union can and should play complementary and mutually reinforcing roles in supporting international peace and security .
An active and effective European Union contributes to the overall security of the Euro-Atlantic area .
Therefore , more favourable circumstances should be developed by strengthening the strategic partnership in the spirit of full mutual openness , transparency , complementarity and respect for the autonomy and institutional integrity of both organisations .
We should also point out that close cooperation between the EU and NATO is of vital importance , and this should be developed without prejudice to the principle of decision-making autonomy and with due respect for the nuclear status of some EU Member States .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the NATO Summit has made good progress .
It is good that it is being discussed here .
New strategic elements , such as civil crisis management and cyber defence , are moves in the right direction .
In particular for small , neutral countries like Austria , strengthening the strategic partnership between NATO and the European Union is of decisive importance .
Developing military capacity by increasing synergy , reducing duplication and improving arms cooperation will help everyone , but especially the small Member States .
There is still quite a lot to be done , in particular for us .
Europe must set itself some homework and make sure that it is completed .
The initiative of the French , German and Polish foreign ministers represents a step in the right direction .
In the medium term , we need a European defence architecture which promotes military cooperation between the EU Member States , which brings together civil and military cooperation between the EU , the UN and NATO and which gradually develops European defence structures .
Our goal must be to become an important security partner in the world .
We need to work on this .
( RO ) Madam President , the Lisbon Summit outlined a new perspective on the Alliance 's security strategy .
In practical terms , three major objectives were achieved : the new strategic concept was adopted , a new approach to Afghanistan was devised , not to mention the fact that new impetus was given to relations with the Russian Federation .
I think that the most important outcome was the integration of the anti-missile shield into the new strategic concept .
Romania has advocated the establishment of the shield since the Bucharest Summit in 2008 .
This indicates that my country had a suitable vision and will make a significant contribution to implementing the defence system .
At the same time , Romania has supported the open-door policy , aimed especially at strengthening NATO relations with Georgia and Ukraine .
I also welcome the fact that NATO reaffirmed the Black Sea region 's strategic importance , given the security risks that are predominant in this area .
They concern in particular the unresolved conflicts in Transnistria and Georgia .
In this respect , I feel that the Alliance must maintain a united front in the announcements made to Russia .
The Russian Federation must demonstrate by deeds its statements of good intentions as it has a firm responsibility to the eastern border of Romania and NATO .
I must stress that , as a result of the political declaration that has been adopted , NATO has assumed its commitment to the territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova and Georgia .
( EL ) Madam President , the historic NATO Summit in Lisbon was a turning point for the future of the alliance .
Twenty-eight allies made important decisions , adopted a new defence doctrine , laid the foundations for closer cooperation with Russia , clarified the question of the anti-missile shield , approved an action plan on Afghanistan and confirmed the importance of cooperation with the European Union .
However , this is the general and optimistic view .
We should not forget that , as the result of consensus , these texts express the lowest common denominator of positions and views .
We all know that , in a post-cold war environment , there are discrepancies in and varying degrees of perception of threat .
Eastern European countries have a different view of relations with Russia and Turkey has a different perception of Iran 's nuclear programme .
We also know that Ankara waged a diplomatic war to prevent any reference to this in the Lisbon text .
Ankara also takes a different approach to cooperation with the common security and defence policy , because it wants to exclude cooperation with one European partner and Member State of the Union .
All this makes the role of the common security and defence policy even more important , within the context , of course , of Euro / NATO cooperation .
That is why I believe that the European Union needs to take full advantage of the new opportunities afforded to us by the Treaty of Lisbon , by retaining independent powers of decision .
We need to raise the Union 's international profile and reinforce its international presence .
We need a stronger Europe , so that we can have a stronger Atlantic alliance .
( EL ) Madam President , I agree with the High Representative 's take on the Lisbon Summit .
It really was an important turning point and an important moment .
Transatlantic relations are the key to world safety and development but , on the other hand , the European Union must , where necessary , have its own voice and its own structures .
The cost cuts mentioned earlier will be generated from this cooperation , both at equipment level and in civil decisions , without the need or the facility to change the NATO alliance .
Europe must have its own defence system and security system and its own voice , because only then will it be able to address problems , such as the problem with Turkey or other problems with NATO members or non-members which take a different approach to Russia .
Besides , I do not think that the issue with Russia is a difficult issue .
I think it is an issue which Europe can handle overall , at the same time as the American side is handling it .
Perhaps Europe can handle it even more effectively .
Madam President , enlargement of NATO could be seen as one of the few true post-Cold War success stories .
However , the momentum of enlargement has weakened .
NATO has remained rather hesitant in opening up to Georgia or Macedonia .
Military contributions have decreased alarmingly .
Very few NATO members meet the 2 % criteria for defence expenditure and the Alliance has not conducted serious military exercises for more than one decade .
The last such big exercise to prove that the US could move troops rapidly into Europe took place 17 years ago .
True , the Soviet Union has collapsed .
However , NATO 's credibility and potential still relies on US military might .
It is vitally important that NATO 's military institutions remain well integrated and that military commanders from America and Europe have the possibility to practice together .
Only under conditions of much closer and more determined transatlantic cooperation will the EU and NATO be able to set a democratic international agenda over the next decade against the challenges of a multilateral world .
I would also like to comment on the conclusions of the NATO-Russia Council .
It calls for a modernised partnership based on reciprocal confidence , transparency and predictability .
It may be taken as a declaration of goodwill .
However , we know that Russia 's military doctrine still views NATO expansion into Russia 's neighbourhood as an aggression and justifies preventive military strikes and landings on foreign territories .
Big military exercises in autumn 2009 in north-west Russia close to the territories of the Baltic States prepared for invasion of these states as a counter-attack , presumably against NATO actions .
What is positive is that the Baltic States finally got NATO contingency plans for their defence , as exposed also by WikiLeaks .
Georgia was invaded by Russia and two of its autonomous territories practically annexed .
Just recently , Russia 's missiles were deployed in these breakaway entities and Russia continues massive spying in all Western countries .
When these spies are exposed , it is the West that feels embarrassment , not Russia , which decorates its spies openly with the highest state awards .
Therefore , Russian insistence on equality in relations with NATO and some sort of joint decision-making is premature and carries a risk of a Russian veto on NATO 's decisions and further enlargement .
- ( SK ) Madam President , at the Lisbon Summit , NATO confirmed its role as guarantor of security in the Euro-Atlantic area , and also acknowledged that it has new challenges to confront .
The best instrument for performing this role is a broad network of strategic partnerships , whether with states or with international organisations .
NATO must therefore be prepared to enter into political dialogue with every potential partner who shares our common effort for peace and secure international relations .
In my opinion , the key strategic partnership is the cooperation with Russia , where NATO needs to strengthen practical cooperation in order to be able to confront the modern threats of international terrorism , piracy , human trafficking and drug trafficking .
NATO needs sufficient financial , military and human resources to be able to fulfil its mission .
It is necessary , however , for these resources to be used as efficiently as possible , and mainly for securing peace .

( SL ) Madam President , I am pleased to have been given the floor before Mr Goerens , my colleague from Luxemburg , because otherwise that would have undermined the basic point that I am going to make , that we who have been speaking here for the past half hour have been mainly members from South-Eastern Europe .
That should tell you that , for us , the questions of security , NATO and NATO 's relationship with the European Union are slightly more significant than they are for other nations .
For precisely that reason , I would like to say that those who attended the Lisbon Summit have passed up an opportunity to take a clearer and more principled and decisive stance on the wishes of two countries in South-Eastern Europe , Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina , to strengthen their security by joining at least one of the EU or NATO .
When we in Slovenia were nearing membership of these two institutions , we said that either would do .
NATO has the opportunity to correct mistakes that are made by the European Union .
I think that we need to take this into account .
( PL ) Madam President , thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to speak .
This discussion , today , is about cooperation between NATO and the Union .
Mrs Ashton has given us , here , a positive assessment , but I want to say that , in my opinion , it is an assessment which is greatly exaggerated .
My fellow Members from Poland , Mr Saryusz-Wolski and Mr Lisek , have already spoken , and I want to say clearly that I agree with their evaluation .
This is only the beginning , and it is the beginning of a very long road .
In relation to this , I would like to draw attention to three pragmatic aspects where we can see common progress .
The first area concerns the joint defence planning of NATO and the European Union - here it is clear that more can be done .
The second area should concern cooperation between intelligence services - here , too , progress can be made .
Lastly , the third matter concerns the operation of combat groups - the question needs to be asked as to whether , today , they give added value .
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to put a question to Baroness Ashton concerning the Europe of defence and also NATO .
The Treaty of Lisbon allows the Member States of the European Union to cooperate more closely in defence matters , if they so wish , of course .
This is called ' structured cooperation ' or ' enhanced cooperation ' , it hardly matters which .
Can Baroness Ashton tell me whether cooperation of this nature has already been considered by a group of countries and if so , where appropriate , can you tell me the criteria to be met to qualify for this type of cooperation ?
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , thank you again to all those who have contributed to a very wide-ranging debate .
I will , if I may , try and pick up some of the key points that were made and at least begin to give you responses to that .
The first thing to say is that I am committed to trying to find ways forward in the relationship between the European Union and NATO , but I do not underestimate the political issues that sit at the heart of this question .
My objective is to find practical and pragmatic ways in which increased collaboration can help support our people on the ground .
The people in theatre , the people in operations , are those who are most in my thoughts when I look at how we can collaborate together .
But I do so with the knowledge that Turkey has an important role to play , and I do so in the knowledge that I represent 27 Member States , and I work closely with the Member States who are most interested and affected by the issues at hand .
We are moving forward to try and achieve that as swiftly as we possibly can .
But I do not underestimate the challenges , and I am always looking at and interested in ideas for how we might do that .
I accept that we want also to look very carefully at what we do ourselves and make sure that what we do is complementary and not duplicating other work .
Actually the areas that we are working in are indeed very complementary .
The example that was given earlier was of Ocean Shield off the coast of Somalia and the work we are doing with Operation Atalanta .
Honourable Members who have visited the area will know it is a huge expanse of sea , where there is plenty of room for complementary activity and very little risk of duplication , and indeed the services work very well together .
Commander Howes who is in charge of Operation Atalanta at the present time was speaking with the defence ministers , making this very point that indeed there was a lot of connectivity in communication , but an awful lot of work that can be done satisfactorily together .
Mr Gahler raised a number of points which were not connected to this debate and I would just like to suggest to him that if he writes me a quick note about those issues I am happy to come back to him , but I did not want to take Parliament 's time this evening on issues that were not on this debate itself .
Concerning questions about missile defence , as far as I can see what happened was that a balance was found during those negotiations on NATO 's new strategic concept between the issues of missile defence and NATO 's nuclear posture .
It is clear that NATO will want to retain its nuclear deterrents while keeping with the objective that it set itself on a nuclear-free world .
That is the approach we are taking today but of course we do not participate in all aspects of NATO for exactly the reasons that have been well understood in this House .
We were not participating , for example , in the NATO-Russia Council meetings so it is not possible for me to comment on what happened there , only , as I have already done , to comment on the issues that came out of it .
In terms of START , the progress we have seen between the United States and Russia on demilitarisation is to be welcomed and I believe will pave the way for better coordination with NATO , which was certainly the objective that the Secretary-General has set himself .
Finally , structured cooperation : will it happen , what is being done ?
It is indeed for Member States to come forward with ideas .
There are already examples where Member States , such as the UK and France , or in the letter that has come to me from the Weimar Triangle Group , have been looking at ways in which they can enhance that collaboration , partly through the European Defence Agency as well , where we have opportunities to try and develop those synergies as appropriate .
I hope and expect to see more of that in the future .
Particularly I expect this with the forthcoming presidencies , especially with Poland which has made defence issues something they wish to focus on .
There are no examples I can give the honourable Member that would suggest there is an opportunity to join in , but I hope that we will see objectives coming forward that enhance the possibilities of being able , in this economic crisis , to use our resources most effectively .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
At the meeting of the ministers of NATO member states in October 2008 , General John Craddock , commander of the NATO forces in Europe , stated that Russia 's military action in Georgia prompted NATO to revise its basic assumption concerning the security of its member states .
Does this statement still hold true now , after the Lisbon Summit ?
The agreement with Russia is an expedient political step , which could serve the reinforcement of our security .
However , it inevitably raises serious moral and strategic questions as well .
Does NATO intend to yield , for the sake of cooperation , the representation and protection of the democratic ideas on which the Euro-Atlantic alliance is based , and which are in sharp contrast to the Russian concept of democracy on several points ?
It is perhaps unnecessary to give a separate reminder of the intimidation and abuse of people , and the unclear details of the deaths of journalists and lawyers in Russia .
It would also be hard not to interpret Russia 's recent nomination of Wikileaks founder Julian Assange for the Nobel Prize for Peace as a provocative gesture .
Will it lessen the chances of countries intending to join NATO if Russia does not approve of their future membership ?
We are faced with the question whether NATO leaders are taking into consideration the vulnerability of certain member states , as well as their open and unsettled issues with Russia that exist to this day .
The historic direction of peace-making and agreement must at any rate be welcomed .
However , we must clearly recognise the historic responsibility of NATO in what major power it legitimises as a consequence of the agreement concluded for the missile defence programme , and what it will firmly oppose , true to our common European values .
The NATO Summit that took place in Lisbon put an end to the strategic security concept that had been in place since the Cold War .
The implementation of this new security strategy represents a move from the traditional defence of member countries of the Atlantic Alliance to a concept of global security for the 21st century .
The challenges that the new strategic security concept emphasises involve close cooperation with the various international institutions , both governmental and non-governmental , and the strengthening of partnerships , particularly with Russia .
In addition to the establishment of political channels , operational questions relating to capabilities and the structure of NATO itself have been adapted to new global threats .
It is also important to highlight the adoption by NATO of a mission transition plan for Afghanistan , with the objective of the Afghan authorities taking the lead in matters of national security .
I believe this new strategic vision , which creates guidelines on which the international relations of the Member States should be based , is extremely important .
in writing . - For the first time since the Second World War , Russia has been invited to join the missile shield effort , something which can only be marked as a milestone for the Alliance .
Russia 's answer remains to be seen , and there is potentially a real partnership with the US , whereby both would have to come to the table committed .
Furthermore , this project needs major European financing , and this is not going to be easy with European defence cuts .
Lastly , Afghanistan will be the big political test for NATO in the years to come .
The US acted quickly to reassure Russia that the missiles were in fact not targeted at them .
It was crucial for the US not to aggravate Russia , and they proved they had no such intention by also inviting Russia to take part in the missile shield scheme .
Secondly , the US was wise enough not to mention the name of Iran or , to put it correctly , granted the wishes of Turkey , which threatened to back out if its neighbour ( Iran ) was mentioned .
The problem is that only 21 of the 27 EU Member States are in NATO , posing a threat to the development of European defence .
Situation in Côte d 'Ivoire ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire is very precarious , as lives are at risk - the lives of Ivorian citizens but also of many Europeans who are living and working in the country .
I believe important issues are at stake , not only the role which Côte d 'Ivoire plays in Africa , but also the vast work done by the international community over the past 10 years to support crisis resolution and enhance stability .
Presidential elections have been due for several years .
In the end , it is a credit to the Ivorian people , to the work of the United Nations with the support of the international community and , in particular I must say , to the European Union and the facilitator , President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso , that these elections could finally take place .
All candidates had agreed beforehand the ground rules of the election .
These included a special role for the UN Secretary-General 's Special Representative , Mr Choi , in certifying the election results .
A European electoral observation mission was sent to the country headed by Mr Cristian Preda , MEP .
I thank him for his work and I believe he will be speaking shortly .
It concluded that the elections were held in democratic conditions .
I do thank and congratulate Mr Preda and his team for their courage as well as their excellent work , carried out in difficult circumstances .
The results were proclaimed by the Independent Electoral Commission and certified by the special representative of the UN Secretary-General .
President Barroso and I were among the first to congratulate President Ouattara on his victory .
The international community has been unanimous in recognising him .
ECOWAS and the African Union have been crystal clear in their message .
Mr Ouattara is the legitimate President of Côte d 'Ivoire .
On 3 December the ACP-EU Parliamentary Assembly was equally unambiguous in its declaration .
We are calling on all political forces in Côte d 'Ivoire to respect the electoral outcome , to show responsibility and to refrain from any act of violence .
All efforts should now be focused on the achievement of a peaceful transfer of power .
UN resolutions provide for targeted measures against those who obstruct the peaceful transition and the elections .
African bodies have already resorted to sanctions on Côte d 'Ivoire .
The EU is ready to assume its responsibilities regarding targeted measures , and we have clearly said so this week in the Council with the EU Foreign Ministers , but we are also prepared to take measures to support the legally elected authorities .
The developments in Côte d 'Ivoire are being followed closely by many actors and by public opinion , particularly in Africa and especially in neighbouring countries , many of which are also in a post-conflict situation and undergoing difficult democratic transition .
The outcome of the present constitutional crisis in Côte d 'Ivoire will send a strong signal to all forces on the African continent , both those in favour of democracy and those who are against .
The response of the European Union to this crisis is vital .
As a major player in the international community , our role will be enhanced , and our credibility as a global champion of democracy improved , if our action can contribute to a peaceful handover of power in accordance with the will of the people of Côte d 'Ivoire , clearly expressed in free and fair elections .
Madam President , Baroness Ashton , I was , indeed , in Côte d 'Ivoire to lead this European Union election observation mission .
I shall begin by referring to the courage and commitment of observers from 26 countries , more than 100 people , 120 observers who were on the ground and who carried out a magnificent job .
They noted , in the first place , that the citizens of Côte d 'Ivoire were saying , more or less on all sides : ' We are tired ' .
That was the key word , the chorus which meant , indeed , that the elections were seen as the end of a political crisis .
Everyone wanted all that to come to an end with these elections .
There is one exception , the outgoing President , Mr Gbagbo , who refused to give up power and who provided himself with the resources to prevent this crisis from coming to an end by setting up a partisan constitutional council which quite simply annulled the results that were favourable to his opponent .
This means that today , instead of calm , instead of an exit from crisis , there is an even more complicated crisis , with an already very precarious balance and now the beginnings of a confrontation .
Further I would say that it is now really very difficult to avoid confrontation .
You just have to look at what happened with the vote in the barracks , in the first and the second ballot .
We are unfortunately faced with an extremely delicate situation .
I would not wish to finish without expressing my appreciation of Baroness Ashton , for her commitment to resolving this matter .
I would like to put a question to her , as I have noted that the Council has announced that restrictive measures are to be adopted shortly : can it be said when these restrictive measures will be adopted ?

on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I would first like to congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Preda , and his team on the remarkable work they have done .
I would also like to congratulate Baroness Ashton , High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , on the determination she has shown with the entire international community in monitoring these elections .
For those of us who are absolutely committed to electoral observation missions , which are an extraordinary tool for encouraging democracy in a country , the fact that there was such a rapid and determined follow-up after an attempt to illegitimately appropriate the result of the elections warmed our hearts and we hope that this may happen in other contexts if ever , alas , the situation should call for it .
Now , I would also like to say - because I have been told it often enough - that President Ouattara is not the candidate of Europe .
The entire international community mobilised , which is extraordinary : the African Union , the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) , the United Nations , Europe , and so on with a single voice , and that marks a historic milestone .
Now , on the issue of Mr Ouattara wanting to put his militants onto the streets , I am , of course , somewhat more concerned , because I cannot see any peaceful solutions in the streets in the context of opposing forces .
I would like to mention a document , which is currently being drafted in the ACP countries and which had already been discussed in Kinshasa at the last ACP meeting , which some of us attended .
Its title is extraordinary : ' Challenges for the future of democracy and respect for the constitutional order ' .
An African representative and a European representative are responsible for drafting it .
There are a great many legal things in this text and three pages are devoted to the sharing of power if one of the parties tries to gain power illegitimately .
These three pages of advice describe the path to follow to prevent the situation from turning into a blood bath .
It is perhaps not in the streets but perhaps through negotiations aimed at sharing a certain form of power that a blood bath is likely to be prevented .
Pressure must first be exerted , of course , to ensure that the winner is acknowledged .
I advise you to read this document .
It is very informative and it showed me that , although African political culture does not know much about democracy , it certainly knows a lot about how to negotiate .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , it is just a few hours since the partisans of Ouattara reached the headquarters of the government and of Ivorian Radio and Television and I want to express my concern , because the risk of clashes and confrontation is clearly significant and absolutely real .
Our first responsibility this evening is to call for calm and dialogue .
However , this is also the responsibility of the main Ivorian leaders .
Both the outgoing President and the President-elect must do all they can to prevent violence breaking out again in a country that has suffered far too much for years .
That is the first message .
The second message is that , from the start , the international community , Europe of course , but also the African Union , have spoken with one voice .
They mobilised to ensure that the result of the election was respected .
This pressure must continue and sanctions must be applied .
Laurent Gbagbo must accept defeat .
Alassane Ouattara must work tirelessly for the reconciliation of his people .
For our part , it is imperative that we do not slacken in our efforts until the situation has stabilised .
I should like to thank you in advance , High Representative , for bearing these messages , especially this evening .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , like those who have preceded me , I clearly deplore the seriousness of the situation today , the acute political crisis and also the risk of clashes that could well break out in the hours to come .
Therefore , I obviously welcome the univocal position taken by the entire international community and I think that , beyond the need to uphold democracy , we have a responsibility not only to save the Ivorian people but also to give a clear signal that alternation of power in Africa is possible .
Beyond the issue of the Ivorian people themselves , their security and the tensions affecting this country , and which could affect it in the days and months to come , the issues also concern the neighbouring countries .
There will be elections in other , neighbouring countries , where the issue of the alternation of an outgoing President and a new President could arise .
I think it is extremely important that , in Côte d 'Ivoire , without in any way prejudging the result , the issue of democratic alternation can be decided peacefully , in a negotiated way , with the support of the international community and in opposition to all those who , given this opportunity , would cause blood baths or , at the very least , take the civil population hostage .
This is important not only because these people have already suffered enough , but also because it will serve as an example for the neighbouring countries , and I am obviously thinking of the Congo , which will no doubt be in an electoral period in the coming year , in 2011 .
I welcome your statements on how to monitor , exert and keep the pressure on in the coming months in order to preserve peace .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL .
Group - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are all concerned about the serious crisis in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Naturally , the decision of the Constitutional Council of this country to challenge the election results officially proclaimed by the Independent Electoral Commission , in violation of the electoral code , is unanimously condemned by the international community .
The European Union , the United Nations ( UN ) , the African Union , the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) and , certainly soon , the European Parliament , demand respect for the official proclamation of the election results and the installation of the new President of the Republic , who has been recognised by the Independent Electoral Commission , which , I recall , is a body validated by the UN .
All the political groups of the European Parliament have expressed their agreement on these crucial issues in a joint declaration .
They have also called for action to curb any escalation of tension in the country , which could lead to civil war , which would be a human , social and economic disaster for Côte d 'Ivoire , which must , of course , be prevented at all costs .
( IT ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , democracy is a non-negotiable value , just as the results of a popular consensus are non-negotiable : participation , representation and popular sovereignty are a measure of the maturity of a democratic system .
The events taking place in Côte d 'Ivoire , which observers have reported with objectivity , are causing serious damage to an electoral process that should have been over by now .
The people 's choice was clear and unambiguous , yet the outgoing but still acting leader of government Mr Gbagbo has not yet been replaced with the incoming leader Mr Outtara .
This is unacceptable to the European Parliament as it is unacceptable to anyone who believes in justice .
Through its political manipulations , the Constitutional Council confirmed in office the outgoing leader , who unfortunately continues to be the acting representative of Côte d 'Ivoire .
All this threatens to fuel tensions and riots that are not easy to control .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) cannot accept that the popular vote is subverted by these Machiavellian manoeuvres .
We therefore ask that the citizens , who have freely expressed their choice through their consensus , be put in a position where they can be governed by the person whom they have all chosen in unison .
The United Nations is backing us in this process .
Naturally , we are asking for this troubled crisis to be brought to an end in a reasonably short time and we place our trust in an authoritative intervention by Baroness Ashton , so that Europe can speak with authority and prestige through the highest office in international relations .
( FR ) Madam President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , the elections in Côte d 'Ivoire have just taken place .
The international community tolerated their being postponed year after year by the regime of Laurent Gbagbo .
These successive reports alerted a number of us to the difficulties in which we find ourselves at the moment but , deep within ourselves , we hoped that the democratic spirit would prevail in a country that has suffered a great deal from sterile and unacceptable confrontations focused , in particular , around the concept of Ivorian nationality .
The international community and , in particular , the European Union around Baroness Ashton and through my fellow Member , Mr Preda , mobilized to ensure that these elections took place under the best possible conditions , transparently and without violence .
This should be commended .
In view of the calm that prevailed and the atmosphere of mutual respect among candidates , the electoral campaign gave us cause to hope that the result would be accepted by all the parties .
Today , unfortunately , the democratic result that emerged through the ballot box has been rejected by the outgoing President .
Tomorrow , like my fellow Members , I will therefore vote in favour of appealing to Mr Gbagbo to accept that what appears to him to be a reversal of fortune or a conspiracy is , in fact , simply the will of the majority of his citizens .
He cannot hang on to power without calling into question part of his own militant history , which was to appear , when resident in Europe , as the man who had brought about the newly regained freedom and democracy established in his country .
The United Nations representative in Côte d 'Ivoire courageously assumed his role and announced the results of the ballot .
As First Vice-President of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I would also like to point out that a declaration was adopted by our Assembly on 3 December in Kinshasa firmly condemning the decision of the Ivorian Constitutional Council for invalidating the results .
This declaration comes on top of the clear and unambiguous position taken by the leaders of the Member States of the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) and of the African Union .
Today , the regime of Mr Gbagbo is neither wanted by its citizens , nor supported by its neighbours , nor accepted by the international community .
It is therefore time that he accepted the victory of Alassane Ouattara , the democratically elected President of Côte d 'Ivoire , who must be in a position to take on the responsibility entrusted to him by his people as soon as possible .
Madam President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to conclude by asking the European Union to assume its role through the means at its disposal to persuade Laurent Gbagbo and his illegitimate government to accept that the game is over .
We will not allow his obstinacy to lead to chaos in Côte d 'Ivoire .

( FR ) Madam President , were it not for the ego of Mr Gbagbo , Côte d 'Ivoire would be a source of inspiration for all developing countries longing for democracy .
Indeed , during the last elections , the Ivorian people showed great political maturity .
Moreover , the international bodies , starting with the United Nations , are not in the least bit impressed by the final machinations of a bad loser .
Mr Gbagbo should go away .
There is no other way for him to keep the bit of dignity he has left .
Until now , the European Union has reacted appropriately , especially at the level of targeting sanctions .
Sanctions must not be imposed on the people , who have expressed themselves in an exemplary fashion , but on Mr Gbagbo and those close to him .
My question to Baroness Ashton is ' What steps do you intend to take if the situation were to degenerate and the use of force were to threaten both the Ivorian citizens and the expatriates living in Côte d 'Ivoire ?
Furthermore , do you think that ECOWAS and the African Union have sufficient capacity to deal with this problem ? '
( IT ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire is a test case and a test case we cannot afford to fail .
This applies to the European Union above all because there is no way we can acknowledge a stolen victory but neither is there any way we can stop exerting maximum pressure on the Ivorian leaders over this massive fraud .
Furthermore , it will not be acceptable for a single euro from European taxpayers to end up in or even pass through an illegal government that disregards even the most elementary rules of democracy .
Côte d 'Ivoire must be made aware of this .
Côte d 'Ivoire is now also a test case for the African Union , which is dealing with the situation in a very interesting way , so far showing a degree of firmness and unity that would have been unthinkable only 10 or 15 years ago .
This is a sign that the Ivorian affair should not be exploited to revive old stereotypes of black Africa being incompatible with democracy .

Even though we hover on the brink of widespread violence , which would be catastrophic , Ivorian society is so far also passing this difficult test : it gave a majority to the reformist candidate Mr Outtara and appears to have learned the lesson of the great Ivorian writer Ahmadou Kourouma , who in 1998 published a book with the apt title ' En attendant les votes des bêtes sauvages ' ( Waiting for the Wild Beasts to Vote ) , which tells this very story from a democratic and very Ivorian standpoint
( RO ) Madam President , the elections in Côte d 'Ivoire have resulted in an unprecedented situation after both candidates in the presidential elections claimed victory and each appointed a prime minister .
There is only one legitimate president : President Ouattara .
I think that all political forces must respect the will of the people expressed in the result of the elections held on 28 November .
There is all the more reason for this as the UN , the Electoral Commission and numerous European states have recognised the opposition leader as the rightful winner .
At the same time , it is deplorable that acts of intimidation were carried out against EU observers , resulting in the mission having to end .
The political instability is already having a significant impact .
The African Union recently decided to suspend the country from all the organisation 's activities .
In addition , there is the risk of resumption of the civil war which took place in 2002 .
Côte d 'Ivoire can therefore make the choice between two paths : one which preserves democracy and continues the progress and the other which means isolation from the African community .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , I will be brief because I think that all one might have wished to say has been expressed very well .
Mr Preda , again , thank you to you and your team for your courage and your work during the elections .
I commend you .
There are two quick points I want to make .
Of course I have kept in touch with Ban Ki-moon throughout .
He and I spoke at the very beginning of this crisis and discussed how outrageous the situation was , and we agreed to collaborate very fully .
Equally I have been ensuring that the EU representatives on the ground are cared for : we have contingency plans in place for their safety , as you would expect .
I also want to answer the specific question that was raised about the sanctions .
I am expecting the list to be ready within the next few days .
We want to get on with this as quickly as possible and to keep the pressure on as much as possible .
There is a real danger of violence and there is a real danger of ambiguity around what is happening .
We need to be very firm and very clear and to work as collaboratively as possible with the international community to keep the pressure on as heavily as we possibly can , and to do the things required to get a satisfactory resolution .
I am extremely grateful for the support in this House for the work that we are doing .
I have received six motions for resolution in accordance with Rule 110 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 on Thursday , 16 December 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Ladies and gentlemen , two presidential candidates declared victory and took their oaths on 4 December .
It is not possible , however , for a presidential election to produce two winners in one country .
The situation in Côte d 'Ivoire is therefore very dangerous , since we are all well aware that the country , which bears the marks of years of conflict and violence , is particularly prone to steps that may lead to a repeat of the civil war which broke out in 2002 after a violent coup .
The steps taken by the international community , represented on our side by the European Union , must therefore be considered carefully and not postponed until some later date , because they will have a decisive impact on the lives of the inhabitants of this country .
I therefore fully agree with the words of Baroness Ashton .
The imposition of sanctions is one possible solution by the EU to punish those who are blocking a peaceful changeover of political elites .
The sanctions must help to enforce the will of the people of Côte d 'Ivoire .
We must not forget the local population , however , and we must try to help improve their security , so that they can live in a free and democratic country .
Control by Member States of the Commission 's exercise of implementing powers ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Százjer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission 's exercise of implementing powers - C7-0073 / 2010- .
rapporteur . - Mr President , it is only about one year since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , which envisages considerable changes in the delegation of powers by the European Parliament and Council to the Commission .
A few months ago in this Parliament , we discussed my report about delegated acts .
Delegated acts are when Parliament and Council delegate powers , but from now on , compared to the previous situation , we can take them back any time .
We can set a deadline , we can change and we can veto if the Commission is not in line with what the legislator wanted .
In the case of the present regulation we are discussing based on Article 291 of the Treaty , we are speaking about implementing acts .
In the case of implementing acts , the situation is a bit different .
Here , it is the Member States which exercise their rights on how to implement the different legislation of the European Union .
So there is a clear difference .
The new regulation and the new system of delegated acts gives us very wide powers .
From Parliament 's point of view , it changes our influence considerably , especially in certain areas of legislation .
However , in the field of implementation , we have the right as Parliament , as legislator , to regulate how the implementation procedure for the Member State should go .
I think Parliament was right after long negotiations to take the position that we would like to confirm and get clear commitments from both the Council and the Commission that Parliament 's rights are met .
After very long negotiations , we have made very serious progress in this area which has influence and an effect not only - and particularly not only - in the area of implementing acts , but also on delegated acts .
Even in the case of implementing acts , Parliament got and kept the right of scrutiny which means that , on the basis of the agreement with the other institutions , we have a procedure which we can apply .
My first priority was that we could keep these important positions .
There is also another issue here , which is that there are other ongoing discussions in this Parliament represented by other committees - especially the Committee on International Trade , the Committee on Development and the Committee on Foreign Affairs - and also between Parliament and Council on the legislation concerning financial instruments and whether and how they should be regulated .
My goal in this framework was that this regulation should not prejudge this discussion .
We want to help our colleagues who are fighting our position in an important discussion with the Council so that we can finally end up with the cooperation of the Council .
Finally , since my time is over , I would like to thank both the Commission and the Council for their flexibility in the negotiations .
I understand that it was very difficult to get an agreement in Council .
I think this is the deal which Parliament wanted and this deal can be satisfying for all Members , especially because this is not only about the text we are discussing now , but we expect both the Commission and Council to take part in the common understanding concerning these important issues .
We also expect declarations which make clear that there is a clear commitment from the Commission for the alignment of the remaining part of the acquis communautaire .
This text attached to my report should be satisfying for all Members of this Parliament .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , this morning we heard a very good debate on the citizens ' initiative and tonight we are discussing the very important topic of comitology .
I think it is a very good sign that here , after the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , we are actually finalising the main pieces of the legislation necessary for its full implementation .
The regulation on implementing acts will have a major impact on the way the Commission implements European law in the future .
It will have a very important influence on the Union 's ability to deliver its policies in the interests of its citizens .
When we presented our proposal we set out its main objective : that new rules should put in place a system for the adoption of implementing acts by the Commission which would be simpler , more efficient , and more transparent and in full compliance with the Treaty .
How did we achieve these goals in the proposals we are about to discuss ?
As in the past , the control mechanism foreseen by the regulation is based on comitology , meaning committees composed of representatives from Member States to which the Commission will submit draft measures but , contrary to the present system , there will no room for intervention by the Council as such .
As the Treaty makes clear , only Member States and not the Council can control the exercise of the implementing powers by the Commission .
Moreover , the regulation provides that all special procedures will disappear and that all implementing measures including those on trade - various measures such as anti-dumping or countervailing measures - will be subject to the regulation .
This will represent a real revolution in the field of commercial policy .
We want to have simpler procedures , so not only will the new regulation establish just two procedures - advisory and examination - instead of four , but it will also provide for an automatic adaptation of the existing comitology procedures .
The new procedures will begin to apply to all existing legislation from day one .
Of course this is without prejudice to the nature of the powers conferred on the Commission on the basic acts .
The Commission has committed in a declaration to review all the acquis in order to adapt it as far as legally required to the regime of delegated acts , and I know how important this is for this House .
We have so far identified 153 acts which were not submitted to codecision before the Treaty of Lisbon , and which confer powers on the Commission that have to be turned into delegated powers .
In addition there are 299 acts which were previously aligned to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , which will now have to be reviewed in the light of the provisions of the Treaty on delegated acts .
But our aim is that before the end of Parliament 's present legislative period all existing legislation will be fully in line with the new provision of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This means full alignment .
You know how ambitious this goal is and therefore I am particularly pleased that the Belgian minister Mr Chastel kindly asked me to deliver to this House the commitment and the statement of the Presidency .
It states that the Presidency is aware of the ambitious intentions of the Commission in this regard ; it welcomes these and supports the objectives .
It can confirm that it is willing to do its utmost to make sure that this alignment is concluded as soon as possible once proposals by the Commission have been submitted .
The Presidency is ready to cooperate in a loyal manner with Parliament and the Commission to achieve these objectives .
Of course we would like to have this statement enshrined in an official written record , but I think that we have to welcome the very cooperative spirit and collegial approach from the Belgian Presidency .
We want to have a system which is more efficient ; accordingly the new rules fully reflect the Commission 's role under the Treaties - with just one regrettable exception which I will come back to later - because only a qualified majority vote by the Committee against the draft implementing act can prevent the Commission from adopting it .
The one exception I just mentioned , where the Commission explicitly needs a positive opinion of the committee before being authorised to adopt the draft implementing act , relates to definitive multilateral trade safeguard measures .
Even though only a limited number of acts are adopted in this area , we were against these exceptions on institutional grounds as we would have preferred a full alignment with the new rules .
I wanted to make this institutional point here although in the end this was the only possible basis for the compromise for the legislator and we welcome it .
We want to have a system which is more transparent ; the whole procedure will be conducted in full transparency .
All documents submitted to the committees are simultaneously sent to the European Parliament and to the Council ; these two institutions will have a right of scrutiny on a completely equal footing .
At any time during the procedure they may indicate to the Commission that they consider that the draft implementing act exceeds its powers ; if we are overstepping our powers you have the right to make it very clear to us .
To conclude , all in all the text presents a very good result for Europe ; it clearly strengthens the Community method and it clearly expands Parliament 's power of scrutiny into all areas .
For instance , the new regulation provides that in some cases the Commission might be obliged to discuss the matter in an appeal committee .
However this committee will be a normal comitology committee chaired by the Commission and subject to the same rules ; only qualified majority against the Commission 's draft can then prevent the Commission from adopting it .
If the new comitology regulation is approved today by the European Parliament it will enter into force very soon , already on 1 March 2011 , and this is indeed very good news .
We need to have the new legal framework operating as soon as possible , and I also hope that in parallel we could launch a common reflection about the line of demarcation between the delegated powers and the implementing powers of the Commission .
We need these not only to avoid further conflicts when discussing proposals for the new legislation but also to streamline the alignment exercise .
To conclude I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Szájer , for all the work done throughout the negotiating process and also to all political groups for their cooperation and the flexibility they demonstrated .
A final word of thanks goes to the Belgian Presidency who did a remarkable job in getting this file through the Council , in finding this very difficult compromise .
I believe that what we are about to discuss , and I hope tomorrow approve , is very good news for Europe .

rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Szájer , for his efforts and for his report .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the current comitology provisions will be replaced by delegated acts and implementing acts under Articles 290 and 291 , as has been explained , but I worry very much about the role of the Commission in implementing the decisions made in relation to the Treaty of Lisbon .
I think I heard the Commissioner just say that their aim is to do so by the end of this Parliament .
That is another three and a half years , and they only have an ' aim ' !
This is not a residents ' association , this is Parliament !
If the Council is involved , Parliament is involved .
As a parliamentarian - and it gives me no joy to say this - it seems to me that often , instead of acting as honest broker between Council and Parliament , the Commission is far too close to the Council , while Parliament , being of such numbers , is easily divided and far too easily sometimes facilitates what is a common view reached by the Council and by the Commission .
I must stress firstly that Parliament , in my view , should not be under any pressure to sign up completely to the proposed first-reading text in this regard .
The most important thing is that we reach a fair compromise that is the best option available for this House and for the citizens we represent , while noting what our colleague , Mr Szájer has said .
If this means waiting for a second-reading agreement , then so be it .
As I said , the rule must be that if Council is involved , Parliament is involved .
We are codecision makers , colegislators in this regard .
As the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development , I feel it is of paramount importance that we assert the independence of Parliament and that the Commission respect both institutions .
I am not sure that this ' compromise ' achieves that .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for his work on what is a complex and very technical dossier , but one that is , nonetheless , very important for our future activities .
The old comitology procedure with four different options was not unknown to us , the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and we have been familiar for a long time with how to deal with implementing decisions .
However , with regard to the adjustments which need to be made under the Treaty of Lisbon , I would like to say that we support the compromises which the rapporteur has agreed with the Council .
There are , nevertheless , two things which we consider need your attention .
First of all , we want the maximum flow of information to Parliament and also the maximum involvement of Parliament in the preparation of the Committee 's decisions .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise the importance of a good approach to the transitional period , and in that respect we ask the Commission to be generous in favour of Parliament when reforming the comitology procedure , as defined in the acquis , to the new delegated and implementing acts , where the choice between the two procedures may be open to debate .
Therefore , this does not apply to the reform alone , but also to the application of the current acquis ahead of any reform .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - Mr President , I worry that rejecting the inclusion of delegated acts in financial instruments might set a dangerous precedent for other policies .
It also raises interinstitutional distrust and we are all concerned by this situation .
The forthcoming proposals on the legislative package for regional policy after 2013 might require application of implementing acts , but might also require delegated acts .
We cannot accept the prior exclusion of delegated acts .
This should be a matter of negotiation among the colegislators on a case-by-case basis .
This position is , in my view , consistent politically and legally and I believe that the Council and the Commission will evidently share it with Parliament .
Ahead of us lie a number of difficult years , without doubt .
Our duty as European institutions is to make the most of our policies , and by avoiding unnecessary conflicts and procedures we can be more effective in this common task .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I am deeply disappointed for several reasons with the contents of Mr Szájer 's report , which is being voted on tomorrow .

Firstly , none the amendments voted for by my committee unanimously - and I stress , unanimously - were taken into account , even though the common agricultural policy is one of the policies with the most acts adopted under the comitology procedure and is therefore one of the ones most affected by the adaptation of legislative acts under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Secondly , under the text of Article 10 , the European Parliament will have no power to exert pressure nor a margin to negotiate with Council over the adaptation of CAP legislation to the new treaty .
We are aware , in fact , that the Council has already demonstrated its unwillingness to agree acts delegated to the European Parliament and , with the adoption of this Regulation , the Council will not have any interest in proceeding with negotiations because the automatic adaptation - which excludes delegated acts and only covers implementing acts - has no deadline because it is transitional .
For this reason , together with other fellow Members , I tabled an amendment that makes the automatic alignment genuinely temporary and I call on you all to support it in order to reinforce the role of the European Parliament .
There is no reason , in fact , to come to an agreement at first reading over such a sensitive file that sets the rules for implementing the treaty for the coming years .
This is the reason why , for this all-important file , we have the right - I would even go so far as to say the duty - to improve the text as much as possible and therefore proceed to a second reading without giving in to blackmail by the Council , which is threatening not to move on this file in order to force us to accept this negative agreement .
After the budget , I think this is the most important file we have to vote on , because it redraws the balance of power between the European institutions .
Here in this Chamber , we must vigorously defend the prerogatives of Parliament , which has been democratically elected and represents all European citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon introduces substantial changes to the process of developing and implementing EU legislation , by distinguishing between delegated acts and implementing acts .
The previous primary legislation only provided for implementing measures .
This regulation is essential for an orderly transition from the old system to the new system , and for appropriate use of the implementing powers granted to the Commission by the Treaty of Lisbon .
It strengthens the democratic principle because it recognises Parliament 's right to control , increases transparency through the annual report and incorporates a review clause in order to perfect it based on experience .
It therefore satisfies the requests that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs had made in this respect .
In the area of financial services , it will help to increase legal security and the effectiveness of legislation .
It complements the objective of the Omnibus Directive of limiting the powers entrusted to the Commission in the old framework that are compatible with the current framework to a period of three years from the entry into force of the new Treaty , and establishes provisions so that the technical implementing standards , which are part of the new supervision structure and the sectoral regulations in the area of financial services , can eventually be adopted .
Therefore , as the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I view the report positively and I congratulate Mr Szájer .
I would like to thank the President for his generosity and to give you all my best wishes for this festive season and for the coming year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a series of explanations are needed , including here in plenary , with regard to misleading debates which have taken place in the groups , in the Conference of Committee Chairs and in some cases in the committees .
First of all , this regulation is not about deciding what delegated acts are under the terms of Article 290 and what implementing acts are under the terms of Article 291 .
This regulation will definitely not come to a decision on this .
This is decided in the basic act .
In other words , the law itself will decide on the authority under the terms of Article 290 or Article 291 , if provision is made for this .
The regulation only covers the procedure in the case of Article 291 .
My second point concerns the criticism of Article 10 .
This article also relates only to the procedure and nothing else .
In this context , the Commission has once again clarified that it does , of course , intend to review all the existing acts from the pre-Lisbon period as part of the alignment and to make new proposals to both legislative bodies : Parliament and the Council .
This has been reinforced once again in comparison with the previous Interinstitutional Agreement .
The only thing which is really new is the procedure for external trade .
I admit that the compromise which the Belgian Presidency has come up with is rather bureaucratic .
There is no doubt about that .
However , given the two blocking minorities in the Council , this was the only possible solution .
For me , this question is all about weighing up the benefits .
We also need to weigh up , as the rapporteur has said , what Parliament has negotiated .
We have a procedure for reviewing implementing acts which is not provided for in the treaty .
That is a very significant step forward , in particular with regard to the involvement of Parliament , which goes beyond the terms of the treaty .
Therefore , when the benefits are weighed up , it is clear that this deserves our support .
This is why I am in favour of the report as it is , without amendments .
We will not be able to achieve any more in the first reading than we could achieve in a later conciliation process after an unspecified period .
Mr President , the regulation that is being discussed today has been largely disregarded by all the committees over a long period .
However , some people in this House have now woken up at the end of the process when the results are on the table .
Some of them have unfortunately not attended the debate , which is a pity because it would have been very interesting to hear their views .
As a former member , I have a clear memory of the spirit of the convention .
It called openly for the European Parliament to be given specific rights in several areas , to ensure that it remained credible in the context of the institutions and with regard to the citizens .
Despite the convention 's demands , nothing was done .
The very tough negotiations which the Belgian Presidency had with the Council were what enabled important progress to be made .
I remember what Mr Lehne said .
It was a question of the permanent possibility of investigating whether the Commission had exceeded its powers .
Of course , some of the regulations are not exactly ideal , such as the international trade agreement , but nevertheless I agree with the outcome .
I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency .
It has made every effort to ensure that something was achieved .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur , who negotiated sympathetically and intelligently .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when we vote on Mr Szájer 's report tomorrow , we will give the go-ahead for one of the new instruments - on implementing acts - contained in the Treaty of Lisbon .
This will simplify the old comitology system .
It is a measure that will ensure greater transparency during the adoption of legislative acts , regulating methods of control by Member States over the exercise of powers conferred on the Commission .
The fundamental importance of the Regulation has made the legislative procedure complicated both at inter-institutional level and within Parliament where , however , because of the involvement - albeit belated - of all committees , I hope it will be possible to adopt the proposal at first reading .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Szájer , for succeeding in achieving the priority objectives for the European Parliament : I refer to the guarantees to align the current comitology procedures with the new procedure , the right to scrutiny by Parliament and the Council , the creation of an appeal committee chaired by the Commission and the inclusion of a review clause that will make it possible to evaluate the efficiency of the procedure .
Allow me a final comment on what was the last obstacle to the negotiations : the inclusion of the common commercial policy within the scope of the future Regulation .
Although the final agreement will allow the application of a simple majority voting system for the adoption of anti-dumping measures during a transitional period of 18 months , subsequently the measures will be adopted by qualified majority .
This solution was the outcome of a difficult compromise but I am convinced that it satisfies both the needs of industry and the European Union executive , removing decisions of a technical nature from the risk of dangerous politicisation .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I totally disagree with the last speakers .
Personally , I find that this measure is harmful to the priorities of Parliament and is against the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are about to conclude 70 % of the agreements at first reading with the Council , but I fail to understand the rush to conclude such a sensitive measure as this at first reading since it concerns the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon , which has extended our powers , particularly on commercial policy .
At the very opening of the anti-dumping procedures , we are changing from the objectivity of legal certainty to an intervention by Member States , which threatens to become the outcome of bargaining between the Commission and Member States .
I therefore think it is a step backwards , as is automatic alignment without any time limits from the old comitology system to the present system in the agricultural field , which strengthens the role of Parliament .
Therefore , I do not believe it is wise to rush into an agreement with the Council at first reading , because we also run the risk of disputes before the Court of Justice .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank everyone for all the contributions , which reflect how complex an issue we are dealing with .
Allow me to react to some of the comments .
Concerning the review and our commitment to it in relation to all the relevant acts , we have here an extremely ambitious plan and I have been discussing it with Mr Lehne during our framework agreement discussions : we have 299 plus 153 acts to align .
I think that if we say we would like to do it within the period of this legislature , it is a very ambitious plan .
If I say it is ' our ' ambition , I mean that on behalf of the three institutions because this clearly requires loyal cooperation from all of us .
I would like to assure Mr Mitchell of the Commission 's utmost respect for Parliament .
I would like to highlight one paragraph in the draft Commission statement which is attached to the proposal .
I will just read it out : ' While this alignment exercise is under way , the Commission will keep the European Parliament regularly informed on draft implementing measures related to these instruments which should become , in the future , delegated acts . '
So our commitment to transparency and clarity is absolutely clear .
I would also like to confirm , here in this House , that we will offer Parliament the maximum amount of information .
Parliament will receive all information at the same time as the committees , so we will do our utmost to keep Parliament informed also in this procedure .
I think I have to thank Mr Lehne for clarifying the situation in the debate .
What we are discussing today are implementing acts , and this regulation does not prejudge in any way whether we should use delegated or implementing acts in the future .
Concerning the issue of alignment , I think Mr De Castro was not here when I was reading out the agreed statement of the Belgian Presidency with a full commitment to loyal cooperation to achieve this ambitious goal of full alignment in the coming years .
I think there is a reassurance here that it is not only in Parliament ' interests , but also in the Commission 's and the Council 's interests to proceed very quickly .
I think this is very clear and I am sure that we will honour this agreement .
Concerning the issue of politicisation of anti-dumping and countervailing measures , I think , actually , that we will see the opposite , because you know what the system is today : that a simple majority of the Member States ' representatives can block a Commission proposal .
This would be much more difficult in the future because you would need a qualified majority of the Member States representatives to block it .
So I think that what we are doing here will actually strengthen the Union approach and strengthen the position of the Commission in the trade talks , exactly as prescribed and projected by the Treaty of Lisbon .
If you will allow me , I will conclude by underlining the importance of legal certainty in this matter because , of course , when we are dealing with sensitive issues like trade , like anti-dumping measures , like countervailing measures , we need to have very well established procedures and we need to have a clear division of roles and responsibilities .
Parliament needs the very clear scrutiny rights which have been given to it by the Treaty of Lisbon , and we need the legal certainty to operate in this very important legislative area because you know how often these measures are disputed in various international fora .
Therefore , I would plead with the honourable Members to support these proposals without amendment because I think they are really good for the position of the European Union in world affairs .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to thank everyone for their contributions , both now and during the last nine months we have been working on this issue .
First , a procedural thing .
Many colleagues have voiced their worries about the fact that we are rushing into a first-reading agreement under pressure from the Council .
Both the Commission and Council and several colleagues involved in the negotiations can testify that the pressure was the opposite .
It was Parliament and myself who said to the Council that if it did not reach agreement then the whole thing could fall apart .
We got a very clear commitment from both the other institutions because like Parliament , as Mr Šefčovič just mentioned , they are for the stability of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The later we accept , the later we adopt this kind of regulation , the longer the old comitology procedure - which we do not like because of its many problems - will go on .
From that point of view , nine months is not a short time and could encompass two readings .
There has been full transparency , and several colleagues can bear witness to that .
I have been in the Conference of Committee Chairs six times during these nine months and have also met with shadows and coordinators from all the committees .
It was I who decided to go for agreement because we were getting everything I wanted .
Maybe the Council and the Commission do not like it , but we got everything .
What does a rapporteur do when everything I and the different committees requested is there , although perhaps not in the form we want ?
Mr De Castro is right .
His requests are not in the form of the text of this regulation , but this is about implementing acts , and they are there in the Commission 's commitment .
I have done this alignment - the omnibus - before , and the same commitment was given by the Commission , which it honoured with very minor exceptions .
In that sense , I thought I could trust this promise and if the Commission does not honour it , I will stand up and claim it and align , as Mr De Castro is doing .
In that sense , there is no pressure .
The pressure came from me .
Through good cooperation in many difficult negotiations we agreed on something which I can unreservedly offer to the House to take on board .
Thank you very much to everybody , especially to the colleagues who took part in this very difficult process .
I apologise to the general public , which does not understand a word of what we are discussing , but I can definitely say that transparency and parliamentary control of European Union issues will be much better after this regulation is adopted .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
This legislative initiative on the control of ' executive instruments ' by the Commission has been imposed by the Treaty of Lisbon , which includes this under the legislative powers of the European Parliament .
It is also undeniably a positive piece of legislation overall , taking account of the existing situation .
But several aspects fall short of full compliance with the Treaty of Lisbon .
Amongst these negative aspects , two stand out .
Firstly , there is no cut-off point for mandatory adaptation of the countless existing situations to the new system and to the Treaty of Lisbon .
It was for this reason that I tabled an amendment introducing such a clause .
Secondly , and principally , the derogations provided for in the case of trade defence instruments ( specifically anti-dumping and anti-subsidy measures , as well as safeguard measures ) , according to which Member States will have more intrusive control over the Commission , are unacceptable , as they will make it more difficult to apply these measures and will lead to their politicisation .
These measures are essential for defending European companies from competition from imports that benefit from such illicit benefits .
There is no constitutional or political basis for this discriminatory treatment of commercial defence measures , which undermines the ability of the Commission ( and the Union ) to defend European industry against unfair competition from outside its own European internal market .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 00 )
European Heritage Label ( debate )
The first item is the report by Mrs Paliadeli , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Union action for the European Heritage Label - C7-0071 / 2010 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , encouraging a European conscience that respects and defends multiculturalism represents a major challenge to the European institutions in their effort to achieve broad cohesion and solidarity between the citizens of the Member States of the European Union .
Knowledge of our history , familiarity with our multicultural cultural heritage and information for the young generation about the ideas and people who were at the forefront in building the European Union may help to bridge the gap between the European Union and its citizens .
The European Commission has undertaken , on the instructions of the Council of the European Union , to draft a proposal to transform the intergovernmental European Heritage label into a Community institution .
Broad public consultation and an impact assessment have illustrated that integrating this institution into European initiatives would help to improve the image and credibility of the label , provided that it is based on clearly predefined criteria and emphasises the symbolic , rather than the aesthetic , nature of a monument or site ; in other words , it would make a statement that European history is the result of a rich and mutually complementary common cultural heritage and that the European Union is rooted in strong values , such as freedom , democracy , respect for human rights , cultural diversity , tolerance and solidarity .
We started with a very ambitious approach to the label ; as a weapon in our foreign policy arsenal which would go beyond the borders of the European Union , it could be awarded to other states in Europe and - why not - even outside our continent .
For the moment , it would appear to be more realistic for it to be used as a means of deepening cohesion between the Member States of the Union and for it to be restricted initially to its Member States .
We countered the Commission 's proposal that the label should be awarded to a maximum of 27 sites with a proposal that the procedure should be repeated every two years , in order to maintain the value of the institution and allow time for sites to be selected and then monitored , once the label has been awarded .
We agree that , because of the symbolic value of the award , as a factor that contributes to European unification , transnational sites need to be favoured , because they support cohesion , promote the creation of networks and encourage cooperation between Member States or regions .
That is why they should take first place in the quota .
For practical reasons , one Member State will act as coordinator between the European group of experts and the Commission .
We approached the transformation of the label not as an administrative transformation of the old transnational institution , but as a new institution with clearly defined selection criteria and binding obligations on the part of recipients if they are to keep it .
The group of experts , the networking , the symbolic character and the monitoring of the awardees indicate a different approach which should not be confused with the previous transnational institution .
That is why , in the aim of safeguarding the old institution and promoting the validity of the new institution , we felt that the transitional provisions in Article 18 in the Commission 's proposal were not needed .
We also sought ways of strengthening the role of the twelve-member team of experts in the Commission text by adding another member proposed by the Committee of the Regions , and we tried to ensure the team was more involved in the label award or withdrawal procedure .
In the same context , and in order to strengthen the role of the European Parliament , we insisted on the Commission 's obligation to publish a full list of pre-selected sites , before the final selection , and to advise the European Parliament and the Council accordingly .
This will give the European Parliament and the Council time to react if any issues arise .
To close this brief presentation , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , the Commission representatives and the Council for their creative contribution to the report which you will be asked to vote on shortly .
I trust that we shall cooperate in the same spirit at the next stage of the consultation .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the European Parliament , especially , the rapporteur , Mrs Paliadeli , and the shadow rapporteurs , for their solid support for the Commission 's proposal on the European Heritage Label .
As you know , this proposal was one of the first approved by the new Commission after it had taken office and it is one of our priorities in the cultural sector over the coming years .
Our aim , through this label , is to give European citizens , especially young citizens , new opportunities to learn about their common and , at the same time , diverse cultural heritage and history and the development of the European Union .
I am certain that this will help to bring European citizens closer to the European Union .
The European Heritage Label will also help to increase cultural tourism and will bring physical and financial benefits .
Cooperation between Parliament and the Commission on the label has been extremely constructive over recent months and I am delighted that our approach coincided on numerous basic issues .
Most of the amendments that you approved today are completely in line with our ambitions for the new label .
We share Parliament 's view that the quality and validity of the initiative are of vital importance .
We also appreciate the action you have taken to maintain maximum clarity , simplicity and flexibility in the rules and procedures , so that they are easy for the public to understand and for the Member States and the European Union to apply .
However , a small number of your amendments are politically more delicate .
I refer mainly to the transitional provisions deleted .
The sites awarded the intergovernmental label and the Member States have huge expectations of the transitional period , which will give them the opportunity to participate in the new system quickly , provided , of course , that they satisfy the new quality criteria .
This is possibly one of the main issues we need to discuss with the Council at our trialogues over coming months .
However , I am certain that compromises will be found which are acceptable to all sides and which will safeguard the long-term success of the European Heritage Label .
That is why we hope to continue his excellent cooperation with Parliament in this sector .
Thank you once again for your excellent cooperation .
Mr President , as is only right , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur not only on her work but , most of all , on her ability to listen .
This report , while it may not appear very important in the overall context of this Parliament , seems to me likely to bring about real Community action .
Small streams make great rivers .
If the Committee on Culture and Education voted to keep the name of ' European Heritage Label ' - for which the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) was hoping in particular - it is because this initiative is not limited to the period of history of the European Union , but focuses on the grand idea of Europe , a much older concept .
The label is a powerful tool that should primarily promote European identity through cultural diversity .
It should not be seen as a simple transformation of the intergovernmental initiative , but rather as a real tool which , based on experience , will bring real added value , both through the impetus it may give to the promotion of European values by Member States or local authorities and in terms of our citizens ' knowledge of these values .
Its aim is to strengthen European citizens ' sense of belonging to Europe , and to help bring about a common awareness .
At a time when public attachment to the European idea remains a major challenge we must face , Europe also needs symbols that develop and strengthen it on a daily basis , as unfortunately it would seem that European identity is an obvious fact that is yet to be invented .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I completely agree with all the other speakers that this is an excellent initiative and I am very pleased that the Committee on Culture and Education and Mrs Paliadeli are putting this forward .
I would like particularly to thank our rapporteur who has done excellent work on this .
It is a very good means of promoting Europe , of promoting our common culture and history .
I am sure it will be a huge success and we have put in place various ways of making sure it is successful .
The final sites will be chosen by a panel of experts who will have specialist knowledge in this area and , as I have said before , we will particularly be looking at cross-border sites to promote the idea of Europe .

There are also particular criteria that we ask the successful candidates to meet : we want to raise the European significance of the sites chosen ; the successful candidates will be expected to organise education events , especially for young people ; there will be an exchange of ideas on initiating common projects with other sites awarded the label ; there will be artistic and cultural activities which will foster dialogue ; and there will be access , of course , for the widest numbers of the public to visit these sites .

So I think the sites , when they are up and running , will have a huge benefit for Europe and will be something that people will be able to come to and enjoy , and will promote the idea of Europe and what we in Parliament and the EU are doing .
So I commend this report to you all .
I am sure when the scheme is set up and running it will be a huge success and I have been very proud to be part of this initiative .


Mr President , the European Heritage Label is , without doubt , a very important project , for at least two reasons : firstly , it enables European citizens to feel closer to their common and diverse history and heritage ; secondly it is a good tool for promoting cultural tourism and boosting the economy .
I would therefore like to thank Commissioner Vassiliou and the rapporteur , Mrs Paliadeli , for their initiative and their hard work , and I would like to take this opportunity to say that , although initially , it was an initiative by the Member States , we now need to give it a clearly EU dimension .
This means that the European Heritage Label should not be the sum of the places selected by the Member States , but rather it should reflect a common European vision .
Having a European vision requires common criteria and absolute transparency in the pre-selection process by the Member States .
It also means that we must respect regional , cultural and linguistic diversity .
Its success depends on us .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the promotion and development of heritage sites in Europe is a necessary and welcome project which deserves our full attention .
Our rich and diverse cultural heritage is something that the citizens of Europe should be proud of and , indeed , is one of the primary reasons why millions of people from around the world visit Europe every year .
The project has the potential to deliver for historical sites the possibility to access additional funding and to preserve and develop their facilities , which is a much needed asset during these tough economic times , but where we raise expectations for citizens , we have the responsibility to deliver .
However , from the outset , this report was couched in a federalist language that sought to promote a fake or forced European demos , and the attempt to rename the scheme the European Union Heritage Label was politically based and would exclude thousands of potential locations whose history and heritage predates , and indeed overshadows , many contemporary sites .
In addition , attempts by myself and others to ensure that the focus of the label remained on heritage , and not on political integration , were rejected .
This will inevitably lead to the unfair exclusion of many important sites .
Funding for this programme also raised serious concerns , especially given the austerity measures currently afflicting culture departments across Europe .
I hope that we were able to contain this , going forward .
The excessive proliferation of sites and the probable duplication of the UNESCO scheme are also likely to add problems .
The central goals of this label should have been to preserve and celebrate our shared and diverse heritage , but unfortunately , we have not guaranteed that we will add value .
This is something that we need to be mindful of .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased with this initiative , which aims to transform the European Heritage Label into a formal action of the European Union in order to increase its effectiveness , visibility , prestige and credibility .
To this end , I should like to emphasise the importance of the professionalism of the members of the panel of experts appointed to evaluate the sites , as well as the rigorousness of the procedures for attribution of the label and reviewing its maintenance as time goes on .
These elements are essential to ensure the specificity and quality of the label itself .
The label must , however , focus entirely on symbolic and educational value , rather than on the beauty of the site - as other initiatives for the promotion of cultural heritage tend to - so as to clearly differentiate it from these .
Therefore , I also agree that transnational sites should be held in particular consideration , in virtue of their symbolic importance .

( DE ) Mr President , a label of this kind makes good sense , but only under two conditions : the first is that it should have high visibility to ensure awareness - after all , we already have an abundance of symbols like this .
The second condition is that the associated bureaucracy should not be allowed to become an end in itself , as with so many similar initiatives and EU institutions .
It really would be a paradox of European cultural tradition if something that could be so beneficial to us , clearly setting out a position quite different from China in the way it deals with its ancient culture , or from the United States with its historically small repository of cultural sites , were to be seen in the final analysis as an extremely bureaucratic and complex way of creating jobs for the boys .
We need to be quite clear about one thing : culture is the source for the inspiring ideas and visions that are frequently espoused here , but far less frequently put into practice .
This particular opportunity to establish an identity that is also encompassed by the principle of subsidiarity , can only exist through culture , which is why we need to do even more in this area .
I am also thinking of the specific promotion of writers and other artists , without the self-perpetuating bureaucratic organisations and institutions we tend to have in a European context .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to greet Commissioner Vassiliou and thank her for her strong backing for this initiative , just as I should like to thank Mrs Paliadeli and all the shadow rapporteurs for the good work they have done .
Europe is experiencing economic and financial difficulties at present .
Indeed , we are currently discussing how to intervene to help several countries of the European Union that are in difficulty .
Obviously , that is an important thing to do , but Europe must not lose sight of the importance of the values that have allowed the Union to emerge victorious from the innumerable challenges it has had to deal with during its history .
Europe 's wealth lies in its history , its culture , its art , its leading figures , its landscapes , its symbolic places , its intellectuals , its philosophers and - dare I say it - in its civilisation .
This label can represent all of this and highlight all the myriad forms of European identity that the Member States have contributed over time .
We must now look at the negotiations with the Council to resolve a few differences of interpretation on several points .
I believe the disputed points will be resolved swiftly and perhaps even easily , given the importance of this topic .
I also believe that as soon as this report is definitively adopted , we shall all feel more European , due to the values and traditions we share .
I believe that through the Commission , the work carried out by Parliament and with the Council , we really are doing a good job for all our citizens .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question from Mr Martin under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Mr President , I am much obliged to Mr Scurria .
I greatly appreciate what he had to say on this matter .
I would just like to ask him , as a representative of the largest group here in this House , how he would assess the risk that we may get tied up with too much red tape in relation to the administration and implementation of this cultural heritage label ?
Does he have any proposals for ensuring that this is kept within reasonable parameters , so that we are not faced with a plethora of endlessly deliberating juries and our actual common goal is not missed , namely , a highly visible label that is also recognised accordingly in the media .

( IT ) Mr President , I am very happy to respond to Mr Martin because we know that the bureaucracy issue is sometimes what distinguishes and separates European citizens from their institutions .
Seen from this point of view , I think the path set out by this report is quite clear .
We shall also talk about it with the Council .
Once the Member States have decided which sites the European label could be given to and once we have a panel of true experts coming together , who are given the chance to select the sites within a necessary but not excessive amount of time - and we still need to work out who will have the last word on this , but it is an issue that we shall have to discuss both with the Council and Commission - I do not see excessive bureaucratic issues from this point of view .
There are bureaucratic issues for many other measures but not on this one regarding the label , which I think can easily be followed in a secure timeframe and with clear results for all European citizens .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to join in congratulating Mrs Paliadeli on the excellent work that she has done .
I think that we can now say , once the report is adopted , that it is going to be the successful culmination of a new commitment to Europeanism , and I do not believe that it is trivial to make a commitment to Europeanism in the current times .
I also believe that the decision of the Member States , the Commissioner and the Commission to place the European Heritage Label within the sphere of the European Union is going to help increase its visibility , prestige and credibility , but it is also going to strengthen the deep-rooted ideals of cohesion and solidarity between European citizens .
The label is an important step towards European integration , because it is going to bring us and all citizens closer to our common history .
When there are so many voices to be heard which so often are laying claim to individual history - frequently national history - I believe that an initiative such as the one that we are voting on today to lay claim to a common history and make it known has a really symbolic and extremely important value .
I believe that what we are going to do with this European Heritage Label will also help the younger generations to understand the ideas that were behind the founding fathers of the European Union , so that they can see that this European Union , this European integration process that we are going through , is a process , and that like all processes , its conclusion depends on those that are working within it .
I think that in this respect , the European Union is going to be what its citizens want it to be .
I therefore urge everyone to work together .
I obviously heard Mr Martin just now saying that we should avoid bureaucracy .
Of course we should !
However , above all , what we need to commit to is our common history , and making it known .
Mr Takkula has asked permission to ask a question .
Mr Takkula , you may put a question to Mrs Badia .
( FI ) Mr President , my chief purpose was to ask to speak , because I am coordinator of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and because I would like , on its behalf , to thank Mrs Paliadeli for this magnificent report and to say a few words about the history of our people and about the European Heritage Label .
So actually , my question is ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Takkula , one moment : the procedure ... we are going to give you the floor soon as an additional speaker , because the representative of your group was indeed not present .
We will call on you along with the various speakers who speak next and you will have two minutes to speak .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , a short while ago , when interpreting Mrs Badia i Cutchet 's speech , the interpreter used the term ' Europeism ' , presumably in error .
No such word exists in the Polish language and , in fact , I have the feeling that the initiative we are currently discussing is constructing something that does not exist : ' Europeism ' , or some kind of artificial creation , which is a pawn in a political game .
I believe that what we are doing is unnecessary .
As a famous philosopher once said , ' entities must not be multiplied beyond necessity ' .
It is my impression that the European Heritage Label represents an entity being multiplied beyond necessity .
I will not mention the huge question mark hanging over the issue of how the label is to be granted and withdrawn .
I will not mention the fact that the initiative will cost European taxpayers EUR 1 350 000 .
My question is of a fundamental nature , quite apart from these other serious matters , namely : why are we doing this ?
Do we really need to construct something which is not Europeanness , but merely the Europeism I mentioned earlier ?
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , the current idea of culture is nothing new - we have heard it before during the discussion of other reports in Parliament and we have heard it again here today - it is on the verge of being considered instrumental in the European Union .
This is expressed in various ways : whether in the context of so-called cultural diplomacy , in which culture is seen as a tool for foreign policy , or in the area currently under discussion of creating a European Union Heritage Label so as to , in the words of the rapporteur , ' enhance the Europeans ' faith in the European Union and its leaders ' and ' fill in the gap between the European Union and its citizens ' .
The rapporteur judiciously realises that there are other more-effective means of achieving this , about which a great deal more could be said .
I should like to point out that no label will be enough to erase the visible effects the policies that the EU has been implementing and its economic governance have had on the citizens and peoples of Europe : in short , the plans of true social terrorism it has been putting into action with the connivance of national governments .
We should also consider the effects of policies such as the common agricultural policy or the common fisheries policy , amongst others , on the destruction of important cultural labels and the live elements of the cultural and historical heritage of the European peoples .
Let us consider the future disintegration , over the course of just a single generation , of coastal or secular rural communities .
This initiative , which has a predominantly symbolic significance , is based on developing the fallacy of a single European identity and a single European culture and , moreover , on values such as freedom , democracy , tolerance and solidarity , via the particularly sensitive area of cultural heritage and , in turn , that of history , which gives rise to the serious concern that this will encourage the alarming procedure of rewriting history that we have been witnessing recently .
Culture , like other historical phenomena , does not come from some kind of homogenous shared identity but rather , it is indicative of antagonisms , conflicts and cultural domination .
Let us again ask ourselves about the meaning of the designation ' European Union Heritage Label ' , which is conferred on the basis simply of where the elements of heritage in question are located .
Knowing , as we do , that European heritage is borrowed from many cultures and could also be claimed by the Islamic world , by the Mediterranean cultures or by the cultures of those people subjected to European colonialism , is it Heritage of the European Union or Heritage in the European Union ?
Mr President , I should like to close by saying that , in general , with a few exceptions , the amendments tabled by the rapporteur have improved the Commission 's draft , but in this case , the report 's specific objectives are far less important than the misconceptions underlying it .
( RO ) Mr President , today , 16 December , we celebrate the 240th anniversary of Ludwig van Beethoven 's birth , the composer of the united Europe 's anthem .
Given this excellent report from the Committee on Culture and Education , as a Romanian historian and writer , I would like to propose for a European Heritage Label an exceptional site which is unique in the world - St Andrew 's Cave , located close to the place where the Danube flows into the Black Sea .
As is confirmed by Origen , one of the fathers of the Christian church , who learnt about it from his father , who , in turn , learnt about it from Andrew 's disciples , the first man to be called by Jesus Christ came here , to this small cave in the province of Scythia Minor , and spread the light of the Gospel .
This is almost certainly the first Christian church in Europe .
During the first few months of 2011 , I am going to take the necessary steps to obtain community support for a grand project .
I intend to erect an impressive statue of our Saviour Jesus Christ in the Romanian part of Transylvania , in the Braşov region to be exact .
It will be 40 metres high , making it taller than similar statues in Brazil , Portugal and Poland .
It will also have a church at its base where weddings , christenings and religious services to mark the great Christian feasts will be celebrated .
In the dark days ahead , we will come through and emerge victorious only in the light of the Christian cross .
( DE ) Mr President , I am very pleased that this initiative , which is already implemented in some Member States , has now come before the European Union as a whole .
It was right and proper that a biennial cycle should have been chosen for awarding the label .
I would also like to express my thanks to the rapporteur in this matter .
However , I must admit that I have a slight reservation about the fact that we must manage to draw a precise distinction between UNESCO 's world cultural heritage programme and the European character of this label .
Otherwise , it will be hard for our citizens to understand why this particular label has a special European dimension .
I have taken a look to see what sites have been nominated by the Member States so far and have found , naturally enough , that they are primarily man-made structures .
Our idea in the Committee on Culture and Education was not just to recognise buildings , although buildings are an important element , but , more importantly , objects of value and other sites , or even experiences , that are associated with European development .
Which brings me to the last point in my comments .
It will be particularly important to appoint appropriate experts to the juries who have assimilated these aims and who will help to implement and develop them .
This being the case , there would be no need to fear the bureaucracy that could conceivably arise .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during a stage in its life in which Europe is undergoing a crisis of identity and prospects , I think that the establishment of a European Heritage Label that identifies those sites - both material and immaterial - of high symbolic and educational value for the history , culture and creation of the European Union , is particularly significant .
My sincere thanks go to the rapporteur , Mrs Paliadeli , who efficiently took on board the proposals and additions suggested by many of us in the Committee on Culture and Education , providing , in particular , for procedures that are more certain and more respectful of the Treaty of Lisbon with regard to the subdivision of tasks among Member States , the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
As some of my fellow Members have picked up on , we also strove to make sure there was no overlap between the label and other initiatives of the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organisation ( UNESCO ) or the European Council 's historic and cultural itineraries .
Indeed , on the basis of well-defined criteria , the Member States will present not more than two actively managed sites every two years .
This is an important point : the Member States must show that they believe in the sites and therefore manage them in an educational way , involving the people .
The Commission , meanwhile , will be responsible for pre-selection after hearing from a panel of experts , but it will also assume a monitoring role , will assess the effectiveness of the management of the sites every six years , and may also withdraw the label .
Parliament comes out of this with a stronger role because not only does it appoint four of the 16 members of the European panel , but also because it has an active relationship with the list of pre-selected sites .
I also support the solution provided to the complex problem of the marks already assigned on an intergovernmental basis to many Member States that , in any case , though not suitable for the new system and the new criteria , will retain their earlier mark and will not therefore be downgraded .
I also appreciate the priority given to transnational sites , which will be a very interesting challenge for Europe , and the role assigned to the Committee of the Regions as part of an approach of subsidiarity , as well as the emphasis on the necessary involvement of Member States in the selection phase , including municipalities and regions , in order to avoid their being only partially involved .
However , I think an extra effort by the Member States would also be useful .
It would be very important for them to launch competitions aimed at young people in schools and universities to start a process to identify the sites , which would also become a way to reconstruct a common European history and destiny and mean that they , too , would contribute to the sense of belonging and European citizenship .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank you for the opportunity to speak for a moment on behalf of my group , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , about this important report on the European Heritage Label .
Listening to the debate today , sometimes my impressions recalled what a certain teacher once told me : anything that can be misunderstood will be misunderstood .
By this I mean that some try to see this excellent project - whose purpose is to raise Europe 's profile and show that Europe 's strength lies in its diversity , in the fact that it is united in its diversity - as a threat to the notion of the nation state , or a threat to European identity , or to something else .
It is not about that .
I believe that this is an excellent initiative , and I would say that we need to know more about Europe .
We need to know about one another , because in that way we can build a better Europe in the future .
Europe is a mosaic of nations where common ideas about democracy , human dignity and freedom of opinion have developed .
They are core values that we want to take forward .
When we talk about the European cultural heritage , it has to be said that we have a very rich one .
I believe that this small investment that we are making , EUR 1.3 million for the entire programme , will benefit those sites that acquire the European Heritage Label many times over , and even financially .
The financial benefit is not what is most important here either : above all , it is the psychological benefit derived from a strengthened European spirit and a better understanding of how this Europe of mosaics was born and what its basis and foundation are .
When we know our background and history , then we will also be able to build a sustainable future .
Mr President , again I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Paliadeli , for her report .
In my view , it is an excellent and necessary one .
Furthermore , it is well worth moving ahead with the European Heritage Label project on the basis of the report .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , creating a European identity and increasing citizens ' interest in the European Union and its origins are two challenges that the European institutions must face up to in order to achieve broad cohesion and solidarity .
Furthermore , these challenges are at the heart of the goals of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Indeed , Article 3 of the Treaty establishes the EU 's obligation to safeguard European cultural development .
If the European dream is going through a difficult phase at the moment , this is not only down to the impasse regarding Europe as a political project , or the ongoing economic crisis , but is also due to the difficulties faced by a Union founded on an as yet unresolved identity .
In this situation , it is more necessary than ever to reduce the gap between the European Union and its citizens , bringing the multinational yet shared cultural heritage of the European Union to its citizens and , above all , to future generations .
This is the meaning and importance of a European Heritage Label : to bring Europe together in its diversity , promoting a shared culture and favouring integration between the places involved within its territory .
In order to realise this objective , the new label will focus on the symbolic educational value rather than on the aesthetic beauty of a site , favouring cooperation between sites and supporting joint projects amongst them .
I should therefore like to pay tribute to the excellent work done by Mrs Paliadeli and the rest of the Committee on Culture and Education , in particular , with regard to the procedure for selecting the sites and strengthening the role of the European Parliament during the selection process .
I am sure that the Member States ' decision to insert the label within the framework of the European Union will contribute to increasing its visibility and prestige , so as to realise the objectives of cohesion and solidarity among European citizens .
( RO ) Mr President , I , too , would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for the excellent report she managed to produce and for the negotiations she conducted with the Commission and Council .
Even though she failed to have the European Union Cultural Heritage Label established , the European Heritage Label is still excellent , as is the project itself .
I firmly believe that if it follows in the footsteps of the European Capital of Culture project , it will be hugely successful .
It is an excellent initiative , especially as it gives rise to cross-border projects .
A number of states are collaborating in order to share the same values and traditions which they have enjoyed together for hundreds of years .
I come from a city located at the European Union 's eastern border , perhaps the largest cultural city on the eastern border , just 10 km from the border .
However , I have also been to Santiago de Compostela , which is virtually on the European Union 's western border - two cultural centres with very many things in common , but also with very many differences between them .
One place is an Orthodox centre of pilgrimage , while the other is a Catholic centre of pilgrimage .
We see the values we share most clearly when we go outside the European Union 's borders , when we travel on other continents .
We then get a very clear picture of the values that we have been sharing for hundreds of years and of the fact that we have a common culture and certain features that differentiate us from other peoples .
The European Union , or rather European Heritage Label , acquires its significance therefore when we go outside the European Union 's borders .
I congratulate you once again on this report and I firmly believe that it will be a successful project .
( HU ) Mr President , I welcome the fact that in the course of this session , this is the second proposal we are voting on that intends to bridge the gap between the European Union and its citizens .
Converted from the intergovernmental programmes of several European countries into an official EU action , the introduction of the European Heritage Label will strengthen the sense of belonging to the EU , and will reinforce the recognition of differences and intercultural dialogue .
It will make citizens , especially young people , aware of the importance of their role in European history and European symbolism .
It can raise our awareness of our common cultural heritage .
The sites that are awarded the label will be more accessible , especially to young people , and the objects embodying our common history will be put to use more appropriately .
What please me most , personally , are the organisational aspects of the action , namely , that the selection and supervision procedures will be conducted along common , unambiguous and transparent criteria , and professional exchange of experience will proliferate .
As an elected Member representing a national minority , I note with satisfaction that in the case of Romania , for example , sites nominated by objective , international experts will also have the chance of being selected in addition to the four objects already holding the label .
Such sites include the Teleki Library in Târgu-Mureş , which is known as one of the bastions of Hungarian culture , or the Black Church of Braşov , which is considered a quintessential example of Saxon Gothic architectural excellence .
( CS ) Mr President , the European Heritage Label is undoubtedly a good initiative , and a continuation of the intergovernmental project now operating since 2006 .
The aim of the initiative is to contribute towards the creation of a common European identity , increasing interest in the European Union and its values .
The concept of ' cultural heritage ' is very broad , and that is a good thing .
I am delighted that the proposal for amendment incorporating industrial heritage into this category was also adopted in the report .
Industry is one of the important components of common European history - after all , Europe was the cradle of the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century , and the beginning of the EU is linked to the founding of the European Coal and Steel Community .
It is also linked , however , with the common history of movements for civil and social rights .
One of the areas expected to benefit from the European Heritage Label is the area of tourism .
I firmly believe that this is an opportunity to make use of the monuments of common European history to develop tourism in those regions which are not traditional tourist destinations too .
This type of monument is , in my opinion , unjustly overlooked , and all that is required is to discover and make use of its potential .
I therefore welcome and support the report very much , and in this context , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Paliadeli .
( PL ) Mr President , in the period before the Treaty of Lisbon was enacted , we were faced with a situation in which the citizens of the EU were becoming markedly less interested in its affairs and activities .
Adopting the Treaty of Lisbon was intended not only to provide a solution to problems relating to the need for better functioning institutions , but also to involve Europe 's citizens more closely in the EU 's activities , for example , by means of the citizens ' initiative .
The European Heritage Label is a further step towards building a European identity and strengthening the links between citizens and the EU .
Over the past four years , the Member States have designated 64 sites with particular significance for Europe .
By discovering our shared history and learning about the European Union 's role and its cultural diversity based on common democratic values and human rights , we can strengthen the sense of belonging to a large European family , within the framework of the EU , in the inhabitants of our Community .
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome these proposals and I think they will grow and develop the tourism industry , something which is much needed these days .
Despite all the criticism that Europe gets , I think most citizens still value Europe and particularly a label with Europe on it .
I have seen that in relation to the European City of Sport .
Limerick , in my own constituency , got that award recently and it was much valued .
The same is true of the European Cities of Culture and it will certainly apply to the European Heritage sites .
There are a few good things about this which should be commended .
One is that you have to maintain the site , so that you will not get it forever without actually ensuring you deserve it .
Secondly , there is the point made by Mr Martin , which was well answered by Mr Scurria , that red tape will not stifle it .
I think we can be very proud of this .
It has a lot of potential .
( LT ) Mr President , there are often discussions among citizens on the future of the European Union .
The foundations of a strong Union and a successful future are built on trust and mutual accommodation , just like in a family .
The European Heritage Label is a means for people to find out more about others , to find those things and recognise personalities and movements that symbolise the building of Europe .
The identification of a shared cultural heritage is an opportunity to strengthen a single and united Europe .
All nations and countries , we all have a different , varied historical experience , often painful , but it is these differences that go together to make up our family and form our European identity .
In particular , I would like to emphasise the division of Europe that lasted for many years and the different or total lack of opportunities for the development of democracy .
I am talking about Eastern Europe and occupation by the Soviet Union .
However , there was always a struggle for the idea of a united Europe there too , and we must appreciate ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , nobody can accuse us of not being consistent .
In the Treaty of Lisbon , we established citizenship of the EU for its inhabitants , and yesterday we had the opportunity to vote on the citizens ' initiative .
Today , we are adopting a symbol , namely the European Heritage Label .
This will unquestionably boost the EU 's identity and citizenship or , in other words , all the values that are of such importance to us .
I believe that this label will act as an outstanding complement to both the UNESCO list and the European Cultural Routes , as well as the European Capitals of Culture .
Anyone who travels knows the value and importance of such schemes .
I believe that promoting European culture to the very heart of Europe , to Europeans , is a fundamental aspect .
A good deal of Europe is still undiscovered in this respect , but the promotion of European culture outside Europe also plays a key role .
What is most important is that this label be promoted successfully by the Commissioner and the Member States .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to take my turn in congratulating our rapporteur , Mrs Paliadeli , on her excellent report and on all her efforts to date .
This new European Heritage Label highlights our culture , highlights the European spirit and satisfies all of us who frequently visit sites in Europe and think it is a shame that we do not highlight the added value of Europe , all these historical monuments that we badly need to advertise .
At the moment , as you know , Europe is concerned not only with the economic crisis , as is only natural ; Europe post-Lisbon wants to highlight its cultural cohesion , the rich history , the mosaic that defines it .
Of course , this needs to be done with the active participation of the European Parliament and I trust that negotiations with the Council on Article 18 will turn out well .
( RO ) Mr President , I welcome the intergovernmental European Heritage Label project being turned into a formal European Union initiative at a time when the initial project has not enjoyed the high profile and prestige which it deserves .
This project allows us to open a door as well to countries which enrich our continent 's culture without being part of the European Union .
One key aspect is the re-evaluation of sites which have already been designated under the intergovernmental agreement , as well as ensuring fairness with regard to states with a different number of initially registered sites .
In addition , in the case where the sites cannot be re-evaluated directly , it is important for them to have the opportunity to reapply for the label in order to offer them more opportunities .
Awarding the European Heritage Label for an unlimited period , without a regular re-evaluation , would help make more efficient use of the reduced budget allocated to the project .
The European Heritage Label will raise the general public 's awareness of the diversity of our common cultural heritage and cultural tourism .
( RO ) Mr President , creating a European identity and increasing the level of interest in the EU are major challenges .
They are capable of generating cohesion and solidarity on a large scale .
The European Heritage Label could meet its objectives in a more effective way if it was managed as an EU initiative .
It must be based on the same criteria and have a very clearly defined monitoring system .
One of the upshots of this will be to boost cultural tourism .
Just as in the case of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites , the label will increase tourist numbers and provide a fresh boost to local economies .
I welcome the Commission 's intention to use the European Heritage Label along with the other instruments designed to establish a stronger link between the EU and its citizens .
I wish to end by stressing the importance of promoting intercultural dialogue .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it seems that the majority of Members who took the floor stressed the importance of this European initiative and the real added value of it .
They stressed the importance of this initiative in promoting Europe , the common European history and heritage , the educational value of this initiative and its significance in creating and encouraging more cultural dialogue .
I am very pleased and very grateful for this approval .
I would like to make it clear that the experts who are going to be appointed for the decisions on this important initiative will certainly have the highest professional credentials to make sure that they choose not only the best and highest value sites , but also ideas .
Let me remind you that this heritage is not only about sites , but also about intangible cultural heritage .
For example , in Portugal , we have the decree which was the first decree in Europe abolishing the death sentence .
That was included with the list of labels , so this heritage can be intangible as well .
I also want to clarify that our purpose is indeed to have a simplified procedure - quality but simplification is important .
That is why we have not accepted the Council 's proposal that after the experts ' group , the initiative would go to comitology , as that would create red tape and waste valuable time for the decision to be adopted .
I would like to finish by saying that in these times of economic crisis which create divisions between the peoples of Europe politically , socially and economically , we need initiatives like this which will bring the people of Europe together .
They will have a sense of identity , and we have to stress the importance of our common cultural heritage whose richness does indeed lie in its diversity .
Common but diverse cultural heritage is what will unite us .
I would like to thank you once again for your support , especially Ms Paliadeli and the shadow rapporteurs for this excellent cooperation we had , and I am looking forward to the final adoption of this important initiative in the near future .
Mr President , I should like to start by stating that I share the views expressed , both on the impact assessment of the European Heritage Label and its added cultural value .
The label alone cannot bridge the gap between the public and the European Union .
It can simply help , together with other initiatives , to address the problem .
Of course , I cannot hide the fact that , in times of crisis , such as the recent crisis we have been experiencing , with the savage attack on the euro and the European Union , the public does not look solely to culture to resolve their basic day-to-day issues .
However , a knowledge of history and respect for multiculturalism may act both as a cohesion instrument and as an incentive to growth for local communities , by calling on them to cooperate at local , regional , national and transnational level , as stated in the Commission proposal and as accepted by us .
From this perspective , the idea of a cultural heritage label for the European Union - my thanks to Mr Ivan who remembered the initial proposal - which is designed to enhance the European public 's awareness of their common heritage and , at the same time , to support cultural tourism , is a positive step in this direction .
Values such as democracy and freedom , which are rooted in Europe 's cultural past , are as important as transparency and solidarity nowadays , especially if we want to bridge the gap between the European institutions and the citizens of the Member States of the Union and the gap between the citizens of the Member States .
Of course , we shall need to address bureaucracy issues , but I can assure you that the transparency and composition of the European team of experts will be subject to extremely clear conditions .
There is no doubt that the institution will operate with absolute clarity .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Turning the European Heritage Label initiative into an official EU action will provide particular added value to all the actions being carried out by Member States , while also making an important contribution to creating a common European identity .
I welcome this initiative and the report that has been presented .
I also want to mention that the European Heritage Label could be extended very successfully and with a beneficial impact to activities relating to traditional rural tourism , a flourishing sector in European states .
Indeed , this is one of the proposals I am going to submit to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development when presenting the opinion on the role which rural tourism and agritourism play in achieving the EU 's objective of turning Europe into the number one tourist destination in the world .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Paliadeli on her work on this report .
Establishing and awarding the European Heritage Label is an initiative that deserves special attention .
The European dimension and the significance of the sites put forward will help to foster European identity and a sense of European citizenship .
Our continent 's history is an important element that could contribute to the integration of the peoples of Europe .
Our younger generation must be properly aware of our common European heritage because it is very important for there to be no variations in the different versions or attempts at populist interpretation , as this is our common European history and it reflects our entire cultural and linguistic diversity .
The selection procedure must make sure that only sites of suitable quality are chosen .
I believe that Member States should submit their proposals in close collaboration with local and regional authorities .
This will help popularise the sites at national level and bridge the gap between the European institutions and European citizens .
As a Member of the European Parliament , the only democratically elected body which represents its citizens , I believe that it needs to play a greater role in this initiative .
I fully subscribe to the statement in the report that there is an enormous gap between the EU and the citizens of the European Member States , as more than half of them have a none too favourable opinion about the EU .
With the renaming of the European Heritage Label as the European Union Heritage Label , and with the accompanying modifications , we are launching another grandiose , costly and superfluous campaign of EU self-advertising and propaganda .
Disregarding such minor details as a monument to the Slovak nationalist and separatist , Stefanik , being deemed an exemplary artefact of the heritage of European Union cooperation , this new initiative , too , will fail to bring people closer to the EU .
Furthermore , it is unclear that if the European Heritage Label does indeed not intend to duplicate the already existing UNESCO World Heritage List , then why is it intended to be extended to third countries , and which countries does the report have in mind in this regard ?
Participation of Switzerland in the ' Youth in Action ' programme and in the action programme in the field of lifelong learning ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation by Mrs Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation establishing the terms and conditions for the participation of the Swiss Confederation in the ' Youth in Action ' programme and in the action programme in the field of lifelong learning ( 2007-2013 ) ( 12818 / 2010 - C7-0277 / 2010 - 2010 / 0231 ( NLE ) ) .
Mr President , I am very pleased that we have the opportunity to lead this debate today because I remember that we both always cooperated with Switzerland in the European Council and are therefore both aware of how important it is for Switzerland to participate in these programmes .
In 2006 , before these programmes were renewed , we , the European Parliament , were naturally aware that we do not exist in isolation , but that we should try to bring everyone else onboard with us .
Although Switzerland is not part of the European Economic Area , it was interested in participating in the field of training and education .
Like everyone else , I was very pleased with this development .
In 2004 , I was part of a delegation that visited the Swiss Parliament 's Committee on Training .
We discussed the relevant issues in detail , for example , mobility and cooperation between schools and universities .
It was clear to me at the time that this motion would eventually be forthcoming and I welcome it now .
In drawing up these programmes , we were not just thinking of our own interests , but also those of all neighbouring countries , such as the countries of the Western Balkans and Switzerland itself , situated in the middle .
That is why we have made some good progress today .
Concerning the previous debate , I can tell you now that Switzerland also intends to issue a request to join in the cultural programme .
It is also interested in participating in the cultural heritage labelling scheme , something it can only do if it participates in this programme .
Ladies and gentlemen , what is it that we need to do today ?
We can either say ' yes ' or ' no ' .
None of us would dream of saying ' no ' because we have always been in favour of Switzerland coming on board .
I should add that by ' coming on board ' , I mean that it will also pay its share .
According to Article 218 , our only choice is to say ' yes ' or ' no ' , and , of course , we are going to give a clear yes to this .
What are the key points of this agreement with Switzerland ?
Naturally , the conditions , rules and procedures for projects and initiatives involving Swiss participants will be the same as for participants from the Member States and the projects they propose .
Switzerland will have to set up a national agency , just as we all have done in our respective countries , that will coordinate the implementation of the programmes at national level and that will be required to make a financial contribution to each of the programmes each year .
In 2011 , this would amount to EUR 1.7 million for the ' Youth in Action ' programme and EUR 14.2 million for the Lifelong Learning programme .
With reference to the financial controls and audit provisions , Switzerland will be required to adhere to the provisions of the European Union , including those relating to the controls by the institutions of the EU and by the Swiss authorities .
The agreement will remain in place until one of the parties pulls out .
However , I do not believe that anyone would enter into a programme like this with the intention of ever withdrawing again .
It is in the interests of the younger generation in Switzerland and , of course , of the young people from the countries surrounding Switzerland who would like to participate in school exchanges with Switzerland as part of the Comenius-Regio programme , or in individual school partnerships , as well as the Erasmus programme .
Naturally , representatives from the Swiss authorities will be able to attend our committee meetings on points which concern their country .
Let me say one thing here : we are anxious that Switzerland should take the plunge with this step .
It has expressed an interest in such an arrangement for a long time .
It is our hope that European awareness in Switzerland will be strengthened when the younger generation has an opportunity to interact with other young Europeans .
Perhaps this will mean that future referenda will have a different outcome from those in the past .
We are placing our faith in the younger generation and in these two marvellous programmes .
I am confident that the cultural programme will be added in three years ' time .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , according to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the conclusion of this agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation needs the consent of Parliament before the agreement can come into force .
I want to thank the Committee on Culture and Education , and particularly its chair , Doris Pack , for their constructive approach to the agreement .
Since Switzerland refused to join the European Economic Area , no agreement , until now , has allowed direct or indirect cooperation in education between the EU and Switzerland .
However , Switzerland has , for a long time , shown interest in our education and youth programmes .
It has even developed a national support system to encourage partnerships with EU Member States ' organisations active in these programmes .
Furthermore , Switzerland has participated in the Bologna Process and the creation of the European Higher Education Area .
Switzerland has also followed closely , albeit from the outside , the debate on education policies in the European Union .
Switzerland will be the first country to take part in our programmes that is neither an EU Member State nor a member of the European Economic Area , nor a current or potential EU candidate .
The Commission welcomes the participation of Switzerland in the two programmes .
The agreement will allow Swiss education and youth organisations , as well as individual students , teachers and young people , to participate in the EU 's Youth in Action and Lifelong Learning programmes on completely equal terms with EU citizens .
Projects and initiatives submitted by participants from Switzerland will be subject to the same conditions , rules and procedures that apply to projects from Member States .
Switzerland has established a national agency to coordinate implementation of the programmes at national level .
It will make an annual financial contribution to each of the programmes and will attend programme committee meetings as an observer for the points that concern Switzerland .
Thank you , honourable Members , for the good work you have done in this case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , other than the Commission , I should also certainly like to thank the Chair of the Committee on Culture and Education , Mrs Pack , for the work and dedication that she has lavished on this dossier .
What we are talking about today is important because it is an instrument like ' Youth in Action ' that creates the spread of ideas , closeness and friendship amongst the countries of the European Union , but also , and above all , amongst those that are not part of it , such as Switzerland or other countries besides .
It is the great richness of our multiannual programmes that , through actions such as ' Youth in Action ' , ' Erasmus ' , ' Erasmus Mundus ' , ' Permanent Education ' , ' Media ' , ' Media Mundus ' and many others , they allow relationships to be built between the countries of the European Union and third countries .
Through these programmes , you see , we have brought the European Union to life , allowing many citizens - primarily young people - to meet , swap experiences , come to know others and to become known themselves .
We have given teachers and workers in general the chance to improve their professional skills and we have given directors , producers and associations of various countries the chance to do better work .
Hence , these programmes are important and so we were a bit concerned when we did not see them on the Commission 's Work Programme for next year .
Today , therefore , today we are approving an important step , which makes the EU grow , strengthens citizenship on our continent , and - given that we spoke about it a little while earlier regarding the European Heritage Label - it is a step that contributes to creating this European identity of ours .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I endorse the rapporteur 's draft report on agreeing to the participation of the Confederation of Switzerland in the ' Youth in Action ' programme and in the action programme in the field of lifelong learning .
The agreement has been appropriately negotiated and protects the EU 's interests , and the legal bases for European programmes in fields relating to education , training and youth provide for Switzerland 's participation .
The principles governing this participation have been outlined in detail , which guarantees that the programmes will be implemented appropriately and fairly .
Switzerland is keen to cooperate with the EU in the field of education , training and youth , and so our agreement should be self-evident .
We are delighted that the EU 's education programmes are so attractive and effective that other countries are joining them .
The latest European Commission research shows that the ' Youth in Action ' programme increases young people 's linguistic abilities and their chances in the labour market .
The opportunities for adult education are still not being fully exploited , however , even though there is enormous potential in this area .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , right from the outset , I wish to thank our committee 's excellent Chair , Doris Pack , who also drafted this report .
I might say that when this proposal was in the hands of Doris Pack , it was in good hands .
As our worthy Commissioner knows very well , Mrs Pack has much professional experience and expertise in these very areas of lifelong learning and youth programmes .
When preparations were being made regarding this issue , it was a joy to observe how well this work progressed .
It is excellent that young people in Switzerland are also to share in the success stories that we in the European Union have created .
It is quite true that even those who take a critical view of the European Union , who are even opposed to it , nevertheless unanimously agree that the European Union does indeed have success stories , such as the programmes that relate to lifelong learning , youth and culture .
This is one of the best aspects of the European Union , and one which we should do much to ensure remains visible .
It is because of the European Union and these programmes that we have been able to encourage young Europeans to pursue a path of education and training and to increase their personal capital .
It has also , however , increased the capital of nations .
In this connection , it is very important that Switzerland is not in any way excluded from this system of cooperation , even though it is not a member of the EU or the EEA .
Instead , young people in Switzerland should be given the opportunity to participate in the programmes and things should therefore be taken forward on a reciprocal basis .
I believe that that will generate added value in all respects .
Mr President , finally , I wish to thank our rapporteur .
I hope that this programme will be a success story for the Swiss too , as it has been for us , the citizens of the Member States of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , this report was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Culture and Education , where everyone acknowledged that it was a good idea .
It really is a good idea which should be entirely uncontroversial , since it exemplifies the values we are discussing .
In fact , this may well be one of those reports to which the Chamber can lend its unanimous support , even if Switzerland 's situation is a unique one , as the Commissioner said .
It is a very interesting country which is very special in political terms , and which engages in very interesting forms of cooperation with Europe while not being party to many European agreements , and for this very reason , it is worth building links with this country by means of uncontroversial and universally accepted programmes of this kind .
Mr President , even though Switzerland has not yet decided to become a Member State of the European Union , it has long shown a serious interest in broad cooperation with the EU in the area of education and professional training for young people .
After the establishment of the Youth in Action and Lifelong Learning programmes in 2006 , a legal foundation was put in place for cooperation between Switzerland and the EU in this area .
The European Commission , in accordance with the recommendations of the European Council following talks with Swiss counterparts , has drawn up an agreement making it possible for us to develop effective cooperation with our Swiss friends in the area of education and professional training of young people , as well as in the area of lifelong learning .
The agreement is correct , balanced and expresses the interests of both signatories to expand mutual cooperation and support the exchange of knowledge and expertise in the interests of improving the quality of the education process .
In my opinion , Commissioner , this agreement between the EU and Switzerland therefore represents a step in the right direction .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Pack , and I agree entirely with her recommendations on the ' Youth in Action ' and Lifelong Learning programmes and the participation of Switzerland in these .
I would say that Switzerland is not just a beautiful and orderly country ; it is of great interest to the European Union due to its direct democracy , the confederation of cantons .
On the other hand , the European Union must also be of interest to Switzerland , because Switzerland is entirely surrounded by EU Member States .
Finally , Switzerland is tuning its pulse of life to the European Union .
I believe that once this programme has been adopted , it will be possible to do this even better .
Switzerland will come even closer to the European Union , and the EU will understand Switzerland better ; as our colleague Doris Pack mentioned , we will be able to anticipate better results in referenda .
Mr President , I welcome the moves for Switzerland to increase its cooperation with the EU in the fields of education , training and youth .
The Youth in Action programme is a very important programme for young European citizens .
It is a programme that needs to be highlighted more , and its aims and objectives need to be realised , in particular , with regard to the European Voluntary Service 's activities under the Youth in Action programme .
Given that next year is the European Year of Volunteering , it is particularly significant that the European Voluntary Service - which supports young people 's participation in voluntary activity and aims to develop solidarity and promote active citizenship amongst young people - is strengthened .
In Ireland , volunteering in grassroots sports organisations offers sporting and leadership opportunities to thousands of young people .
These organisations encourage active citizenship amongst young people , while promoting health , fitness and an active lifestyle .
The programme and its voluntary measures should be enhanced and strong links should be forged with Switzerland in this regard .
There are many possibilities under the Youth in Action programme , and any measures to enhance its aims and to encourage and support young people in the EU should be sustained and strongly encouraged .
( LT ) Mr President , rapporteur , I would like to thank you for your work and say that I really support your recommendation that the European Parliament should approve the Council decision on Switzerland 's participation in the ' Youth in Action ' and Lifelong Learning programmes , because the Commission 's agreement with the Swiss authorities meets all the requirements , provisions and conditions .
Furthermore , the Swiss National Agency will cooperate on the implementation of the programmes at national level and will contribute financially to each programme on an annual basis .
This bilateral agreement is very important both for Switzerland itself and the European Union , because the young people of Switzerland will be able to take advantage of various opportunities according to the ' Youth in Action ' programme and vice versa .
The European Union 's young citizens will be able to participate in all projects alongside Switzerland 's young people .
I am therefore delighted that although it is not part of the European Economic Area and is not an EU Member State , Switzerland is nevertheless cooperating closely with the European Union in the fields of education , training and youth affairs .
Mr President , ever since I came to the European Parliament , I keep asking myself why Switzerland and Norway have not joined the European Union , and I wonder if it is because they have the best of both worlds .
The benefits of being in the European Union without the obligations .
Here today , I am a bit dubious as well .
The Commissioner mentioned they will have to pay .
Of course they will have to pay , but normally non-members pay more than members of clubs .
However , I will bow to the superior wisdom and experience of Doris Pack in saying that this may be the way forward .
It may help create greater European awareness among the citizens in Switzerland and they may one day join the European Union .
If that happens , which I hope it will , I think all the credit will have to go to the Commissioner and Doris Pack for their enlightened approach .
In this season of goodwill , I am prepared to go along with the proposals .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , European youth is a generation that has been given the privilege to grow up on a peaceful continent almost free of boundaries , which is characterised by mobility and multilingualism , and which also offers a wide range of cultural and economic opportunities .
In order to ensure that more and more young people engage in active citizenship , we need to establish stable aid schemes in the field of youth policy .
It is true that Switzerland is not a member of the European Economic Area , but it closely cooperates with the European Union , and it does so not only in the fields of education , training and youth .
Since 2008 , Switzerland has participated in , and financed , several projects that aim to reduce economic and social differences within an extended Europe .
Switzerland has expressed solidarity with , and commitment to , the enlargement of the European Union , and aims to establish firm economic and political relations with the new Member States .
I agree with the key points of the agreement on the participation of Switzerland in the programme , which would make it an equal partner ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if this programme is brought to fruition today , it is thanks to the determination of Mrs Pack and the will of Commissioner Vassiliou .
As an Italian-Swiss citizen , I am happy that Switzerland is the first country from outside the European Union to participate in EU education programmes for young people , both in higher education and continuing skills training .
Indeed , let us remember that even if Switzerland is not part of the European Union , it has made a major contribution to building the values and freedoms that are a shared heritage of the European continent .
It is a symptom of the success of programmes such as ' Youth in Action ' that Switzerland requests that the mobility of our European programmes be extended to their young people and therefore , it is of significant importance that Switzerland is not only requesting a larger economic area but also a larger educational area .
I believe that it will be very interesting for the young people of the European Union and Switzerland to get to know each other better , and I am sure that this will lay foundations that will also have an influence on the future of the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , understandably enough , Switzerland , which provides some of the financial backing for the ' Youth in Action ' and Lifelong Learning programmes , now wishes to participate in these programmes .
However , in the spirit of learning , it would also be good if the EU were to take a leaf out of Switzerland 's book when it comes to direct democracy .
When the Swiss population decides against the erection of minarets , this decision is accepted .
Likewise , the recent initiative on the deportation of foreign criminals .
The Swiss authorities are aware that when the people say ' no ' , they mean ' no ' , so that they do not simply continue to hold ballots until they get the result they want , as has happened in the EU in the case of Ireland , for example .
The fact is that the original rejection of the constitutional treaty for Europe at that time may have made it easier for some Swiss to vote in favour of the Schengen and Dublin Agreements .
They might find it easier to form an alliance with a loose federation of states than with a centralist European Union .
This is something that cannot be concealed by the voices currently being heard in Switzerland calling for accession to the EU .
Not everything in the European Union garden is rosy ; centralising tendencies are on the rise and developments are moving inexorably in the direction of a transfer union .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to extend my very warm thanks to Mrs Pack and the Commissioner for taking this initiative .
I think that Switzerland , an enclave surrounded on all sides by EU Member States , does , in fact , need to be open to the programmes .
I think that young people are not always aware that , since they are not yet part of the European Union , they cannot benefit from this supranational European programme , which provides an excellent way to integrate young people and exchange best practices , and which really does ensure that cooperation and lifelong learning can be truly European .
I would also , and most importantly , like to offer thanks for the fact that today , we will be able to transfer a model of European programmes to a country which is not a European Union Member State .
In the same spirit of acceptance and invitation , I would also like to encourage Mrs Pack and the Commissioner maybe to extend similar schemes to include other countries that are willing .
I am thinking here mainly about the Eastern Partnership and also the Balkans , or , in other words , countries that are not yet formally European Union Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , like everyone else here , I have the feeling that Switzerland may come increasingly closer to Europe in this way , eventually , and hopefully soon , becoming a full member of the European Union , something that is certainly greatly to be welcomed .
We should be encouraged by this small white spot in the middle of the map of Europe .
According to our estimates , the ' Youth in Action ' programme will reach about one million people .
The important prevailing aim is that youth organisations should take part .
This is a signal to the next generation that their active participation is very welcome .
I would also like to express my appreciation to Mrs Pack for her efforts .
We need to reach out from the Union to other countries , in this case Switzerland , as this is the only way that we can achieve success .
Simply waiting for the Swiss to ask to join the European Union will probably not be enough in times like these .
In addition , we must not forget that financial support for the Committee on Culture and Education in particular gives us reason to hope that Switzerland will also join in other programmes soon .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank everyone for warmly welcoming this initiative .
It was my pleasure to have signed this act between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation as my first act as Commissioner for Education , Culture and Youth .
I welcome this development , and I wish Switzerland was also in a position to join us in the culture programme , which they cannot for internal constitutional reasons .
As many speakers stress , we welcome the creation of closer relations between the youth of Switzerland and the youth of the EU Member States .
We see it as a means of paving the way for greater support for the European project in Switzerland , which we hope will change its mind in future and decide to join us in the European Union .
I also take note that honourable Members encourage other non-EU members to join this programme , something which we shall , of course , promote .
Thank you very much for your support .
Mr President , I am very pleased to see that some of my fellow Members from the ranks of the Euro-sceptics have voted in favour of this motion , agreeing how wonderful it is that Switzerland is to join this programme and that there will be greater European cooperation on education .
This will open up horizons perhaps also for the Members themselves , but certainly for the younger generation in Switzerland .
We are pleased with this .
Mr Mölzer is no longer here , but I note that he did not mention the fact that Switzerland did not hold a referendum on this cooperation .
It is indeed remarkable that Switzerland decided against such a step in this area in particular .
After all , it can be sure that the younger generation has been waiting a long time for the opportunity for such cooperation .
Mr Mölzer obviously failed to notice that a referendum did not take place in this case .
The people do not need to be consulted on every single issue .
Good things , such as accession to the European Union , will be self-evident .
I hope that the younger generation will benefit from the fruitful cooperation in these education and youth programmes and that they will become real Europeans who , at some stage , will say : ' Now is the time for us also to join the European Union , sharing with the rest of Europe in all other policy areas .
We are a single continent , and should also agree on these questions ' .
I am certain that these education programmes will play an important role in enhancing European awareness among the people throughout Switzerland .
Thank you , Mrs Pack , I would like to congratulate you , not only on this report , but also on your hard work and enthusiasm , and also for being in Madrid at the weekend to promote the LUX Prize .
I am not going to be able to be with you on the 17th , although I would very much have liked to be there .
On the 18th and 19th , I will be able to participate in the meetings .
Thank you , the truth is that Parliament needs people like Mrs Pack in order to achieve the effectiveness that we all need .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I find it encouraging that Switzerland wants to participate in the European Union 's education and youth programmes , especially as this country is not yet a member of the EU or of the European Economic Area either .
This involvement in EU programmes is also important from the perspective that we have not had , until now , a direct cultural and education agreement .
However , Switzerland 's participation in the Bologna Process and the creation of the European Higher Education Area guarantee that we can create together the conditions for achieving the 2020 strategy 's objectives , establishing in the process a strong link between Member States and third countries .
Meetings between young people , exchanges of experience between teachers and researchers and increased opportunities for lifelong learning will help us create a common European identity .
However , I want to stress that we also need to consider including the other countries bordering the EU in our programmes because education and culture should not stop at our borders .
This will enable us to rebuild the continent of Europe and encourage young people to become actively involved in shaping our common future .
The participation of Switzerland , a country that chose not to be a part of the European Union , in the ' Youth in Action ' programme and in the action programme in the field of lifelong learning cannot be ruled out a priori , but should be carefully evaluated .
I therefore support the terms of the agreement reached between the Commission and the Swiss Government , so I am voting for the report by Mrs Pack .
It is right to grant the benefits of the programmes to Switzerland , but it is also right to safeguard all the financial and other interests of the European Union .
The aim of the Lifelong Learning programme , which is included in the Seventh Framework Programme , is to develop various forms of learning throughout people 's professional lives , by supporting cooperation between education and training systems in countries participating in the programme .
The programme 's target group is not only students or secondary school pupils , but also adults , thanks to the Grundtvig programme , and training staff , for whom study visits are provided .
The year-on-year increase in the budget earmarked for this programme , which amounts to nearly EUR 1.028 billion in 2011 , is a sign of the justified need for development and cooperation in this field .
In a time of such high youth unemployment due to a lack of education adapted to the needs of the labour market , and a lack of appropriate professional training for graduates , we must concentrate on making the maximum possible use of the opportunities afforded to us by the Lifelong Learning programme , and find a solution for such a difficult situation .
I welcome the initiative to include Switzerland in cooperation in this area .
I hope that the joint exchange of experience will help raise employment levels and increase the mobility of the labour market .
Welfare of laying hens ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Paolo De Castro , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the welfare of laying hens - B7-0657 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today represents an important opportunity to discuss the strategic issue of protecting animal welfare in agriculture .
On 1 January 2012 , the terms of Council Directive 1999 / 74 / EC will enter into force , laying down minimum standards for the protection of hens , tantamount to the abolition of conventional battery cages as a system of rearing for the production of eggs .
This method of animal housing will be banned in favour of systems of rearing that guarantee better animal welfare .
Mr President , the memory of the Council of the European Union on Agriculture , held on 19 July 1999 , is fresh in my mind .
It was an important day , on which , as the representative of my country ( at the time I was the Italian Minister for Agriculture ) , I contributed to the approval of this important directive by voting for it .
Now , one year after the irrevocable entry into force of the new legislation , data show that European producers are proceeding to adapt their production system , but not without running into difficulties .
What we need is a concrete commitment from the Commission to safeguard animal welfare , to protect producers who have adapted their system of rearing to Council Directive 1999 / 74 / EC , and , at the same time , to effectively guarantee the passage of the new legislation , avoiding distortions in terms of market competition .
This is why my fellow Members and I felt it appropriate to add this important topic to the agenda of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which I have the honour of chairing .
Hard work over recent months , involving all parliamentary groups , resulted in the oral question of 28 October 2010 , which puts three important issues to the Commission :
Firstly , to report on the implementation of the new legislation within the Member States ;
Secondly , the actions to be taken in the Member States to guarantee compliance with the terms of the directive , and compromising where necessary with those undertakings that show a genuine desire to adapt .
Lastly , measures and guarantees to be adopted to avoid crises in the egg market in the coming years and to prevent unfair competition from third countries that are not obliged to respect the European Union directive within the European internal market .
These are the queries to which we are awaiting concrete and definitive responses from the Commission .
Lastly , we ask the Commissioner to guarantee a more transparent market , along the lines of the concept of so-called reciprocity of rules , in order to facilitate the prospect of greater international convergence on the animal welfare standards applied by the European Union .
Attending to this matter , which we have discussed a number of times in committee since the start of the legislature , is essential to prevent Europe 's efforts on animal welfare - our efforts , Commissioner - from being rendered useless by a market that is incapable of recognising the social values that are bound up in foodstuffs .
We need to reduce the distorting effects of the possibility that producers outside the European rules system could translate the lesser restrictions they are subject to into greater competitive advantages .
Mr President , adopting the motion for a resolution on the welfare of laying hens , which we will vote on this morning , could represent a first and important step in this direction .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I was asked by Commissioner Dalli to pass on his apologies for not being able to be here in person , but I was pleased to take this question as former Commissioner in charge of animal welfare and health .
On behalf of the Commission , I would like to underline that the ban on conventional cages which was adopted in 1999 represents an important improvement for animal welfare in the European Union .
Furthermore , it has stimulated intense debate worldwide .
I also wish to highlight that Member States are primarily responsible for implementing EU legislation on the protection of laying hens .
The Commission is making every effort to monitor enforcement in Member States , including through inspections carried out by the Commission 's experts , and through the data provided annually by the Member States on the basis of a specific Commission decision related to animal welfare inspections on farms .
Last month , in November 2010 , official data for 2009 on production sites for laying hens were submitted to the Commission by 24 Member States .
As of today , only 18 Member States have submitted complete data .
This data shows that 66 % of the production sites in those 18 Member States were keeping laying hens with free range systems , 29 % with barn systems , 3.5 % with conventional cage systems and 1 % with enriched cages .
However , the Commission is aware that important data gaps still exist and that three Member States did not reply at all while six Member States have only provided partial data .
Therefore , the above picture is far from being complete .
The Commission is continually asking Member States to complete the missing data on every possible occasion , including in the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health and the meetings of the chief veterinary officers .
Furthermore , the Commission asked Member States by a formal letter to submit their national action plans to implement the ban in order to better analyse the situation across the EU .
At this stage , the Commission is concentrating its efforts to ensure that Member States take the necessary measures to implement the ban on conventional cages by the legal deadline .
Member States are responsible for ensuring that eggs not produced in compliance with the directive on the protection of laying hens are not legally marketable according to EU legislation .
A better picture of the situation will be available next year after the stakeholder meeting .
The stakeholder meeting will take place in January 2011 .
Today , the import of shell eggs is very limited due to the short shelf life of the product as well as EU food safety requirements .
According to EU legislation , packs containing eggs imported from third countries where there are not sufficient guarantees as to the equivalency of production standards are to bear the indication of farming method as non-EU standard .
This label allows imported eggs not produced according to EU welfare requirements to be clearly distinguished .
The Commission will further examine the situation with all relevant stakeholders , as I said , in a meeting to be held on 19 January 2011 in Brussels , where options to ensure the smooth enforcement of the directive will be discussed .
Mr President , we are hurtling at breakneck speed towards a situation where millions of eggs will fail to comply with European rules .
After all , as has been said earlier today , it is expected that 30 % of all eggs produced in 2012 will breach the battery cage ban which we agreed in 1999 .
Commissioner , this is merely a matter of simple arithmetic .
It costs the farmer 8 to 13 % more to produce this kind of animal-friendly egg , from hens not confined in battery cages .
On the other hand , whether we like it or not , the average consumer will still opt for cheap eggs and is prepared to pay only 3 to 4 % more for this kind of animal-friendly egg .
The competitive disadvantage that arises from this situation therefore appears to be very clear .
The key question is : what are you , the European Commission , going to do to ensure that farmers who are complying properly with the rules and who have invested in alternatives are not penalised in favour of their colleagues who are lagging behind .
Commissioner , please do not just fob us off with the same old line that Member States are responsible for implementation and checks .
You are the guardian of the treaties , which is why all our eyes are on you .
I also find it very unfortunate that we are still discussing data and relying on getting a better picture next year , because it will be too late then !
What are we going to do ?
The pressure must be increased !
In our resolution , we are , of course , demanding maintenance of the cage ban , more inspections , that national action plans should ultimately have to be drawn up and an export ban on any eggs which are not produced according to the rules , amongst other things .
Commission , it is your move !
If you do nothing , then not only will bona fide chicken farmers suffer , but so too , I fear , will your credibility and that of all European animal welfare regulations .
Now , that is a situation that I believe we all want to avoid .

Mr President , like the Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr De Castro , 12 years ago , I , too , had the opportunity , as Minister for Agriculture , to participate in the decision to adopt the legislation that we are discussing here today .
It was a very long and difficult debate because we were confronted with two contradictory values : establishing conditions for animal welfare and ensuring the sector 's competitiveness .
The solution reached was to favour animal welfare and allow a sufficiently long period for the sector to adapt .
Although there is still one year until the new regulations come into force , the available data on farms that have not yet adapted are of concern to us , as the Commissioner indeed confirmed .
We cannot allow companies that have invested and made a great effort to be in a position to comply with this legislation to be penalised or subject to unfair competition .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for the information that she has provided us with , but we would like to obtain more detailed information on what point each Member State has actually reached .
We would also like to know what specific procedures the Commission is thinking of following to ensure that companies can , in general , comply with this legislation on 1 January 2012 , other than those the Commissioner has mentioned , and if there is actually a framework of penalties with a modicum of uniformity between the various Member States .
This is the intention of the resolution that we are discussing today , which will , I am sure , be widely supported in Parliament .
However , my group will be voting against removing , in whole or in part , points F , 8 , 9 and 14 , which contain wordings and objectives that we doubt are compatible with EU law and that will reduce the resolution 's credibility if they remain .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for the information at the beginning of this debate .
Regardless of whether you have the complete picture or not , the hard fact is that , as of 1 January next year , 80 million eggs in the European Union are likely to be produced under illegal cage systems .
That is going to be a fact .
We have a 12-month laying cycle .
There is no way that figure is going to change dramatically by that time .
I would like to know what I am going to say to the likes of John Campbell of Glenrath Farms and all the producers in the United Kingdom who have spent , on average , GBP 2 million each to comply with the legislation and now incur an extra cost that is between 8 and 10 % higher than under a conventional cage system .
What do I tell our consumers back home , to whom we promised that , by 1 January 2012 , there would be no more eggs on the market produced under the old conventional battery cage systems ?
I know what I want this Parliament and the Commission to say .
I want to be able to go back and tell them that we are going to take tough action to make sure that the legislation is complied with .
No derogations and no extensions .
After all , producers have had ten years to comply .
I want Member States who are compliant to be able to protect their consumers and their producers by being able to ban imports of illegally produced eggs from those producers and countries which are not compliant .
I also believe that the Commission should draw up a list , once it has the information , and name and shame those who have failed to comply .
It is no excuse to say that we were not aware it was coming .
Ten years is a long time in any business cycle to be able to prepare and invest .
Commissioner , when you are winding up this debate , I hope you will give us a strong statement saying that you understand the concerns of producers and consumers and a promise of tough action that protects both of them .
Mr President , Commissioner , your answers have failed to convince me .
The details provided by the Commission in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development were also far from convincing .
As Mr Lyon has already stated , this is a problem facing us down the line .
From 2012 onwards , 30 % of the eggs on the market will be illegal .
However , we have no idea how to deal with them .
Apparently , we are to trust states to meet their reporting obligations - permit me to ask why we do not initiate infringement proceedings or at least threaten such action , so as to make it quite clear that , at the end of the day , European law must apply in all Member States and to all farmers ?
We have built up a very high level of credibility in respect of animal welfare , and this is something we must also defend .
Citizens rightly expect these standards to be applied .
The public is very sensitive to animal welfare issues .
After all , we do provide funding and public support to the farming community because we have more stringent regulations in relation to environmental protection and animal welfare .
It is not unreasonable to expect something in return from all Member States .
For this reason , I should like to ask : What is the Commission going to do now ?
We have already made a demand at committee level .
We actually need to place a catalogue of measures on the table immediately .
We cannot accept the possibility of further discussions aimed at extending deadlines .
It cannot be that we now penalise those who have implemented policy by allowing others to work with transitional deadlines for even longer .
This will cause farmers to lose faith in the institutions of the European Union .
You raised a question in relation to labelling .
What will happen with products that contain liquid egg instead of fresh eggs , for example ?
How can we label such products ?
This point must be regulated immediately at the very least .
It has already been said several times that 10 years is a long time .
Everyone in the European Union must have known that these deadlines would have to be observed .
There can be no excuse for Member States , including new Member States , saying : ' Sorry , but we ran out of time .
Ten years really was not enough ' .
The European Union is in pole position when it comes to animal welfare .
We can use it to back up our arguments worldwide .
We can use it in argumentation with consumers , which is why we must implement this consistently if Parliament and the Commission are not to lose credibility in relation to the implementation of European standards .
For this reason , we are urgently calling on the Commission to take action , rather than wasting even more time risking a situation that will satisfy no one from 1 January 2012 onwards .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all , can I also say I am not totally convinced by what the Commissioner told us today .
There have been two occasions when officials from the Commission came to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and their performance and what they told us was not only unacceptable , it was abysmal and it was a disgrace .
Now I have listened to what the Commissioner said and I have listened with tremendous interest to some of the things she did say , but she has not given us anything other than the fact that they are going to meet the stakeholders in January .
So what are you going to say to the stakeholders in January , Commissioner ?
What is going to be the outcome of that ?
We want to know , because you have got to realise that , today , the last hens are already in the conventional cages that have got to meet that deadline .
They are already there .
There is normally a 13 to 14-month laying cycle for hens that go into conventional cages .
Now , you made a comment during your remarks and maybe you will reply or enlarge on it : you said that eggs from outside the EU not meeting equivalent standards would have a different mark .
What do you mean by that ?
Will you take on board the point that eggs within the EU produced unlawfully after 1 January 2012 will either have the same stamp , will not be allowed to be exported outside the country in which they are produced or will not be allowed to go onto the market ?
We have a terrible problem here because , as George Lyon said , there are 83 million eggs - we know that for a fact - which , on 1 January 2012 are going to be illegal .
Now that is also a terrible plight for us in Europe , where people require eggs to eat .
So what are we going to do here ?
I really think we need to know where we are going .
Will you give us an assurance that you will come back to this House in March with a proper proposal as to what you intend to do - what measures you intend to bring in - to actually control this situation ?
As has been outlined by others , many producers have already spent millions of pounds in conforming to the standards .
They cannot now be asked to take further pain by others who are not prepared to do the same .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the Commission has created a huge crisis in the egg industry .
Like it or not , 100 million birds will still be in cages on D-day - or should I say E-day ?
There is neither the cash nor the logistics to prevent this .
Insisting on the ruthless enforcement of its rules in a year 's time from the comfort of an armchair may give the speaker a great feeling of satisfaction , but it could seriously jeopardise the long-term health of the British egg sector .
Let us look at the practical implications .
How do you remove and dispose of 100 million hens in 24 hours ?
Or , how do you safely smash and dispose of 83 million eggs every day ?
On the assumption that you somehow succeed in either of these , where will consumers turn for their 83 million daily eggs ?
To Ukraine , to India , to Argentina , to Brazil , where all the eggs will have been laid in battery cages .
Do any of these countries have a reputation for high welfare standards ?
Once this trade starts , it will expand very rapidly by virtue of its competitive advantage .
It will be very difficult to stop .
It will completely undermine the efforts of colony egg producers in the UK .
In effect , we will export a large slice of our industry which has just made massive investments to stay compliant with EU rules .
I believe that an intra-Community trading ban is a complete non-starter .
Not only will it be impossible to police across open borders , but it could be challenged by the WTO .
So the least bad solution - and I say ' least bad ' - is to allow temporary derogations to non-compliant producers with conditions attached .
There are some naked images I enjoy looking at , but I do not enjoy the visual image of lorry-loads of naked , unstamped eggs leaving foreign battery cage units en route to the UK in 2012 .
Unstamped eggs are a gift to a fraudulent trader .
We have learnt this the hard way in the UK .
Our UK solution is to mechanically stamp eggs with the code numbers that represent their method of production at the laying farm itself .
This operation is proceeding on my own farm at this very moment , and the machinery is reliable .
The Commission say it is far too difficult for them to organise the stamping of a special code on non-compliant eggs , despite its obvious necessity .
Yes , this is , of course , the same Commission that is forcing UK sheep farmers to unnecessarily identify sheep individually with unreliable electronic equipment .
What a glaring inconsistency .
The ' least bad ' solution - and I use that expression again - is for the EU to insist that non-compliant Member States spend their regional funds on stamping machines and also to pay for an inspectorate whose staff are nationals of compliant Member States .
This inspectorate will also visit packing stations and build up a database of the processors who use these battery cage eggs in their products .
Most UK retailers are keen to avoid trading in battery caged eggs after the deadline , but they can only succeed in this if these eggs are properly identified .
Mr President , this is not just a matter about hens in unsuitable cages , but it is about the ability of the EU to oversee the single market .
States were given 10 years to comply by 1 January 2012 or the product would be illegal .
The Germans , Scandinavians , Dutch , British and others have complied , but certain large producers have simply refused .
This involves massive capital costs and to comply means borrowing money .
The regulation has put about 15 pence on a dozen eggs .
Those bandits who do not comply might be given more time and would be clearly rewarded because they would have been given a price advantage .
Eggs from illegal cages will undercut those who obeyed the EU .
One producer borrowed GBP 10 million to comply with this directive .
He did the right thing .
Is the Commission going to renege and make his eggs uncompetitive ?
If more time is given , then the moral of this story is that , if the EU makes a directive , it pays to ignore it .
( ES ) Mr President , in January 2012 , 400 Spanish egg producers could disappear , which is around 30 % of the total number in my country , with the loss of the production of 300 000 tonnes of eggs .
The European Union could stop producing the 80 million eggs , which amount to 2 million tonnes , and if we do not act very intelligently , the only thing that we would achieve would be that they would be covered by imports from third countries , whose animal welfare standards are much lower than those in the European Union .
This 1999 directive , which requires that the space in cages for laying hens be increased , demands that we act intelligently and positively , because otherwise , we will only weaken European production and give extra trade opportunities to third countries where the amount of space per bird is much smaller than what we currently have in the European Union .
This directive requires a great deal of effort from European producers , as in Spain alone , it is understood that the cost is around EUR 600 million .
It should also not be forgotten that it has an economic impact that extends to the egg products industry and the food industry in general .
I therefore ask for your support for the amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to paragraph 2 , which asks for a solution to be found at least for responsible farms and responsible businesses that are in the process of transforming their farms and will have completed that transformation by January 2012 .
We need to support them in transforming their facilities and give them time to complete that process , thus preventing farms from suffering irreparable damage and preventing an overnight shortage in the EU market , which will consequently increase prices for consumers .
We need to respect the directive , give the egg and egg products industries a chance and also respect the right to animal welfare and the right of consumers to a reasonable price .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , at this point , I would like once again to point out that a decision has already been made to ban the practice of battery farming in cages .
The Member States and the egg producers have had plenty of time to implement the directive for the abandonment of conventional battery practices .
The time has not run out quite yet - there are still twelve months to go before the practice is to be completely banned .
I believe that we must ensure that battery farming is completely banned by 1 January 2012 .
It must be possible to threaten the Member States who have not succeeded in implementing the directive by then with legal action , such as financial penalties .
We also need to ensure that eggs which originate from farming practices that do not comply with European law are not sold in the internal European market .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have known for twelve years that battery farming practices would be banned in the EU from 1 January 2012 onwards .
How can it be that twelve years have not been enough for some Member States to implement this ban in good time and to prepare their poultry industry accordingly ?
This is just one of many examples of how poor implementation leads to frustration .
Egg producers in Member States who have implemented the changes in good time are already experiencing competitive anomalies that run counter to the principles of the EU .
I am calling on the Commission to require that the relevant law should be upheld in all Member States and to do all it can to ensure that it is implemented .
Eggs should no longer be produced in battery cages after January 2012 and the then illegal eggs should no longer be allowed to reach the shops , putting an end to their negative effect on competition .
The farmers who have changed their practices to comply with EU requirements should not experience financial disadvantage while those who flout the changeover reap the economic benefits .
It is impossible to explain to people in Europe why EU law does not apply equally in all Member States and why some Member States are always seen to be dragging their feet .
The recent crises show where this can lead us .
We need a Europe that acts in a concerted way , rather than one in which every member can do as it pleases , regardless of the rest .
Mr President , like many mothers , I want decent animal welfare standards but I also want affordable eggs .
I am not a poultry expert and my daughter 's four attempts to keep pet chickens have all fallen prey to the local fox .
Therefore , I would rather listen to the professionals - like the farmer , the keeper of 30 000 happy EU-compliant hens , that I visited in my constituency last month .
In the UK , the pig-farming industry learnt - to its great cost - the mistake of introducing higher animal welfare standards unilaterally .
The UK 's egg farmers put their confidence in the Commission , and have invested hundreds of millions of pounds getting ready for this legislation .
Public confidence in the EU is at an all-time low .
You must protect those who have complied , in good faith , with this legislation .
It is not time to play chicken with the egg farmers .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission for the answer , incomplete as it is .
There are very specific questions raised by the Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and they have not been answered fully .
I would particularly question the figures , and perhaps you might clarify them ?
Did you say that 66 % of production is now free-range ?
That is not the information I have .
I dare say that the information you have is therefore selective , and you do need to have a very thorough stakeholders meeting because those are , let me say , very enriched figures .
They do not at all give the true story of egg production in the European Union .
Let me also say that if it was easy to comply with this legislation and if our consumers really - and I mean this - really , really wanted welfare-friendly framing systems , they would pay the price for them .
They want them .
They do not value them , and they do not want to pay the price for these .
I have not received one query from a consumer in my time here in the European Parliament since 2004 begging me to have this legislation implemented .
Remember that , folks .
That is the fact of the situation .
Having said that , it is important that this legislation passed by this House is fully implemented and that those who have invested huge amounts of money to be compliant are protected by the European Union .
I think the Commission knows it will have a legal problem on its hands .
Let me address the market situation .
There will be a very visible pile-up of eggs : 83 million of them on 1 January 2012 that are illegal !
Morally and ethically , we cannot dump those eggs .
It would be horrendous if we did , and also the market would suffer and prices to consumers would rise , and there would be protests and revolt .
The Commission needs to tell us what is going to happen on that day , because it is inevitable these eggs will be on the market and there will be a black market in eggs of some description , so we do need clarity on this .
Those who are in the transition phase also need to know that there will be no roll-back , because they are confused about the messages they are getting .
Of all of the issues we debated this week , this is a crucial one for our consumers , but also our producers .
We need some answers from the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , as you will see , in this House we monitor compliance with legislation , including legislation that has not entered into force .
If we extended that exercise to other sectors with deadlines still pending , we would have to have 15-day plenary sittings .
Today , we are discussing a sector that does not receive aid from the common agricultural policy and is suffering due to increased feed prices .
It is not easy for the sector to cope with additional costs , but it must do so in order to comply with the high production standards that we set in the EU .
Everything appears to point to the fact that by 1 January 2012 , producers in many Member States will not have been able to comply 100 % with the deadline set .
It is calculated that there will be a shortfall of 30 % of production in order to cover the needs of the EU market .
The result is that fresh eggs will be produced here , and they will indeed be more expensive for consumers .
We will buy eggs for processing elsewhere , and we will close the proportion of EU production that went to that market .
By then , I hope that we will have had more success in requiring mutuality in our relationships with third countries .
I will conclude : the legislation will be compulsory from 2012 .
In the meantime , the Commission can enforce other legislation that is in force , such as electronic identification of sheep and goats , which adds value in terms of traceability and good veterinary conditions and also has a direct impact on animal welfare .
( PL ) Mr President , it is quite clear what the resolution under debate is saying - there are to be no exceptions and no derogations .
The European Commission is to prepare instruments for enforcement and for penalising production that is not adapted to the requirements .
Unfortunately , nothing follows , either , from the statement in the preamble to the resolution that some producers will have had 12 years to adapt , while others will have had eight and yet others only five .
I would add that the producers who have been given the shortest length of time to adapt supported the adaptation efforts of their counterparts in the old EU Member States by buying their non-adapted cages , unaware of the problems they were causing for themselves .
Experts have found evidence to show that demand for table eggs in the European Union will exceed supply after the Laying Hens Directive has been implemented , which , in practice , will mean imports from third countries of eggs produced in cages which are certainly not adapted .
I therefore call on the Commission to assess the feasibility of maintaining the ban on the use of conventional cages from 1 January 2012 while also finding solutions and clearly defined criteria for those producers who will not complete the modernisation process by 1 January 2012 , as referred to in two amendments supported by my group .
According to its authors , the key argument in favour of adopting this resolution , aside from animal welfare and competitiveness , is the fact that the transitional period for making adaptations was well-known and enshrined in the directive , and that this deadline cannot be changed .
I hope that the Members who accept this line of reasoning and vote in favour of the resolution will all be just as determined and unanimous when it comes to voting in favour of there being no further transitional period after 2013 for the differentiation of direct payments in the European Union , since a deadline of 2013 was enshrined in the Treaty for this transitional period .
It is enshrined as such , and I do not think we should change it .
( HU ) Mr President , the debate so far has made it clear that there is a serious conflict of interests between those who have completed the transition to the new system and those who have not yet done so .
However , there is also a serious conflict between the old and the new Member States .
I completely agree with Mr Kalinowski in that the old Member States had far more time for the transition , and in fact , they passed on their old , obsolete structures to the new Member States prior to the accession of the latter .
Even so , it is evident that the rules must be followed , and it is also evident that once again , the European Union is putting its own producers at a competitive disadvantage by specifying stricter rules for them than those it applies to external suppliers for imports .
Not only does it require these rules to be observed , but also quite often fails to control them effectively .
Therefore , I believe that the European Commission is about to take another decision which will put EU producers at a disadvantage in relation to external markets .
( EL ) Mr President , I fully acknowledge the need to safeguard equal terms of competition within the Union , for the benefit of producers who have complied with the enhanced requirements imposed by the directive .
At the same time , however , we must support producers who undertake to comply , but who are unable to afford the high cost of adapting by the deadline set .
Provision has been made so that products not produced in accordance with the legislation cannot be legally marketed and traded within the Community from 1 January 2012 .
At the same time , however , products produced to lower animal welfare standards will continue to be imported from third countries .
In other words , when numerous farms in the Union are in danger of going out of business , due to enhanced animal welfare standards , products will be imported from third countries that do not even meet the specifications which apply in the Union today .
Yes , we must protect animal welfare , we must safeguard the proper treatment of animals , but we must also protect the European social and productive fabric .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , although all European producers should respect Community legislation and make the necessary adjustments in time , it is estimated that 30 % of egg producers will not have made them by 1 January 2012 .
Unfortunately , this state of affairs shows us that the European Commission has failed to convince producers that it is to their advantage and a policy that has failed to persuade the directly interested parties to defend it will have difficulty succeeding , whatever the policing measures imposed .
We believe that an integrated approach , which links the cost of the investment with the benefit to both the producer and the consumer from the use of enriched cages , would do more to convince producers to adopt the measure and , of course , such an approach would safeguard the distinct difference of European products , based on quality , safety and animal welfare standards , and protect them against unfair competition on unequal terms from third countries , which is exactly what we fear will happen .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of animal welfare is one that this House has tackled many times and I believe that Parliament , together with the Commission and the Council , has made a considered and balanced decision .
I do not think we can backtrack on this .
We therefore have the duty to look for the best ways to apply this measure and , in this case , we must structure it with a view to responsibility and enforce it in a responsible way with regard to all those operators who are adapting their production process .
It is clear that we shall not be able to postpone this date and allow an additional period of time for the transition to a responsible system of animal welfare .
It is incumbent upon us to think about all those people who have begun the transformation process and are carrying it out during a time of crisis and investment difficulties .
Therefore , I should like to emphasise the issue of the transition phase to you , which takes into consideration all those farmers who have begun the adjustment process in order to take account of animal welfare , but who have not yet completed it .
At such a difficult time of crisis therefore , I believe that particular attention should also be paid to these producers .
( RO ) Mr President , I do not think either that it is fair for us to talk in general about a 10-year period which Member States would have had available .
Romania and Bulgaria , for example , joined the European Union only three years ago , but rules are rules and they must be observed by everyone .
However , I want to urge fellow Members to vote for Amendment 2 , tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
There is a large number of producers who have already started making investments to modernise their rearing systems or who are about to initiate such investments .
However , these investments cannot be made overnight and it would be unfair for the producers in question to be penalised .
I want to emphasise once again that it only concerns those producers who have started modifying their rearing systems , and the amendment refers to compliance with certain clearly defined conditions .
Mr President , United Kingdom producers have been investing substantial sums of money - pushing up their production costs - in preparing for the implementation of this directive because they know that Britain will implement the law .
Why should they have to face unfair competition from countries that fail to implement the law or possibly are granted exemption or delayed enforcement ?
The measure has been drafted with the barest minimum of enforcement , left to the precious care of greatly varying standards in 27 Member States .
The language is hardly suggestive of uniformly severe enforcement .
Words like ' proportionate ' and ' dissuasive ' have been used .
I am not in favour of the EU passing laws on behalf of Member States at all .
However , if such laws are passed , it is not acceptable for some countries to be forced to comply and others granted effective exemption .
Will the Commission ensure that countries that fail to comply will be prevented from exporting eggs to countries that do comply , or at least that eggs from non-complying units will not be exported ?
Our producers are demanding protection from unfair competition .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , with regard to the subject being debated here today , allow me to start by reiterating that I believe , firstly , that directives should actually be complied with and that this is equally true for Directive 1999 / 74 / EC , and , secondly , that concerns over animal welfare is a flagship issue that the European Union should uphold .
That said , it is important to stress that adapting to the directive is quite burdensome for the sector 's companies : 30 % per hen in Portugal .
Moreover , there is no specific support from the Rural Development programme for this purpose .
As a result of the lack of capital in this sector , limited bank credit and the crisis in general , it is imperative and urgent to acknowledge that the adaptation of many companies has been delayed .
It is therefore important to allow extra time for those companies - and only those companies - that have already started to adapt as required .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , none of us wishes to cast doubt on the need to implement a directive that dates back to 1999 , as the credibility of this institution is at stake , and none of us wishes to cast doubt on the need to protect the wellbeing and health of animals .
However , directives also need to be based on good sense , so today in this House , I should like to make a few good-sense observations .
Firstly , between 1999 and today , there has been a deep economic crisis that has hobbled businesses , industry and consumption , so many businesses have not been able to make the adjustments .
Should we not take that into account ?
Secondly , rigorous application of the directive from 1 January 2012 would remove many businesses from the market , paving the way for the import of eggs produced using methods that are much less protective of the animals than those required and practised in the European Union , or to the relocation of European production facilities to outside the European Union .
If this is what we want at a time of crisis - to favour a drop in employment and an increase in imports of eggs produced outside Europe , under different criteria than those imposed on our producers - then I think that we shall commit an injustice .
We worked a great deal on the idea of a substantial transition phase and I feel that I support it .
Commissioner , I am asking you to guarantee it as well .
Mr President , as many colleagues across this Chamber have said , protecting producers who have complied with this legislation and spent vast amounts of money is absolutely right and is the duty of the Commission at this stage .
However , I do feel that there is something the Commission needs to realise .
I have spoken to many of my own farmers who find it difficult to find the money to invest in difficult financial and economic circumstances .
I am interested in the reference to the marking or stamping of eggs .
I have a recent letter from the Commission which actually indicates that an additional mark would have little or no benefit because the Commission did not believe that consumers would actually differentiate .
Therefore , I would ask the Commission to indicate to us whether it has changed its mind on this issue or whether it simply does not know ?
Again , I would ask the Commission to indicate if it intends to go down the route of an intra-EU trade ban .
I have companies in my constituency which rely on the import of eggs from other European countries .
Are they simply going to force these companies to rely on third-country imports ?
Most certainly , the eggs there will have been produced under much less stringent welfare systems .
( PL ) Mr President , there can be no debate about the fact that farmers must adapt to the 1999 directive .
We understand those farmers who have already invested money in modernising cages .
We are not talking about giving more time to some farmers than others , as one of the previous speakers said , but about giving the same amount of time to everyone to meet the requirements made of them and to ensure that the standards are met .
The terms ' illegal production ' and ' consumer care ' have a very nice ring to them , but I would like to know why we do not show the same determination in protecting consumers against the consumption of imported eggs produced in conditions which do not meet the requirements introduced in the EU .
I always try to understand the situation of different groups of farmers in the individual countries , and I am in favour of solutions that help them , since I know that as a group , they are in an exceptionally difficult situation in terms of revenue .
It is a shame that others in this House do not share the same view .
( DE ) Mr President , it must be clear to us all that the health of our animals and , by association , human health must be our prime concern .
In the Science and Technology Options Assessment ( STOA ) scientific committee , where we carry out technology options assessments , we also have the ' Better Life ' project , which looks at ways of improving future conditions in the area of nutrition and feedstuffs .
For this reason , particularly in the context of the Eighth Framework Research Programme , I would ask the Commissioner to work to ensure that the research programmes in the areas of foodstuffs / feedstuffs are strengthened , so that there is an improvement in research into the safety of foodstuffs and the health of animals and humans in this area and so that we can prepare the appropriate documents here for the citizens of Europe in the future .
Mr President , thank you for your indulgence .
I wanted to mention two other points in my contribution .
The issue of eggs in shell is quite visible and clear .
There is , however , a massive market for processed eggs for the confectionery sector and we need to know what sort of labelling requirements there will be for that product .
I think this is where we have the greatest concerns because more and more eggs are going into the processing sector , and my fear is that we will export our cages from the European Union and then import liquid-egg and dried-egg products from those very systems in third countries .
I see you nodding in agreement .
This is a very real problem for the European Union .
My other concern relates to parallel production systems and a huge problem in the marketplace if we have enriched cages coming into production while the current systems remain in production .
That could cause major problems for producers and , ultimately , for consumers .
So the Commission has a huge balancing act to get this right .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is obvious that there is no consensus on this issue .
I have heard Members here pleading for no exemptions and no derogations and , on the other hand , I have heard Members pleading for an extension .
It depends on which country they come from and on the stage of development in each particular Member State .
Let me underline the Commission position .
I want to repeat that , as of January 2012 , conventional cages must be replaced by enriched cages or alternative systems .
Therefore , eggs from conventional cages will not be legally marketable after January 2012 .
This is our position .
The Commission is making every effort , and we are concentrating on our efforts , to support Member States in complying with this directive .
What are we doing ?
First of all , we are encouraging Member States to develop and complete national plans , in collaboration with the industry and major stakeholders , and we are receiving national plans which also incorporate sanctions for those industries , or those farmers , who are not in compliance with the directive .
Secondly , we are exchanging information with Member States on good monitoring practices for reporting on progress with enforcement .
We are organising visits by Commission experts to see that the directive is being implemented , and we are organising appropriate meetings with stakeholders .
As I said , on 19 January 2011 , we have a big stakeholders ' meeting at which representatives of the Member States will discuss the current state of play , and we will see how best we can support Member States who are not in compliance , so that they can complete their compliance by the end of 2011 .
This is our position .
After January 2012 , if there are still eggs which are not legally produced , those eggs cannot be marketed , and if non-compliance is demonstrated , the Commission could , of course , undertake all the measures available under the current legal framework - initiating infringement procedures in order to ensure proper enforcement of EU legislation .
Alternatives to infringement procedures are also being studied , with a view to preventing the possible illegal circulation of eggs produced in conventional cages after January 2012 .
Honourable Members made many other comments and I will make sure I convey all your concerns to Commissioner Dalli who , I am sure , will take serious account of your comments .
Mr President , I know it is quite unorthodox to take the floor after the Commissioner has spoken .
I am very happy with what the Commissioner has said .
However , the conclusion that we are divided in this House on this issue is not justified .
I would respectfully ask the Commissioner to look at the result of the final vote before judging whether this House is divided on this issue or not .
I have received four motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Mr President , can I first of all support what Esther has just said .
Can I also ask the Commissioner that if she cannot speak today , she would maybe let us have a statement in writing , because I do not believe this House is divided for one moment .
Could she elaborate more on what she said on eggs from outside the European Union that do not meet equivalent standards to EU standards not being allowed in and having a separate mark .
What mark does she propose for those eggs in the EU that are not allowed to carry a legal mark after 1 January 2012 ?
Mr Nicholson , I am sorry , it was not a point of order .
As I said , the debate is closed .
You had the opportunity to raise your concerns before we closed the debate .
( DE ) Mr President , I simply wanted to thank the House services because we have finished in an exemplary fashion today fifteen minutes before the vote , so that chaos will be avoided in the plenary sitting .
This orderly procedure sends out the right signals to the public .
I should like to express my particular gratitude to the House services .
If only things were always like this .
Thank you very much .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 : 40 and resumed at 12 : 00 )

Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Council Directive 1999 / 74 / EC lays down minimum standards for the protection of laying hens under various systems of rearing with the added objective of protecting against unfair competition among producers in the different Member States .
Although I support the principles of this directive , it must not be taken lightly that , as things stand , a great many European producers - having begun the process of converting their facilities - have run into real problems in completing the transformation and risk not being ready before 1 January 2012 , the final deadline for complying with the directive .
If we also bear in mind the real difficulties faced by many producers in obtaining financing to support conversion processes and the serious economic difficulties that they are still having to deal with today - with serious repercussions on the stability of their businesses and employment levels - I am convinced that something has to be done .
Member States should intervene to promote measures that can help European producers in the poultry farming sector who , aiming to adapt to the new European legislation , have embarked on the process of converting their facilities but are very unlikely to complete it before the start of 2012 .
Support for strengthening the European Union ban on shark finning - Increased European Union support for grassroots sports - An EU homelessness strategy ( Written declarations )
Written declarations 0071 / 2010 , 0062 / 2010 and 0061 / 2010 have been signed by a majority of the Members in this Parliament and therefore , pursuant to Rule 123 ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , they will be forwarded to their addressees and published in the adopted texts of this session , together with the signatories ' names .
Madam President , on behalf of my co-signatories , Ivo Belet , Hannu Takkula , Mary Honeyball and Joanna Senyszyn , I thank all the Members for signing this declaration .
It was significant that almost 50 % of the signatories were women , so I would like to thank them very much for their cooperation and also pay particular tribute to Joanna Senyszyn .
She did stalwart work and she might like to say a few words as well .
So to everybody , I thank you and wish you all fun and games and lots of sport for Christmas .
The next item is Written Declaration No 61 / 2010 .

( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with some emotion and on behalf of my fellow Members , Mrs Thomsen , Mrs Lynne , Mrs Figueiredo and Mr Protasiewicz , that I would like to express my sincere thanks for your support of Written Declaration 61 / 2010 on an EU homelessness strategy .
While today , the European Commission is presenting its flagship initiative - a European Platform against Poverty and Exclusion - this declaration sends a strong message from Parliament to the European Commission and Member States .
The time for talking is over .
It is now time to act .
Specific proposals can now be implemented .
Let us make sure that we have put an end to rough sleeping by 2015 .
I wish you all a happy holiday and I believe we will get off to a good start next year .
( Applause )
Mr Besset has requested the floor .
Please go ahead .

( FR ) Madam President , on behalf of my three fellow Members , Mrs Pietikäinen , Mrs Sârbu and Mr Davies , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the 410 Members of the European Parliament who signed Written Declaration 71 / 2010 on support for strengthening the European Union ban on shark finning , which we tabled .
Indeed , this fragile species , like many others , is subjected to a veritable massacring at sea as a result of finning practices and the discarding of carcasses at sea following that mutilation .
Thank you for having overwhelmingly signed this Written Declaration .
It sends a strong signal to the Commission to bring about the strengthening of regulations to protect this species .
( Applause )
1 .
European Heritage Label (
2 .
Participation of Switzerland in the ' Youth in Action ' programme and in the action programme in the field of lifelong learning (
3 .
Control by Member States of the Commission 's exercise of implementing powers (
4 .
Human rights in the world 2009 and EU policy on the matter (
( IT ) Madam President , what some fellow Members are trying to suggest - since it is Thursday and this is the last vote - is that if you just say ' approved ' or ' rejected ' , that will be fine .
There is no need to say ' 452 voted ; 53 against ; 22 in favour ; and so on and so forth ' .
Madam President , it is a factual issue .
We simply wish to remove the words ' in Croatia ' .
I do not believe it is controversial with the other groups .
( DE ) Madam President , because it is not yet indicated in our voting list , I just wanted to point out that the second part of this motion and the next each have a free vote .
Thank you .
Madam President , there are two additions to the text .
After ' list of individuals responsible for ' , insert ' severe ' .
Then amend the next phrase to read : ' human rights violations such as torture , censorship , rape and extra-judicial executions in Iran ' .
rapporteur . - Madam President , we have an oral amendment to Amendment 7 .
The text will read as follows : ' Urges the Commission to draw up a list of individuals responsible for severe human rights violations , such as torture , censorship , rape and extra-judicial executions , in Iran , particularly after the 2009 elections , and to consider imposing sanctions on them in the form of asset freezes and travel bans ' .
rapporteur . - Madam President , as there are some positive developments in Russia , we would like to amend the sentence which starts with : ' regrets that so far , all Strategy-31 demonstrations have been refused permission by the authorities ' .
The proposal is to replace the words ' so far ' by ' except for the very last one on 31 October 2010 ' .
5 .
A new strategy for Afghanistan (
Before the vote on paragraph 30 :
( FR ) Madam President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would like the first word of the last sentence in paragraph 30 to be modified , replacing ' welcomes ' with ' notes ' .
rapporteur . - Madam President , following talks with other political groups , I propose to change the text of paragraph 66 to the following : ' Notes the involvement of the Pakistan Intelligence Service ( ISI ) aimed at making sure that Pakistan , too , gets a satisfactory outcome from any peace dividend ' .
rapporteur . - I propose to change all the text in the third part of paragraph 71 to the following : ' and to ensure that drones , special forces and local militias against Taliban leaders are used according to General Petraeus ' orders for zero tolerance on the loss of innocent civilians ' lives ' .
6 .
Establishing a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area ( vote )
Before the vote :
( ES ) Madam President , as the co-author of Amendment 9 , the technical clarification is that where it reads ' ESM ' , it should read ' ESM / EMF ' .
Seasons greetings to everyone .
Before the vote on Amendment 12 :

Madam President , I would like to move this amendment on behalf of the S & D , EPP , Liberal and Green Groups . ' Calls on the European Council to provide the necessary political signal for a Commission investigation into a future system of Eurobonds , with a clear specification of the conditions under which such a system would be beneficial to all participating Member States and to the eurozone as a whole ' .
7 .
Situation in Côte d 'Ivoire (
8 .
Welfare of laying hens ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( FI ) Madam President , I would just like to say that I voted for this excellent report .
Mrs Paliadeli has done a splendid job in building the European cultural heritage and its very own label .
In my opinion , this is one excellent indication of how , ultimately , we can achieve special added value in the European Union at little expense .
I believe that the sites that will receive the European Heritage Label will definitely benefit from it .
It will be visible in the number of tourists they receive and it will help to make Europe better known .
It is very important that we remember that Europe is united in its diversity , and it is important for us to ensure that the people of the different countries of Europe can discover the mosaiclike European identity on a wider basis .
That is what I wanted to say , Madam President .
When people here are leaving the House , it is a little difficult to concentrate , but I hope they will have listened to what I had to say .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Heritage Label is of fundamental importance for a continent that contains the majority of UNESCO sites , and it finally highlights the natural , archaeological , urban and cultural sites that have had an important role in the history , culture and integration of the European Union .
Approval of the label is an important step for the process of EU cohesion and is also educational and formative for cultural dialogue .
One can also see how this decision is a good omen for future generations , who increasingly will have a shared vision of European heritage , which can bring them together historically and culturally .
As I thank the rapporteur for her efforts , I should like to offer her my heartfelt congratulations for the negotiations carried out with the Commission for a successful outcome to this initiative , which is so important for the future of the preservation of European culture .
( FI ) Madam President , I wish to say that the Lifelong Learning programme is one of Europe 's success stories , and Mrs Pack should be thanked for her excellent work .
I voted for this report , and I was especially delighted that those who are vigorously opposed to European integration can also see that projects like the Lifelong Learning programme are needed .
It is very important that this programme can be extended outwards , and now Switzerland is to participate .
Moreover , this will not cost us taxpayers in the European Union anything , as Switzerland is itself paying for its involvement .
It is important that these best practices and best programmes that exist in the European Union are extended in this way .
The Lifelong Learning programme and the Youth in Action programme are good examples .
In this connection , I also want to welcome Switzerland to the European youth and culture programmes .
Madam President , I would like to put one question to the House .
Why is Switzerland doing so well ?
You would have thought that a country particularly exposed to the financial sector would have suffered unusually during the recent banking crisis , but the Helvetic Confederation in 2009 had a GDP per head 214 % of that of the EU .
Its people are twice as rich as the citizens of the Member States .
In part , of course , that reflects the deal that the Swiss have struck with Brussels .
They are in the free market , they are covered by the free movement of goods and services and so on , but they are outside the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy , they control their own borders , they settle all their own human rights issues , they pay only a token contribution to the budget and they are free to sign accords with third countries in commercial areas .
What a great model for Britain !
If seven million Swiss relying on bilateral free-trade agreements can give their people the highest standard of living on the continent , how much more so could we , a nation of 60 million , a trading maritime nation whose colonising and enterprising energies have touched every continent ?
And we should not leave it at our relations with Brussels !
Having got the power back , we should copy the Swiss in their system of localism and direct democracy and push powers down to the lowest practicable level .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I abstained from today 's vote on this report on comitology because once again , people are trying to make anti-dumping procedures inapplicable or linked to discretionary political choices which , as we know , are still one of the few worthwhile defensive instruments to prevent unfair competition .
Even though Mr Szájer found a compromise with the Council , it really must be underlined that this proposal was unable to align commercial policy with comitology procedures , particularly in the part relating to trade policies , which damages European businesses at a time of serious crisis , creating fresh unemployment and a new wave of relocations .
Without suitable rules against counterfeiting , there is no point talking about measures to relaunch the European economy .
Madam President , I am going to put this as simply as I can .
Irish taxpayers and EU taxpayers are being gouged in order to prop up the European banking system and the single currency .
Yesterday , the House of Commons in my country voted through a bilateral loans package to Ireland which was supported , I think , by sincere and generous MPs thinking that they were helping a friendly country .
But you do not help an indebted friend by pressing more loans on him at a ruinous rate of interest .
Ireland has been ruined by the single currency .
Between 1998 and 2007 , it had real interest rates of -1 % .
Every Irish economist could see the crash coming but there was nothing they could do about it because there were no longer any Irish interest rates .
There were no rates to be raised .
Now , when the crash comes , it is worsened by the inability to devalue .
A nation is being condemned possibly to a generation of deflation , debt and emigration so that we can keep this project of ours alive .
Instead of helping to bail out the euro in Ireland , we should be helping Ireland to bail out of the euro and to re-establish its own currency , possibly with a temporary link to sterling , allowing it to pay off its loans and to re-establish itself as an independent and prosperous state .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Andrikienfor her efforts in drafting this report .
I would also like to say that I voted for Amendment 25 in its entirety as I feel that the climate of impunity in Russia is extremely dangerous .
The European Union 's intention is to defend on the international stage the same principles which also guide it internally , namely , democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
In any case , it is perfectly clear that numerous human rights activists have been killed in recent years , which raises a question mark over the development of genuine democracy in Russia .
The message we wanted to convey to the Russian authorities via Amendment 25 is the urgent need to investigate the death of Sergey Magnitsky .
The response from the authorities in Moscow to this initiative actually shows that the Russians are listening to the messages from the European Parliament .
This is yet another reason for us to condemn vociferously the lack of any investigation into this case .
We call on the Council to monitor this matter closely and to take the necessary measures , failing any progress .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Union stands up for the weakest members of society and those who suffer discrimination , and helps the poorest and those who are in need .
We award the Sakharov Prize to recipients from around the world .
However , the European Union frequently fails to enforce respect for human rights within its own territory .
I would like to draw your attention to the continuing problem of discrimination against minorities , including the Polish minority in Lithuania , an EU Member State which is a signatory to international agreements and treaties on the protection of human rights and minorities .
The Lithuanian Parliament was to take a decision today on whether to limit opportunities to receive education in a minority language .
It has postponed the decision to the near future .
Once again , I call on the Members of the European Parliament , the President of Parliament and the European Commission to ensure that observance of the principles of democracy and respect for the rights of minorities is enforced effectively in the EU Member States .
Limits placed on the number of hours of mother-tongue instruction in schools and measures aimed at closing Polish schools in Lithuania are nothing other than discrimination against a national minority .
Madam President , I also supported Amendment No 25 , especially the second part where the European Parliament suggests considering ' imposing an EU entry ban for Russian officials involved in this case , and encourages EU law enforcement agencies to cooperate in freezing bank accounts and other assets of these Russian officials in all EU Member States ' .
I think that this is an absolutely crucial issue for both Russia and the European Union , and I strongly encourage the Commission and the Council to follow the advice of the European Parliament .
The powers of the European Parliament have recently been increased .
It is now time to stop declaring and act instead , causing real pain and trouble to those responsible for human rights offences .
I think Russian and European Union cooperation can only have real prospects if a transparent solution is found to the Magnitsky and Khodorkovsky cases and those responsible are punished .
( FI ) Madam President , I voted for Mrs Andrikienė 's report .
I think that it is very important that we speak about human rights issues and bring them to the foreground .
This lies at the heart of the European Union .
We must also ensure that we practise what we preach .
This is perhaps something of a problem .
Of course , we have a lot of resolutions , but the challenge is how to live up to them .
It all starts with practical realities .
Perhaps I should have had the floor to raise a point of order on the matter regarding Mr Arlacchi 's report .
There were a good 50 on that side of the Chamber who stood up .
My colleagues and I counted them .
We found out that there were fewer than 40 of them , so no action resulted .
If we treat some people in this way in this Chamber , people whose opinions are perhaps contrary to our own or those of the majority , there is no real justification on our part for criticising countries where there is a democratic deficit .
We in the European Union have to be very careful to ensure that all the work we do here is in accordance with the law , EU regulations and all the legal provisions on human rights .
That is why I believe that there is room for improvement here , so that we can be credible when we explain these issues to Russia and the rest of the world .
We must ourselves ensure that we are not discriminating against any one minority .
Everyone who works in the European Union must have the opportunity to enjoy full human rights .
( NL ) Madam President , in this debate , Parliament is once again following an all too familiar course .
American NATO troops make a mess in Afghanistan and the European Union then has to step in as guardian angel and take the initiative on the issue .
What is then the standard reaction of many in this House : if the EU did just a little bit more , then everything would be fine again !
President , this line of thinking gets one stage worse , if you read paragraph 63 of the report which recommends the involvement of Iran in helping to bring about a solution to the problems in Afghanistan .
Madam President , I had to read this three times just to make sure I had not imagined it , but it really is there : ' recommends the involvement of Iran ' !
I have rarely come across a proposal as strange as this .
This is tantamount to using Beelzebub to exorcise the devil .
I have therefore voted emphatically against this report .
Madam President , I had the honour of visiting Afghanistan earlier this year with British forces .
I met not only our own servicemen , but soldiers from Estonia and Denmark who are sharing their camp .
I would like to begin by saying that I cannot adequately express my gratitude to the men and women from various of our Member States , as well as our allies overseas , who are pouring their energies into trying to bring peace to that unhappy , if beautiful , land .
I would just like to say one thing about this report .
We seem to be making one error as a Western alliance , which has to do with our policy of eradication of poppy .
Members here who represent rural constituencies will know that there is no one on earth more conservative than the small farmer , but by our policy of razing poppy crops in Afghanistan , we have taken a population that used to have a strong interest in order and property and turned them into badmashes , into brigands , because of our policy of destroying a crop for which there is a market : there is a worldwide shortage of opiates and morphines .
If we could only restore property rights , we would begin to give Afghanistan the basis of a flourishing civil society with an independent magistracy and , in due course , representative government .
Madam President , I voted against the resolution establishing a permanent crisis mechanism for the eurozone , because in Ireland and Greece , we see the reality that such mechanisms are to bail out a crisis-ridden financial system dominated by speculators and assorted profit-seeking sharks at the expense of working people , pensioners and the poor .
Today in Brussels , the European Council will most likely decide to amend the Lisbon Treaty to give itself more powers to impose strict conditionality on any financial assistance given to Member States , thus institutionalising the doctrine that society must pay for the crisis .
I warn the Irish Government not to think it can foist this change to the Lisbon Treaty on the Irish people without a referendum .
The Irish Government has already turned our country into a vassal state of the IMF , which is acting blatantly on behalf of the speculators and the financial markets .
We demand a referendum on any change to the Lisbon Treaty so the Irish people will have the opportunity to resist being turned into full-time serfs of the financial markets .
Written explanations of vote
I voted for the Commission proposal to expand the original concept of the European Heritage Label from an intergovernmental action to a formal EU action as a contribution to a stronger European identity .
I voted in this way because I believe that the proposed purpose of this label should not be just the goal of promoting the internal cohesion of the European Union but also of demonstrating European unity and values outside its borders .
The label should be evaluated and put into practice following effective demonstration of the results within the EU .
I voted for this resolution on the Commission 's proposal to use the European Heritage Label as a tool , among other more efficient ways , to fill in the gap between the European Union and its citizens , as a way to stress that European history is the result of the diverse , yet rich and complementary , common cultural heritage .
I agree that the decision of the Member States to place the European Heritage Label within the framework of the EU will not only help increase its visibility , prestige and credibility , but will contribute to achieving long-sought ideals of cohesion and solidarity among European citizens .
I support the rapporteur 's position that , owing to the symbolic value of the label as a contributory vehicle towards European integration , transnational sites should be favoured since they promote commonalities ; they promote networking and encourage cooperation and collaboration between States or regions .
I believe that the idea of a European Union Heritage Label that aims to increase European citizens ' sense of sharing a common heritage ( through knowledge of history and participation in activities that promote intercultural dialogue ) and envisioning the building of the EU as a long and ongoing process is a step in this direction .
In 2007 , several European Union Member States came together to create a European Heritage Label .
That initiative was intended to ' strengthen the support of Europeans for a common European identity and to promote a sense of belonging in a common cultural space ' by selecting a certain number of special sites across the continent .
In 2008 , the Council of the European Union presented the Commission with its conclusions , inviting the Commission to submit a legislative proposal that would enable us , as was the case with the European Capitals of Culture initiative , to turn this intergovernmental initiative into a real European Union label .
Following the Council 's suggestions , the Commission then instigated an impact assessment and public consultation .
After that consultation , the Commission issued a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Union action for the European Heritage Label .
That is the text I supported .
I voted for this report because European history is the result of the diverse , yet rich and complementary , common cultural heritage .
This demonstrates once again that the EU is rooted in strong values such as freedom , democracy , respect for human rights , cultural diversity , tolerance and solidarity .
Owing to the widely recognised contribution of European culture to the world , the European Parliament approves of the idea of a label which would extend beyond the borders of the European Union and which could be used as an ambitious tool serving external policies .
In order to achieve its political goal , the new European Heritage Label should focus on the symbolism and / or educational value of heritage sites .
Furthermore , it should insist on close cooperation among the labelled sites so as to share best practices and initiate common projects .
I would like to stress that the decision of the Member States to place the European Heritage Label within the framework of the EU will not only help increase its visibility , prestige and credibility , but will contribute to achieving long-sought ideals of cohesion and solidarity among European citizens .
One of the things Europe is very rich in is cultural diversity , which is perfectly reflected in the diversity of its cultural , artistic , architectural and linguistic heritage .
It is this diversity , along with a rich history and a great respect for heritage and its preservation , that makes Europe a unique place .
However , although we all share a very rich and comparatively small area , the truth is that , in many cases , we are not very close to or interested in each other .
I therefore think that this initiative could lead to closer ties between European citizens and increase knowledge of European heritage and the common values that we all share , making Europe a truly diverse union .
In general , the amendments proposed by the rapporteur have improved the Commission 's initial draft .
However , there are also some negative aspects .
Regarding the promotion of multilingualism , the amendments proposed by the rapporteur do not touch on the central issue and therefore fail to correct the serious flaw in the original proposal .
Indeed , real and effective promotion of multilingualism is achieved , not ' by using several languages of the Union ' , but rather by using the various languages of the Union .
However , what is more important than the report 's specific objectives are the misconceptions underlying this concept .
The European Heritage Label ( or European Union Heritage Label ) is based on developing the fallacy of a single European identity and a single European culture based on values such as freedom , democracy , etc .
There is no single ' European cultural heritage ' .
Europe 's entire cultural history , like its entire history overall , is not just built on diversity and admirable creative and progressive energy , but also on violent , antagonistic conflicts , on intolerance , and on multiple strands and contexts of cultural domination .
The field of heritage is particularly sensitive because of its intimate association with history , which is cause for serious concern that this will feed into the worrying processes of rewriting history that we have been witnessing recently .
The image of the European Union and its institutions in the eyes of its citizens is a matter of vital importance .
Unfortunately , poll results show that a sense of European identity and unity is becoming increasingly rare among the European public , and the situation is the same for trust in the EU institutions .
Promoting knowledge of our common history and common cultural roots may be particularly helpful in the process of bringing the EU closer to its citizens , and also in building a sense of cohesion and solidarity between them .
The new European Heritage Label may be helpful in just this respect .
Streamlining procedures and standardising the criteria for awarding the label will make it more prestigious and improve the EU 's image , as well as increasing its citizens ' trust in institutions such as the European Parliament .
Today , I voted in favour of the report on a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Union action for the European Heritage Label .
I believe that this is an interesting and valuable initiative which will help promote European culture and achievements and contribute to the development of tourism and individual regions .
It is to be welcomed that we have emphasised , as Parliament , that the European Heritage Label will act as a complement to other cultural heritage initiatives , such as the UNESCO World Heritage List and the Council of Europe 's Cultural Routes , and not duplicate these initiatives .
in writing . - I welcome the Commission 's proposal to use the European Heritage Label as a tool , among other more efficient methods , for bridging the gap between the European Union and its citizens ; as a way of stressing that European history is the result of the diverse , yet rich and complementary , common cultural heritage ; and as a means of appreciating that the EU is rooted in strong values such as freedom , democracy , respect for human rights , cultural diversity , tolerance and solidarity .
The Member States ' decision to place the European Heritage Label within the framework of the EU will not only help to increase its visibility , prestige and credibility , but will also contribute to realising long-sought ideals of cohesion and solidarity among European citizens .
We are cheered by the Commission 's proposal to use the European Heritage Label , together with other initiatives , as a tool to bridge the gap between the European Union and its citizens ; as a way to stress that European history is the result of a diverse , yet rich and complementary , common cultural heritage .
It represents an appreciation that the EU is rooted in strong values such as freedom , democracy , respect for human rights , cultural diversity , tolerance and solidarity .
The decision of the Member States to place the European Heritage Label within the framework of the EU will not only help increase its visibility , prestige and credibility , but will contribute to finally achieving , on a large scale , the long-sought ideals of cohesion and solidarity among European citizens , creating a common European identity and increasing their interest in the Union and its origins - two fundamental challenges for the European institutions .
The new label must , however , focus on symbolism and educational value , rather than on the beauty of a site , and must insist on close cooperation among the labelled sites so as to share best practices and initiate common research and development projects .
Alongside other initiatives , the European Heritage Label is a additional way of bringing the European Union closer to its citizens and strengthening their sense of belonging to Europe .
It will also enable us to further their understanding of the common history and heritage of Europe .
The label will help encourage multilingualism and dialogue between cultures , and will support the establishment of networks aimed at promoting European heritage .
It will stimulate economic attractiveness , particularly through cultural tourism .
By supporting this label , we will improve multicultural dialogue .
It seems to me that the effectiveness of the European Heritage Label is open to question precisely because Member States can decide for themselves whether or not to participate in the scheme .
In addition - and here I agree with the rapporteur - the proposed selection criteria and the large number of sites that could acquire the label mean that quality and prestige could be lost .
Close cooperation with existing initiatives in the area of cultural heritage , such as UNESCO World Cultural Heritage , may be a more effective approach .
I did not vote in favour of the report because it does not deal in sufficient detail with the need to introduce a cultural heritage label based on the specified objectives .
The decision to place the European Heritage Label within the framework of the European Union will ensure that citizens ' sense of belonging to the European Union will increase , stimulating ideals of cohesion , solidarity and integration .
I voted for the report on the European Heritage Label because Europe has set itself the goal of creating a common identity , bringing the EU closer to its citizens through awareness of this rich and diverse historical and cultural heritage with which everyone identifies and through which young people can learn and find out about their own identity , sharing it with the other young Europeans .
Formalising the label will also help promote those places that have made history in the creation of Europe .
I enthusiastically welcome the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a European Heritage Label .
The goal of creating a joint European identity and promoting the Union 's interests is crucial to peace and social cohesion .
The proposed measure of promoting European heritage using a transnational website appeals to young Europeans and could encourage them to find out more about the continent 's history , to familiarise themselves with multinational heritage and shared cultural heritage , and to find out more about the people and ideas that led to the creation of the European Union itself .
This measure is of high symbolic and educational value , and will present European history and culture as a whole .
I support the intentions expressed in the report of safeguarding the European Parliament and Council 's effective participation in selecting the sites and content presented , so as to ensure that the initiative is very transparent and democratic .
I congratulate Mrs Paliadeli on her excellent work .
The European Parliament has today given the green light to the European Heritage Label , a register of historic sites whose importance transcends national borders .
The European Union has around 500 million inhabitants , who mostly feel that they are , first and foremost , citizens of their countries of origin , and not European citizens .
The lack of a strong European identity can be seen as an obstacle to European integration , but it is not at all surprising .
The European continent is a vast patchwork of languages and customs , and the differences between the countries that form it are often more obvious than the common threads .
This initiative will enable the sense of belonging to Europe to be strengthened , as well as creating greater cohesion between citizens of different countries .
This is why it is important to highlight the places that celebrate and symbolise European integration , as well as those that celebrate the ideas and values of the European Union .
In addition , just like the sites on the UNESCO World Heritage List , those bearing the European logo ought to attract more tourists , with beneficial effects for the local economy .
in writing . - The formation of a joint European identity and the growth in interest in the European Union and its genesis are challenges with which the European institutions are faced in their bid to achieve broad cohesion and solidarity .
There certainly are other , more radical and obvious ways to enhance the Europeans ' faith in the European Union and its leaders ( the recent financial crisis has shown that there is still much to be achieved at the upper levels of the administration ) .
However , knowledge of the history of our continent , familiarity with its multinational , yet common cultural heritage , and stepping up the education of the younger generation in the ideas and people who led to the building of the European Union may actually contribute to bridging the gap between the EU and its citizens .
As a member of the Committee on Culture and Education , I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution on a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Union action for the European Heritage Label .
The idea of establishing an EU label is important from the point of view of making citizens more aware of the European Union 's history and cultural heritage , and of building a European identity and links between countries .
By selecting sites in the individual Member States which have applied to be granted the EU 's European Heritage Label , we will make people more aware of the fact that Europe 's history affects all of us , regardless of where we live , our language or our culture .
Changing the European Heritage Label into an EU initiative will help make it more credible , visible and prestigious .
This , in turn , may translate into economic and social benefits , inter alia , by making the sites awarded the label more attractive to tourists .
Selecting sites to be awarded the label will also help to increase the younger generation 's interest in , and knowledge of , the ideas and peoples of Europe , and , in so doing , will bring Europe 's inhabitants closer together .
The European Heritage Label initiative is intended to promote the cities , people and activities that have contributed to the process of European integration .
Its aim is to make citizens more aware of the fundamental values , such as democracy , solidarity , cultural diversity and tolerance , upon which our Community is based .
The list of sites awarded a European Heritage Label will act as a kind of map of our continent 's traditions and culture , and a map of places that have played a key role in forming the European identity .
Europe 's common , yet diverse heritage can strengthen its citizens ' sense of this identity , and strengthen European cohesion .
This initiative will create a platform for cooperation between the countries and regions of Europe .
Furthermore , it may have a positive impact on the tourism sector , by helping to make regions more attractive and , at the same time , improving their economic situation .
I agree that this scheme should become an official initiative under the auspices of the EU , as this will make it more widely recognised , credible and prestigious .
The increased visibility of the scheme will make it possible for a greater number of citizens to identify with the labels , which symbolise and commemorate European integration .
The scheme should operate in parallel and as a complement to UNESCO 's international scheme and the European Capitals of Culture , since the European Heritage Label operates on the level of educational and symbolic values and , to a lesser extent , aesthetic and architectonic qualities .
We should search for ways to strengthen citizens ' sense of belonging to Europe .
I consider European values , such as the Old Hungarian runic script , to be of great importance , and their recognition and appreciation through awards to be indispensable .
In this case , however , we must preserve the tradition of giving this award to values actually located within the EU .
It is unacceptable to extend it to third countries , as in doing so , we would only duplicate the UNESCO World Heritage List .
On the other hand , I hope that this award will help us return to traditional European values , and awarding the label will truly be an expression of recognition .
I abstained because of the abovementioned contradictions in the report .
I voted for the recommendation on the conditions for Swiss participation in the Youth in Action programme and in the Lifelong Learning programme because I consider it a positive factor in European youth strategy ; this is because it is a stage in the cooperation process with this country on sectoral policies within the European Union .
As Switzerland is willing to participate in human , economic and social terms in this project involving young people , the European Union can only benefit from including the young people of third countries like Switzerland in the process of raising awareness of the EU integration process amongst the younger generations .
I voted for this recommendation because I have no doubt that the EU 's cooperation with Switzerland in the fields of EU education , science and youth affairs will be of mutual benefit to the improvement and effective implementation of policies in these fields .
Switzerland participating in the 2007-2013 ' Youth in Action ' and Lifelong Learning programmes will give these programmes an additional impetus and will create opportunities for participant exchanges , for sharing experience , while , at the same time , preserving financial and other EU interests .
The ' Youth in Action ' programme is intended to develop and support cooperation in the European Union youth field .
It aims to encourage the participation of young people in public life , particularly those with fewer opportunities or with disabilities , and foster initiative , enterprise and creativity .
In turn , the programme for education and lifelong learning helps to develop the Union as an advanced knowledge-based society in accordance with the objectives of the Lisbon strategy .
Supporting and complementing the action of Member States , it aims to encourage exchanges , cooperation and mobility between Community education and training systems so that they become a worldwide reference for quality .
Switzerland , which is not an EU Member State , does not currently take part in these actions .
I think that the opposite should be the case , and that we must include our Helvetian neighbours in these policies , in the context of an open Union .
That is why I voted in favour of this legislative resolution that embraces Switzerland in these important actions .
I voted for this recommendation prepared by the European Parliament because I approve of the Council 's draft Decision on Switzerland 's participation in the ' Youth in Action ' and Lifelong Learning programmes .
Although it has chosen not to join the European Economic Area , Switzerland is nevertheless cooperating closely with the European Union in the fields of education , training and youth affairs .
This agreement is appropriate because Switzerland is committed to complying with the conditions and provisions laid down by the European Commission .
Furthermore , projects and initiatives submitted by participants from Switzerland will be subject to the same conditions , rules and procedures as are applied to projects from Member States .
Switzerland will conform to EU financial control and audit provisions .
In accordance with the bilateral agreement , Switzerland will establish a National Agency to coordinate implementation of the programmes at national level and will make an annual financial contribution to each programme ( in 2011 , EUR 1.7 million to the Youth in Action programme and EUR 14.2 million to the Lifelong Learning programme ) .

Cooperation with Switzerland on education matters is an important step in EU-Switzerland relations .
The two programmes in question support lifelong learning and the inclusion of young people in European integration , through tolerance and solidarity between young Europeans .
The agreement between the Commission and Switzerland is adequate , given that Swiss participants in these programmes apply on an equal footing with all other young Europeans , and that Switzerland is committed to adapting to European rules and their supervision , as well as to contributing to both programmes financially .
in writing . - I welcome the adoption of this report in my capacity as the Chairman of the European Parliament delegation for relations with Switzerland .
The European Commission , the European Parliament and the Member States of the European Union agreed to establish the ' Youth in Action ' programme , which puts into effect the legal framework to support non-formal learning activities for young people .
The aim of this proposal is to provide for the participation of Switzerland in the Youth in Action and Lifelong Learning programmes .
Switzerland is the only European country to take part in these programmes without being a member of the EEA , a candidate or a potential candidate country .
Although it has chosen not to join the European Economic Area , Switzerland has shown sustained interest in closer cooperation with the EU in the education , training and youth fields .
We are all very much aware that a good education system which ensures that young people receive the best possible education is enormously important for every country .
A good level of qualifications , knowledge and education has a direct impact on culture and the labour market and , as a result , citizens ' standard of living .
Each country wants to be proud of its young people , and each young person wants the opportunity to get to know new cultures and languages and to acquire professional experience abroad .
The European Union can be proud of its well-developed student exchange system and of its open labour markets , which mean that every young European has a great many opportunities for intellectual and professional development .
Switzerland 's participation in the ' Youth in Action ' programme demonstrates that cooperation with the European Union , particularly in the field of education , is of great importance to the country .
We should not prevent young Swiss citizens from enjoying the privileges and possibilities of a Community education .
The attention being focused on education and training , on research and , in particular , on the resource provided to the European Union in its young people , is steadily growing .
By providing new learning opportunities , we want to offer our citizens more chances .
Education , training , cultural , research and youth programmes are a key element in this strategy .
The aim of the ' Youth in Action ' programme is to inspire a feeling of active European citizenship , solidarity and tolerance among Europeans , from adolescence to adulthood .
The programme promotes mobility both inside and beyond the EU 's borders and encourages the inclusion of all young people , irrespective of their educational , social and cultural background .
As a member of the Delegation for relations with Switzerland and Norway , I voted for this report as I think that the agreement signed between the Commission and the Swiss authorities is completely appropriate and in their mutual interest .
This will enable us to help as many young people as possible acquire new skills and offer them learning opportunities with a European dimension .
in writing . - Although it has chosen not to join the European Economic Area , Switzerland has shown sustained interest in closer cooperation with the EU in the education , training and youth fields .
Initially , the legal bases for the EU education , training and youth programmes did not provide for participation by Switzerland , but this changed in 2006 when Parliament and the Council adopted decisions establishing the 2007-2013 Youth in Action and Lifelong Learning programmes .
In February 2008 , the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations about Swiss participation in the two programmes .
An agreement was reached in August 2009 and the Council has already adopted a decision approving its signature and provisional application from 2011 .
I supported this proposal .
The participation of Switzerland , a country that chose not to be a part of the European Union , in the ' Youth in Action ' programme and in the action programme in the field of lifelong learning cannot be ruled out a priori , but should be carefully evaluated .
I therefore support the terms of the agreement reached between the Commission and the Swiss Government , so I voted for the report by Mrs Pack .
It is right to grant the benefits of the programmes to Switzerland , but it is also right to safeguard all the financial and other interests of the European Union .
Although not a Member State of the European Economic Area , Switzerland has continued to show interest in cooperating more closely with the Union in the field of education , training and youth .
The conclusion of this agreement on Switzerland 's participation in the ' Youth in Action ' programme and the action programme in the area of education and lifelong learning is a very positive consequence of that .
Indeed , the notion of education and lifelong learning is vital to the competitiveness of the knowledge-based economy .
It can be applied to every level of education and training ; it concerns every stage of life and all the different forms of learning .
We must develop and strengthen exchanges , cooperation and mobility .
Furthermore , it is important to encourage young people to take part in public life , particularly those with fewer opportunities or with disabilities , and to foster initiative , enterprise and creativity in order to promote a sense of active European citizenship , develop solidarity and encourage tolerance .
Understandably enough , Switzerland , which provides some of the financial backing for the ' Youth in Action ' and Lifelong Learning programmes , now wishes to participate in these programmes .
In the spirit of learning , it would also be a positive development if the EU were to take a leaf out of Switzerland 's book when it comes to direct democracy .
When the Swiss population decides against the erection of minarets , this decision is accepted .
Likewise , the recent initiative on the deportation of foreign criminals .
The Swiss authorities are aware that when the people say ' no ' , they mean ' no ' so that they do not simply continue to hold ballots until they get the result they want , then express surprise at a drop in voter turnout .
The Swiss example should give us pause to reflect on the concerns that people have .
I cannot fully agree to the regulations described in this report , which is why I have voted against it .
I voted for the recommendation on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation establishing the terms and conditions for the participation of the Swiss Confederation in the Youth in Action programme and in the Lifelong Learning programme ( 2007-2013 ) , because I believe that the agreement negotiated with the Swiss authorities by the Commission is fairly positive , increasing the programme 's benefits in Switzerland and safeguarding the European Union 's interests , not least its financial interests .
Today in plenary , we voted on the draft legislative resolution concerning the participation of Switzerland in the ' Youth in Action ' programme and in the action programme in the field of lifelong learning .
Although it has chosen not to join the European Economic Area , Switzerland has repeatedly shown its interest in closer cooperation with the European Union in the education , training and youth fields .
Through this recommendation , we have concluded an agreement between the EU and Switzerland , granting the latter the possibility of participating in the ' Youth in Action ' programmes and programmes in the field of lifelong learning .
in writing . - Although it has chosen not to join the European Economic Area , Switzerland has shown sustained interest in closer cooperation with the EU in the education , training and youth fields .
Initially , the legal bases for the EU education , training and youth programmes did not provide for participation by Switzerland , but this changed in 2006 when Parliament and Council adopted Decisions establishing the 2007-2013 ' Youth in Action ' and Lifelong Learning programmes .
In February 2008 , the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations on Swiss participation in the two programmes .
An agreement was reached in August 2009 and the Council has already adopted a Decision approving its signature and provisional application from 2011 .
Under Article 218 ( 6 ) of the TFEU , the Council has to obtain the consent of the European Parliament before the agreement can enter into force .
The Parliament and Council Decisions establishing the ' Youth in Action ' and Lifelong Learning programmes , adopted in 2006 , already provided in principle for Swiss participation .
The agreement negotiated with the Swiss authorities by the Commission is quite adequate : it extends the benefits of the programmes to Switzerland , while safeguarding the financial and other interests of the EU .
The rapporteur therefore recommends that Parliament approves the draft Council Decision .
Switzerland is a country which has to contend with the problem of unequal access to higher education , despite having excellent education programmes .
Let us hope that cooperation with the EU will mean that young Swiss people , particularly those from the immigrant population , will have a better chance of accessing education .
Member States ' experiences of programmes facilitating educational exchanges for young people show clearly that they not only promote a good education , but also play a positive role in terms of European integration thanks to acquisition of the languages , cultures and traditions of individual countries .
At the same time , the Lifelong Learning programme represents an excellent opportunity to draw attention to the role of women in Switzerland .
The country was the last in Europe to grant women the right to vote in federal elections , in the 1970s , and for a long time , women have constituted a social group which finds it difficult not only to participate fully in civil society , but also to access education and professional self-fulfilment .
Today , middle-aged women wishing to join the labour market are often faced with the problem of a lack of qualifications or experience , since a considerable number of them stayed at home in order to look after their families , due to the high costs of childcare .
The two reports on human rights in the EU and in the world represent a challenge to the workers who , as the capitalist crisis develops , are suffocating under the barbaric attack on their rights and life by the EU , capital and the bourgeois governments trying to get them to pay the cost of the crisis and save the monopolies ' profits .
It takes a great deal of cheek for the political representatives of capital to proclaim the EU as the guardian of human rights when it is in the process of adopting the new , even more reactionary NATO 2020 doctrine and is first in line when it comes to exploiting the people and natural resources and supporting puppet and reactionary regimes .
At the same time , in all the Member States of the EU , labour and social rights acquired in hard , bloody fights are being slaughtered , grassroots and labour struggles are being savagely repressed , the immigrant hunt and racism are on the rise , fundamental grassroots freedoms and democratic rights are being restricted and communist parties are being outlawed and communist symbols banned in a series of countries .
The standard references to alleged infringements of human rights in Cuba and other countries putting up resistance to the imperialist plans are raw threats , coercion and pressure to break the will of the people , so that they abandon their rights to freely decide their own fate .
Traditionally , the plenary session in December is partly devoted to human rights .
One of the ritual events that punctuate the session , apart from the awarding of the Sakharov Prize , is the adoption of the resolution on Parliament 's annual report on human rights in the world and the European Union 's policy on the matter .
One of the Union 's international commitments is indeed to promote democracy and human rights around the world .
The report this year notes the continuation of grave violations in this area and a situation aggravated by the economic crisis , climate change , new technologies and the fight against terrorism .
It recommends that the objectives of the Treaty of Lisbon be implemented , in particular , through the new European External Action Service .
Mrs Andrikienė , rapporteur of the text , states that the priority of a consistent European foreign policy should be to promote democracy and human rights .
I voted in favour of the annual report on human rights in the world 2009 and the European Union 's policy on the matter , because it examines , assesses and , in specific cases , provides an analysis of the European Union 's work in the field of human rights and democracy and future challenges .
As far as violence against women is concerned , the European Parliament expresses its deep concern about the entrenched gender-based discrimination and domestic violence in several countries , and points out that women living in rural areas are a particularly vulnerable group .
I therefore approve of Parliament 's requirement that women 's rights be explicitly addressed in all human rights dialogues and , in particular , the combating and elimination of all forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls , all forms of harmful traditional or customary practices , for example , female genital mutilation and early or forced marriage , all forms of trafficking in human beings , domestic violence and femicide , exploitation at work and economic exploitation .
As millions of children are still victims of rape , domestic violence and physical , emotional and sexual abuse , I agree that the EU must urgently take additional measures against child labour , and should apply more efficiently the instruments at its disposal .
The role of the European Union as a human rights defender is a fundamental characteristic which the institutions must not relinquish and which must be maintained as a priority of diplomatic work .
Annex I of this report is the best proof of this , as it lists all the situations in which there have been human rights violations that we in Europe have denounced or have not shirked from condemning ; from Afghanistan to Somalia , from Russia to Iran .
We do not turn a blind eye or bury our head in the sand , even when strategic partnerships are at stake , because individual interests cannot be put before defending freedom and human rights .
In my opinion , the Union 's position must remain as follows : interventionist and courageous , fighting for human rights and democracy .
This report is part of a recurrent exercise in pure hypocrisy by the majority , dominated by the right and by social democrats , who claim the role of ' ambassador ' for the defence of human rights .
This is an exercise that is unmasking itself as it goes through the obvious contradictions that it contains , not least in making use of an alleged defending of human rights to promote intervention in countries where its own interests are at stake , whitewashing its allies and supporting them , particularly the United States .
Examples of this include the case of the so-called CIA flights and the complicity of many EU countries ' governments in the kidnapping , torture and illegal transfer of prisoners to Guantánamo Bay and the continued occupation of Afghanistan by NATO forces and the successive massacres of civilian populations under the pretext of combating terrorism .
Further examples include the upholding of Israel 's policy of apartheid over the people of Palestine and support for Morocco 's continued occupation of Western Sahara. and support for the illegal US blockade of Cuba , condemned by the United Nations General Assembly on 18 consecutive occasions .
These policies , like the majorities promoting them , leave a bad taste in the mouth : the time is coming when the people will be able to reject them .
in writing . - The directive on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings aims at creating a more hostile environment for the human traffickers by punishing the criminals and guaranteeing stronger prevention and protection of the victims .
It is unacceptable that human trafficking is still a state of fact in Europe affecting hundreds of thousands of people mostly from vulnerable social groups , such as minorities , women and children for reasons of sexual exploitation , forced labour , modern-day slavery , and others .
I strongly condemn all exploitation of victims of human trafficking and therefore , I am in favour of strengthening protection of the victims and introducing higher sanctions for the traffickers .
Improving the cooperation between EU countries and strengthening the coordination between various institutions and organisations at European , national and regional level is of particular importance for the successful implementation of the directive .
The EU should use its international relations to commit its partners to curb human trafficking and ensure that the rights of the victims are respected worldwide .
Moreover , it should include in its political dialogues with non-EU countries policy norms , standards and principles of the international human rights system for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings .
in writing . - ( LV ) I am voting for this resolution and the proposal for a categorical demand to be made to the Russian authorities to bring the persons guilty of the murder of the Russian lawyer , Sergei Magnitsky , to justice , and I call on Parliament to consider the possibility of denying Russian officials involved in this case entry to the European Union , and of freezing these officials ' bank accounts and other assets in all EU Member States .
Such a demand would send a powerful signal to the Russian authorities that European Union citizens find the serious deficiencies in the Russian justice system , the selective application of laws in the interests of the authorities , and the fact that persons culpable of attacks on , or even the death of , the defenders of human rights , independent journalists and lawyers still remain unpunished far too often , to be unacceptable .
This signal would confirm the EU 's support for the defenders of human rights in Russia , who operate in especially difficult circumstances .
Observance of human rights is one of the EU 's fundamental values , and one to which the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament pays particular attention , since it appears on the agenda of practically every meeting held by our group .
It is important for Parliament as a whole also to devote its attention to this subject .
We are seeing something of an improvement , albeit a slow one , in the situation throughout the world .
There are still countries whose governments persistently violate human rights , yet there are also those where changes are afoot .
The rapporteur 's oral amendment reflected these positive trends in Russia .
The situation in Cuba is , however , still a cause for concern , as demonstrated by the prize giving ceremony for the 2010 Sakharov Prize .
I voted in favour of this report with conviction .
in writing . - The annual report on human rights is inevitably a backward-looking exercise but I nevertheless welcome it .
This report deals with the period July 2008 to December 2009 , just before the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
I warmly welcome Cathy Ashton 's commitment to human rights and her assurance during the debate that human rights will be mainstreamed into the work of the EEAS .
I hope this will mean that when we debate the human rights report next year , we will be able to report a more coherent and consistent approach to human rights by the EU .
This annual report aims to emphasise the European Parliament 's strong determination and long-term efforts to defend human rights and democracy in the world through the development of an increasingly integrated and effective European policy capable of guaranteeing greater coherence and consistency across all policy areas , whether through bilateral relations with third countries or through supporting international and local civil-society organisations .
In particular , we insist on the importance of conducting a thorough assessment of the human rights aspects of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) , which should notably address the coherence and efficiency of the existing mechanisms such as the Action Plans , Progress Reports , Human Rights dialogues and the decision-making process of upgrading relations with non-EU countries .
We should like to give greater visibility to the future accession of the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights as an opportunity to prove its commitment to defending human rights inside and outside its borders .
We therefore call on all Member States to support this and commit their citizens to it .
The report on human rights in the world 2009 and the European Union 's policy on the issue form an extremely important tool to reinforce the role of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) with regard to human rights policy .
Indeed , these things have always been the hallmark that makes the European Union stand out in the world .
I agree with Mrs Andrikienwhen I underline that freedom of religion or belief constitutes , amongst all human rights , an essential and basic right that must be respected , and that conditions related to respect for human rights which feature in the bilateral agreements with non-EU countries need to be enforced more strongly and more effectively .
It is therefore right to call on the High Representative to incorporate freedom of religion or belief into EU human rights policy and to give a thorough evaluation of the situation of freedom of religion or belief in the EU annual report on human rights .
I am voting in favour of the report by Mrs Andrikienė .
The European Union needs to do whatever it can to ensure that the principles and freedoms governing human rights are applied , so that it can play a leading role in this sector .
A special human rights service needs to be created and , more importantly , areas in which there are EU representatives need to be monitored by the Union .
The European Union must also supervise and closely monitor infringements of human rights in its Member States .
I did not support this report since it does not deplore or criticise the EU 's double standards regarding respect for and promotion of human rights , both in its Member States and in third countries with which it has special political and trade relations .
As such , it does not state that EU governments have designed and implemented policies that are radically opposed to human rights in areas such as immigration , with mass expulsions and detentions based on race or security , allowing serious human rights violations such as detaining people illegally and transferring them to secret prisons where they are tortured .
The EU itself has adopted directives that are contrary to human rights , such as , for example , the Returns Directive , and it has initiated or developed special trade or political relationships with governments of countries such as Morocco , Colombia or Israel which systematically violate human rights .
Although I appreciate the fact that for the first time , the human rights situation in the non-autonomous territories of the Western Sahara is included , I do not support this report due to the omission of all the above elements and of the negative impact on human rights of the EU free trade agreements , not to mention its unjustified and exaggerated criticism of countries such as Cuba and Venezuela .
The report on human rights in the world 2009 is very detailed and addresses a wide variety of issues .
Unfortunately , I somehow get the impression that there has been a desperate attempt to pack in every possible issue here without following a clear strategy .
The fact is that the promotion of democracy throughout the world must be an important issue for the Europe Union .
However , this requires a clear approach and a definite , consistent strategy for resolving these problems , some of which are extremely difficult .
Since there is no sign of such a strategy , I abstained during the final vote .
Although it is more than 60 years since the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was signed , there are still many places in the world where this Declaration is nothing but a piece of paper .
Sadly , there are many such places in Europe too , a continent where the protection of human rights as one of the principles of democracy was born .
The European Union , which we can boldly say leads the world in terms of human rights , is making significant efforts to ensure that at least minimum standards of human rights protection are guaranteed in other places around the world .
I therefore congratulate my colleague , Mrs Andrikienė , for preparing a really comprehensive report , and for drawing attention to the complex situation worldwide .
I hope that this report will contribute to improving the situation and that such reports will be shorter in the future .
I voted in favour of this year 's European Parliament report on human rights because it includes both countries that are geographically near to and far from the EU .
In the report , the EP calls on China - the country with the highest number of executions - to make its national execution figures public , and thus allow for transparent analysis and debate on the subject .
This should encourage the country to hasten the abolition of this barbaric form of punishment .
On the other hand , it is shameful that the death penalty is still being used to this day in the democratic United States of America .
The report expresses concern about children involved in , or otherwise affected by , armed conflicts or even forced to take an active part in them .
In my amendments to this report , which were adopted by the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs , I urge the Commission and the Council to ensure that in relations with third countries , compliance with the EU Guidelines on Children and Armed Conflicts is mandatory .
I also call for immediate steps to be taken by the EU and UN institutions to disarm , rehabilitate and reintegrate children who have taken an active part in wars .
I urge the North Korean authorities to make concrete and tangible steps towards improving human rights conditions .
I urge Pyongyang to allow inspection of all types of detention facilities by independent international experts , and to allow UN Special Reporters to visit the country .
I also call on the North Korean authorities to lift restrictions on the ability of international staff to monitor the distribution of aid , and to ensure that international aid reaches the needy .
This report on the annual report on human rights in the World ( 2009 ) and the European Union 's policy on the matter details , exhaustively , human rights violations across the globe .
The European Parliament 's unshakeable determination and longstanding efforts to defend human rights and democracy across the globe by applying a firm and effective policy in defending human rights in the EU should be recalled here .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , a historic opportunity to deal with the gaps that still exist in EU policy on human rights and democracy is opening up .
I therefore join the rapporteur in calling on the European External Action Service to comply fully with the objective and spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon , to ensure that respect for human rights and its promotion is at the heart of the various fields of intervention of Union external policy .
Yesterday , the European Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to the Cuban citizen Guillermo Fariñas , who was absent .
His chair was empty , because the Cuban Government would not have allowed him to return home .
This is a shocking and symbolic example , serving as a brutal reminder that the human rights situation in the world is not improving .
The practice of the death penalty close to home in Belarus , hangings and stonings in Iran , female genital mutilation in Somalia , mass rapes in the Democratic Republic of Congo , the murdering of journalists in Russia , 215 million children working , arbitrary detentions , unfair trials , censorship , and so many other barbarities that require the European Union to be steadfast and uncompromising .
The report adopted today requires us to put human rights at the heart of the European Union 's external action , in its development , defence , trade , fishing , immigration and justice policies .
The universality of these values must take precedence over geopolitics , once again cynically revealed on 10 December 2010 when 15 countries made a cowardly response to China 's express request that they boycott the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Chinese citizen , Lu Xiaobo .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Andrikienon her excellent work .
Parliament 's annual report on human rights - this year in relation to 2009 - is a point of reference for all those interested in the issue .
This edition is even more important , because it is the first since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , which grants the European Union greater powers in foreign policy .
In fact , the greatest hope for human rights is the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon in terms of foreign policy : The European External Action Service must reflect the priorities and the spirit of the Treaty .
One of the priorities of a coherent foreign policy should be the promotion of democracy and human rights .
Lastly , I note that Parliament 's annual report on human rights not only provides a long list of problems ; it also suggests solutions .
The report notes the abolition of the death penalty in several countries , the progress made on violence against women , the protection of children , the fight against torture , protection for human rights activists , the promotion of democracy and religious freedom , and so on .
in writing . - As usual , the final text has good and bad news .
Among the positive points : First of all , the amendment in two parts relating to Magnitsky was adopted with a large majority ( + 318 , -163 and 95 abstentions ) .
S & D and ALDE amendments were all adopted ( LGBT , death penalty / lethal injection ) .
Two GUE amendments were adopted ( equal access to healthcare / treatment and Colombia ) .
However , among the negative points , we have to mention that the two amendments tabled by the rapporteur ( EPP ) relating to the EIDHR and the need to dedicate more projects to democracy instead of HR were adopted .
I voted in favour of Mrs Andrikienė 's report because I believe that we need to stress once again that respecting human rights is the reflection of a modern society .
All human beings are born free and equal , and it is clearly our duty to do everything possible to ensure that this is the case across the world .
Notwithstanding the fact that the European Union 's external policy has made some important strides in recent years , the road to adopting a shared and coherent policy for the promotion of human rights is still a long one .
First of all , the Council and the Commission need to improve the European Union 's capacity for rapid response to violations in third countries .
Beginning with the firm condemnation of the death penalty across the European Union , we need to strive to achieve and reaffirm human rights on a daily basis .
In this vein , I should like to conclude by noting that , as Mahatma Gandhi said , the protection of human rights is the necessary precondition for peace .
This should never be forgotten .
The report on the annual report on human rights in the world in 2009 and EU policy on the matter provides a near total overview of human rights problems across the world .
The report also takes up new types of human rights issues , such as human rights protection and the fight against terrorism .
Thanks to the amendments of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , a chapter has been included on the role of human rights in the newly-established European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
This is very important given the fact that , as a new instrument , the EEAS is able to provide us with an opportunity to review the EU 's human rights policy and to defend human rights worldwide in a more coherent and decisive way .
I therefore support 100 % the proposal to appoint a high representative , who , together with his / her service , will coordinate the Union 's human rights policy on a permanent basis .
The core message is clear : human rights should occupy a central place in the foreign policy of the European Union .
There is still a long way to go , but Parliament will keep its finger on the pulse .
That is an exceptionally positive thing .
I voted for the report on a new strategy for Afghanistan .
I believe that international aid should be channelled directly to the Afghan authorities , thereby circumventing intermediaries .
Regarding the peace process , the EU 's role should allow the Karzai government to be autonomous in choosing its dialogue partners , while insisting on the following prerequisites : banishing al-Qaeda , eradicating poppy cultivation , and a willingness to establish basic respect for fundamental human rights .
As for the professional training of the police force , I agree with the objectives of focusing not just on increasing the number of police officers and soldiers , but mainly on training , on organisation , and on the relations of police forces with parallel judicial institutions .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution and supported a pragmatic approach towards Afghanistan and the new counter-insurgency policy which is geared to protecting the local population and rebuilding areas where security has been ensured .
The new counter-insurgency policy must be given time to show results , there should be a political solution and negotiations with all sides should take place .
I am convinced that any long-term solution must include concrete measures for the eradication of poverty , under-development and discrimination against women , enhancing respect for human rights and the rule of law , strengthening reconciliation mechanisms , ensuring an end to opium production , engaging in a robust state-building exercise , and fully integrating Afghanistan into the international community , as well as banishing al-Qaeda from the country .
We have to pay tribute to the servicemen and women of all the Allied Forces who have lost their lives in defending freedom , and to express condolences to their families , as well as to the families of all innocent Afghan victims .
The situation in Afghanistan is still a concern .
Almost 10 years after the Western coalition drove the Taliban from power , peace and prosperity are still far from being a daily reality for Afghans .
The strategy used for years in the country is flawed and must be changed .
The Union must assert its views on the subject and take note of the failure of the United States ' military policy in the region .
Our troops are bogged down , and no hope of exit seems possible under such conditions .
For these reasons , I supported Parliament 's resolution calling for a new strategy for Afghanistan .
The system that has been in place until now must be changed .
We have to tackle corruption and waste so that international aid can at last fulfil its role .
Peace will return through civil action .
The coalition needs to be stricter when controlling these funds .
On the other hand , we must stop interfering in Afghan affairs .
The Afghan Government must be free to find its modus vivendi with all the groups that make up Afghan society .
The path to development is still long , and we must not endanger these fragile balances .
I abstained during the vote on the report on the new strategy for Afghanistan .
The report does indeed contain several positive points and it acknowledges the highly unfortunate aspects of the current situation and the responsibility of the international community , especially NATO , the EU and the Member States , which are involved in various ways in the war in Afghanistan and the ' management ' of its ' reconstruction ' .
The report also highlights the fact that the distribution of money and international aid does not reach the Afghan people .
It also illustrates how negative and absurd it is for foreign troops to remain in Afghanistan , given that , apart from the human victim aspect , it proves that the situation has worsened in terms of the poverty of the Afghan people , the level of respect for women 's rights , the spiralling rise in opium crops and even the emergence of mafia organisations and corruption through the privatised security system applied by the USA .
Unfortunately , however , amendments by the conservative forces which contradict the original text have altered it .
It welcomes ' new counter-insurgency policy ' , adopts President Obama 's timetable , calls for closer identification by the EU with NATO and the USA and recognises the efficacy of and need for troops to remain and secure the area .
Nine years after the start of the military intervention in Afghanistan , it is possibly the greatest challenge faced by Europe and its allies in terms of foreign intervention and global security .
The truth is that in the last decade , despite the strong - and uninterrupted - international presence in Afghanistan , security in the country has deteriorated .
Terrorists continue to be supported and trained and , on top of this , the main socio-economic indicators are unsatisfactory .
At present , therefore , the main objective of the international community and of Europe should be to encourage the creation of a strong and stable government , so the peace process continues to be supported , insofar as it respects the three basic commitments listed in the report : ( i ) Afghanistan 's commitment to banishing al-Qaeda from the country ; ( ii ) eradicating poppy cultivation and combating drug trafficking ; and ( iii ) a willingness to establish a basic respect for fundamental human rights .
Within this framework , and in accordance with the international commitments that have been made in the context of NATO , the military presence in Afghanistan should be progressively reduced , while maintaining international support for peacekeeping and security with a view to post-intervention stability .
This report is perhaps the best compromise that can be reached today on the new European strategy in Afghanistan .
This is partly thanks to the numerous and crucial amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which made it less ideological and more pragmatic , and capable of recognising the criticalities discovered over nine years of operations on Afghan territory , as well as identifying the positives and lines of development to make the international community 's presence more effective and favour the transition towards a complete hand-back of sovereignty to the Afghan authorities .
A solely military response cannot be enough , it is true .
It is , however , an essential precursor , in order to weaken the Taliban groups and drive them to cut all links with al-Qaeda and therefore to sit down at the negotiating table .
Preventing civilian massacres remains a priority , of course , but we must not deny ourselves the use of drones , which are performing well in the areas around the border with Pakistan .
The commitment to the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan ( EUPOL ) needs to be reinforced in order to continue to train a police force that is capable of maintaining public order .
The training of judges and administrative officials should be intensified in order to favour the strengthening of the Afghan institutions , reduce corruption and build the conditions to return Afghanistan to the Afghans .
in writing . - This report highlighted many of the problems facing Afghanistan .
The report is critical of the role of the NATO-US occupation and of human rights abuses in Afghanistan , in particular , the increased repression of women and higher levels of poverty .
The anti-war movement has warned of these problems since the start of the war .
However , I abstained as I could not support the report 's support for the occupation and the ' surge ' that has been carried out by the Obama administration .
I abstained on amendments calling for more support to the Afghan State .
I support respecting the sovereignty of the Afghan people , but the Karzai regime is corrupt and does not reflect the interests of the majority of the Afghan people .
I call for all aid to be democratically controlled by the small farmers , workers and poor of Afghanistan .
I note the tribute in this report to ordinary soldiers who have been killed and to the Afghan people who are victims of this war .
I cannot agree , however , with the statement that military personnel died ' defending freedom ' .
This is a war carried out in the interests of the major imperialist powers and not in the interests of ordinary people .
Where is our money disappearing to in Afghanistan ?
I am pleased with the motion for a resolution on a new strategy for Afghanistan .
The report highlights very well the many problems affecting that country .
There is no military solution for Afghanistan , something the report also states .
If the troops have not been able to bring peace to Afghanistan , neither has the money that we have poured in .
The report even says that between 2002 and 2009 , more than USD 40 billion in international aid was channelled into the country .
Of this 40 billion , just six billion went to the Afghan Government , the remaining 34 billion being channelled into the country from elsewhere .
As much as 70 to 80 % of this aid never got to its intended recipients , the Afghan people .
Furthermore , the costs of the war in Afghanistan over the period 20012009 amounted to more than USD 300 billion .
However , these enormous sums of money are not doing the Afghan people any good .
Instead , it is , for example , the arms industry , mercenaries and international companies that get to benefit from the money spent in Afghanistan .
It is important that the report actually highlights this unsatisfactory state of affairs .
in writing . - ( LV ) I fully support the report where it calls for efforts to reconstruct Afghanistan and an improvement in the human rights situation .
It cannot be denied that the security situation in Afghanistan today is much better than it was nine years ago .
People live in a freer society , girls can get education , and medical services are more accessible than under the Taliban regime .
However , serious problems , in the resolution of which there has been no progress , still remain .
This can especially be said about the war against drugs , as is rightly emphasised in the report .
According to expert opinion , 92 % of the world 's opium is sourced in Afghanistan and is then distributed throughout the world , including the European Union .
We must take into account the fact that the cultivation of opium poppies represents a significant source of income in rural areas , where other forms of earning a living are difficult to find .
That is why the destruction of opium poppy plantations without offering alternative means of earning a living is not an effective solution .
The government of Afghanistan must make more purposeful use of international aid to develop small enterprises and agriculture in regions where opium is currently grown .
The European Union 's investment in rebuilding Afghanistan is significant , but there is still much more to do .
The most important thing is to guarantee security .
I should like to stress that a premature withdrawal of forces from Afghanistan would not only be dangerous for the local population and a threat to the democratic world , but it would also thereby destroy all the good that has been achieved in Afghanistan .
People have paid a high price for peace in Afghanistan , and we must not let them down .
in writing . - The rapporteur decided to focus exclusively on four areas where , he believes , targeted action could bring about real changes : international aid , the implications of the recently launched peace process , the impact of police training , and the elimination of opium cultivation .
Although I do not support every conclusion he draws , I did vote for this well thought-out and useful contribution to the debate on Afghanistan .
The report on a new strategy for Afghanistan should be assessed positively overall , so I am voting in favour of it .
The enormous problems that remain today in Afghanistan , each different and extraordinarily important for the future of this Middle-Eastern country , need to be dealt with using a new approach with a different definition of priorities compared to what has been done so far .
The primary question - as the report we are going to vote on correctly identifies - is the fact that ' there can be no stability or peace in Afghanistan without the state first of all guaranteeing security for its citizens on its own responsibility ' .
In this regard , I hope that the rapporteur will reconsider the part in which he talks about the use of drones , perhaps through an oral amendment .
This report paints a disastrous picture of the consequences of a NATO-led war in Afghanistan that has had the complicity and support of the EU .
It is regrettable that the report does not condemn the war itself and hesitates between maintaining NATO military forces on the ground and going ahead with their necessary withdrawal .
Despite this , considering all the important criticisms it contains , I will abstain from voting .
One of the main reasons why I did not support this report is because not only does it suggest the immediate withdrawal of European troops , but also it ' welcomes and supports ' the plan to strengthen EU action .
Likewise , it scarcely questions the role played by the International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) and the grave human rights abuses committed .
I consider it positive that the report includes the statements by General Stanley McChrystal in which he denies that there is sufficient al-Qaeda presence to justify the deployment of troops in Afghanistan .
I also think that it is positive that the report calls for police training to cease being in the hands of private contractors as soon as possible , along with the recital stating that there is no obvious end in sight for the war in Afghanistan due to the militarism and warmongering that has taken place so far .
I did not support the report because my firm , consistent commitment to pacificist values lead me to criticise this report , the spirit and focus of which are entirely opposed to the need to demilitarise the EU 's foreign policy and its foreign relations .
In general , the rapporteur has quite correctly recognised the situation in Afghanistan .
He is aware that resources and troops are being deployed completely incorrectly in Afghanistan and that additional resources and troops will do nothing to change this .
He has correctly recognised that the presence and disdainful demeanour of the Coalition is the primary reason for its absolute rejection by the local population .
He is also aware that it is not possible to foist democracy and Western values on the people of Afghanistan .
However , the rapporteur must be criticised for harping on themes such as women 's rights which , although very important , are completely unacceptable at local level and therefore render the entire peace process even less likely .
In addition , the rapporteur , despite identifying their negative effect , also calls for more troops and more resources for Afghanistan .
I am convinced that the Afghan conflict is an unjust war and that the continued occupation of the country is of no benefit either to Europe or to Afghanistan itself .
Europe 's first line of defence is not at the Hindu Kush .
It is for that reason that I have voted against this report .
The Member States of the European Union who are fighting at America 's side in the war in Afghanistan should withdraw their troops from this country as quickly as possible .
The Afghan War will soon have lasted nine years and there is still no sign of any improvement in the security situation .
On the contrary , the Islamist Taliban is growing in strength .
Europe is wasting its resources instead of deploying them where they are urgently needed , for example , on the EU 's Balkan borders .
It is hard to see what European interests are actually to be defended in the Hindu Kush .
It would seem that the primary concern is not to establish democracy in Afghanistan according to the Western model , as the Americans claim .
Instead , economic interests play a central role , particularly because , according to the New York Times , it is estimated that around USD 1 billion worth of natural resources lie buried in Afghanistan .
Obviously , the EU is required to help US concerns to exploit these riches without disruption .
It is for that reason that I have voted against this report .
This report on a new strategy for Afghanistan was prepared following on from the meeting of the Foreign Affairs Council in which it was discussed how to move forward with implementing the Action Plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan , and in which the first semi-annual implementation report was tabled .
I fully support a strategy aimed at protecting the population and reconstructing areas where security is guaranteed , as well as political solutions in which all involved parties are called into the negotiations .
I welcome the goal of gradually transferring responsibility for security to Afghan forces between now and 2014 .
I unreservedly support Parliament 's call for the Commission to ensure total transparency in the financial assistance provided to the Afghan Government , international organisations and local NGOs .
It is only by means of a transparent system that we will be able to maintain the coherence of aid and succeed in reconstructing and developing Afghanistan , which is the ultimate goal .
I should like to congratulate Mr Arlacchi .
The report adopted today proposes that the new European Union strategy for Afghanistan should be based on four key factors : full support for peace negotiations between the Karzai government , the Taliban and other insurgent groups ; an extensive training plan for the Afghan police ; the elimination of opium crops ; and halting the international aid scandal , in which 80 % of aid disappears during the journey from donor countries to Afghanistan .
Regarding the last of these points , it is noted that international aid for Afghanistan ends up being spent in bribes , forms of ' legalised corruption ' and all kinds of stealing , often financing the enemy .
Since 2002 , the EU alone has spent EUR 8 billion on this tortured country and despite this , the child mortality rate has risen , literacy levels have fallen and the amount of people living below the poverty line has increased by 130 % over the last six years alone .
In order to rectify the absence of coordination and communication among international donors , the EU is calling to set up a centralised database on all EU aid and to allocate funds directly to specific projects implemented in partnership with Afghan institutions .
in writing . - The report adopted today is based on the extensive consultations that the rapporteur has been engaged in over the past six months on the situation in Afghanistan and its relations with the international community , in an attempt to explain why so little has been achieved in Afghanistan in spite of the huge amounts of money and effort expended over the past nine years .
The gap between hope and reality in Afghanistan has become more striking than ever , and a new EU strategy in that country should thus start from this premise .
The report focuses exclusively on four areas where targeted action could bring about real changes : international aid , the implications of the recently launched peace process , the impact of police training , and the elimination of opium cultivation .
in writing . - This report has some useful references to the NATO / ISAF mission ; to the deep problems of illiteracy and ill-treatment of women ; to endemic corruption and the need for fresh thinking .
It might have stopped there .
However , it could not resist constant criticism of the coalition and , tacitly , of the US .
It tries to find ways to elevate the EU role .
It advocates increased ' EU funding ' when clearly , the need is not more money but better control and use of the massive amounts already provided .
The ECR therefore abstained .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe that with this document , the European Parliament is strengthening its role in its relations with the Commission .
I agree with the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs that it is of the utmost importance for Parliament to be able to fully and timely exercise its prerogatives and for the Commission to actively inform Parliament about all draft measures , amended draft measures and final draft measures that it intends to adopt under Article 291 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which provides that , where uniform conditions for implementing legally binding Union acts are needed and implementing powers are conferred on the Commission , the control on the exercise of such implementing powers by the Commission rests with the Member States alone .
I feel that in light of the specificity and political sensitivity of implementing acts to be adopted under the external financial assistance instruments , and in line with the practice established with the democratic scrutiny dialogue , Parliament should have the opportunity to contribute to the process leading to the definition of the content of the draft implementing acts to be adopted under the external financial assistance instruments .
In the architecture of the European Union , the Commission 's role is akin to that of government in a typical State .
The Commission has the legislative initiative , but also the power to implement regulations , directives and decisions .
The Commission can therefore be considered the executive branch of the Union .
It has derived powers , which allow it to take measures to implement texts adopted through the ordinary legislative procedure .
Just as regulations and circulars in France must respect the laws in place , the implementing acts of the Commission are not independent from European laws .
However , it is possible that , in exercising this quite natural power to implement , the Commission may exceed its powers , in most cases , without necessarily seeking to do so .
For democratic reasons , it is for other EU institutions to monitor the Commission 's activity so that the division of powers is respected .
That is why I voted in favour of this proposal for a regulation laying down the general principles for control by Member States of the Commission 's exercise of implementing powers .
in writing . - I could not vote for this report because it sacrifices some of the European Parliament 's hard won new powers in international trade for the expediency of an agreement with the Council on implementing powers in other areas .
The Commission 's proposal is a concerted attack on democracy .
This report settles for amending it without actually condemning that fact .
The Commission is the only group of civil servants in the world that remains outside the control of its government ( the Council ) .
I shall be voting against this latest authoritarian move .
There have always been efforts to centralise control within the European Union .
These efforts seem to have increased recently in tandem with a rise in bureaucracy , despite all the statements to the contrary .
It must remain a matter for the Member States to decide what powers they wish to cede to the EU and / or the Commission .
This cannot be changed by judgments by the European Court of Justice , which seems to have been pursuing the principle of a centralised state in its judgments for years .
Likewise , the Treaty of Lisbon cannot be exploited for this purpose , nor may such objectives be pursued under the pretext of crisis management .
In theory , there is a clear acceptance of the subsidiarity principle .
However , this is frequently ignored or skirted in practice .
I voted in favour of the report because it basically goes against this trend .
The compromise reached means that the commercial policy , including the instruments of trade defence , can be included within the general framework of comitology .
This approach is entirely coherent and in line with both the spirit and the letter of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In particular , I fully support the need to strengthen the decision-making and implementation process , providing the Commission with the requisite instruments in the common interest of the European Union , the Member States and all economic operators .
I support the principle that the Commission should adopt definite anti-dumping and countervailing measures and that the Member States should vote on the basis of a qualified majority .
This report on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down the rules and general principles on control mechanisms by Member States of the Commission 's exercise of implementing powers is motivated by the new rules on implementing acts introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is a delicate matter , not least in terms of agriculture and fisheries issues .
Under the current system of committee procedure , the common agricultural policy accounts for the majority of acts .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the current regulations on the committee procedure will have to be replaced by delegated acts and implementing acts , under the terms of Articles 290 and 291 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Problems with adapting existing legislation to the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon are of the greatest importance , especially for policies - such as those on agriculture and fisheries - that have not been adopted under the codecision procedure .
Only the test of new legislation , heavily amended by the European Parliament and the Council , will be able to indicate whether the route set out will result in the effectiveness and implementation of European policies .
in writing . - In general terms , the report was well perceived by all groups and the amendments tabled by the committee reflect the agreement reached with the Council and Commission for a first-reading agreement .
Our group is in favour of the agreement .
I voted in favour of this resolution because there is a need for a permanent crisis mechanism in order to safeguard the financial stability of the euro The European Stability Mechanism and / or a European Monetary Fund should be based on solidarity , subject to strict conditionality rules and financed , amongst other sources , by the fines applied to Member States as the outcome of a procedure for dealing with excessive deficits , excessive debts or excessive imbalances .
I believe that it is also important that the financing of the permanent crisis mechanism must be based upon the ' polluter pays principle ' , meaning that Member States creating bigger risks by their deficits and debt burdens should finance a larger proportion of the total assets .
These penalties would be one of the means of avoiding financial and economic crises in euro area countries , such as the one that arose in Greece a few months ago and which is still continuing .
The war against the workers , the self-employed and small-scale farmers is a strategic choice by the bourgeois governments and the EU in order to support the profitability of capital .
The debt and deficit are simply a pretext .
All the national governments in the Member States of the euro area and the EU are being called upon to step up the adoption and application of even more savage , barbaric and anti-labour and anti-grassroots measures coordinated by the EU , the ECB and the IMF .
The summit will create the ' support mechanism ' , which is basically a bankruptcy mechanism .
The debate on resources and the participation of private capital is wool over the workers ' eyes .
The aim is to ensure that the plutocracy does not go bust .
Capital makes the markets more visible to the absolute regulator of Community mechanisms and amends the Treaty of Lisbon in that direction , so as to safeguard its profits by over-exploiting the workers and by plundering the wealth that they produce .
Enhanced economic governance is being imposed in order to control capitalist restructurings and step up the attack on the life and rights of workers .
In light of this all-out attack by capital and the plutocracy , there is an urgent need for a broader grassroots rally to radically reverse the power correlations for the benefit of the grassroots alliance and to achieve an exit from the EU , grassroots power and a grassroots economy .
On Thursday , 16 December 2010 , the Heads of State or Government agreed to maintain the financial solidarity mechanisms established several months ago in response to the crisis .
This is to ensure the stability of the euro as a whole , in case of difficulties in one or more Member States of the euro area .
However , the granting of financial assistance will remain subject to strict conditions , which I think is necessary .
As does Parliament 's resolution , I welcome this commitment made by Member States , which shows true European solidarity .
Unfailing solidarity is today the best answer that we can give the markets .
Important decisions were taken this year aiming to establish an EU framework for economic governance and financial supervision .
The EU will see the launch of the European Systemic Risk Board , responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the financial system in order to avoid periods of widespread financial distress and contribute to the smooth functioning of the internal market , thereby ensuring a sustainable contribution on the part of the financial sector to economic growth .
I approve of the proposal to establish a permanent European Stability Mechanism and so further reinforce economic governance , in order to be able to ensure effective and rigorous economic surveillance and coordination , which will focus on prevention .
I agree with the proposal set out in the resolution that Member States outside the euro area should have the possibility to be involved in the creation of this mechanism and they should be given the opportunity to obtain financial assistance if necessary .
I voted in favour of this European Parliament resolution which discusses the need for Member States to establish a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area as a whole .
This instrument is aimed at effective and rigorous economic surveillance and coordination , which will focus on prevention and will substantially reduce the probability of a crisis arising in the future .
In order to streamline the current processes of economic policy coordination and remove overlaps and to ensure that EU strategy is understandable to market operators and citizens , it is necessary to move to more integrated approaches and to bring about a change in the decision-making process .
I agree that we must strengthen the involvement of the European Parliament in legislative procedures related to the crisis mechanism , so as to improve democratic accountability and to rely on the expertise , independence and impartiality of the Commission .
As the European Stability Mechanism is meant to complement the new framework of reinforced economic governance , the European Parliament calls on the Commission to present a communication , following consultation with the European Central Bank , containing a comprehensive description of this permanent crisis mechanism .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on establishing a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area , given that this kind of mechanism has become a necessity in the current economic and financial crisis .
I also support this resolution as it calls for the mechanism to be inspired by the Community method , which involves decision making at a common European level .
Having a permanent crisis mechanism is beneficial to all Member States , including those which have not yet adopted the euro , given the interdependency among Europe 's economies .
We voted against this resolution because we disagree with the positions being taken on the financial problems that the Member States are experiencing , without taking their causes into account , and without tabling fundamental measures for identifying a complete solution .
Such solutions include the immediate abolition of the Stability and Growth Pact , the immediate amendment of the European Central Bank 's statute and guidelines , the immediate end to the liberalisation of the capital market and the derivatives market , and the immediate abolition of tax havens .
As the European Union does not wish to take any of these measures , it is opting for positions that scarcely reduce the current problem but that still have a significant dependence on the financial market and richer countries .
The resolution also insists on imposing penalties on Member States that do not comply with the rules established , notably in the Stability and Growth Pact , which will exacerbate the situation as a whole of those countries with weaker economies .
This means that the most important thing is the interests of the major powers , such as Germany , and that the much-trumpeted solidarity is still lacking .
in writing . - We voted against CCCTB but did not want to defeat other important aspects of this report .
Our support for the general provisions is not support for CCCTB .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with the proposals for resolutions , because we need to establish a permanent crisis mechanism that is credible , robust , lasting , grounded in the essential technical realities and inspired by the Community method , thus ensuring market stability and greater certainty .
in writing . - I voted for the EP resolution on the permanent crisis mechanism specifically because of the fact that during the debates in the Committee on Economic Affairs , the texts relating to establishment of a minimum corporate tax rate in the EU of 25 % were deleted .
I firmly support the idea for Member States to keep their national tax policies .
It is crucial to preserve tax competition as a tool to facilitate cohesion and boost EU economic growth .
Otherwise , how shall we drive EU competitiveness if we eliminate one of the best instruments to promote it and what shall we solve if we harmonise taxes clearly without the agreement of all Member States ?
I also support the proposition for Member States that create bigger risk by their deficits and debt burden to contribute more to the assets of the crisis mechanism because this would definitely encourage strict fiscal discipline and enhance the added value of having a proper economic and fiscal policy .
I am greatly concerned by the establishment of a permanent crisis mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the euro area .
This is a vitally important issue for the countries in the euro area , and for the remaining Member States of the European Union .
Over 150 million EU citizens live outside the euro area .
Stabilisation of the euro will make it easier for them to fulfil their ambitions of joining this area , and may protect the entire system from further turbulence .
The resolution does not solve any problems in and of itself , but it can send a strong signal to the Council and the Commission and to the Member States .
The resolution gives voice to Parliament 's firm intention to strengthen the Union approach and European solidarity .
I voted in favour of this resolution , and I have high hopes of it .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution and , in particular , the oral amendment by Stephen Hughes which ' calls on the Council to provide the necessary political signal for a Commission investigation into a future system of Eurobonds , with a clear specification of the conditions under which such a system would be beneficial to all participating Member States and to the eurozone as a whole ' .
This report supports the establishment of the European mechanism for financial stability and the social cuts that this will entail .
It requires full consistency with International Monetary Fund regulations and establishes the European Commission 's control over national budgets .
I shall therefore vote against this report , which I also condemn .
The motion for a resolution placed before us today with the specious title ' Establishing a Crisis Mechanism ' is , in fact , a desperate attempt by the EU imperialists to bind all EU Member States together in a common European destiny , following the principle of ' United we stand , united we fall ' .
Right from the start , the euro was a completely misjudged construct that was bound to fail .
It is not possible to shoehorn together states with completely different national economies under a single shared currency .
Because there is no desire for greater integration or for the transfer of taxes between the peoples of Europe , it will be necessary to abolish the existing monetary union and to establish a hard currency union .
For this reason , I favour bringing this business to a close instead of allowing it to lurch from one disaster to the next .
I am therefore voting against this motion for a resolution .
I should like to reiterate what was said yesterday during the debate and say that I am very happy about the approval of Amendment 12 , even if I would have added an even more direct reference .
We need to find new and innovative instruments to finance the crisis mechanism .
Through the issue of Eurobonds , the crisis mechanism would be financed on the markets , drawing on foreign capital and people looking to invest , without any negative effect on national budgets .
A mechanism based solely on pro-rata contributions , under the form of mere provisions of reserves , would imply a major burden on Member States , which would have to find the cash or capital to deposit without this bringing any yield or return .
In a situation like the one at present , where Member States are asked , on the one hand , to implement severe budget policies to reduce deficits and debts and , on the other , to pay contributions to participate in the stabilisation fund , there is a real risk of collapse .
in writing . - Among other things , this resolution calls on the European Council to specify as soon as possible the Treaty changes required in order to establish a permanent ESM .
Parliament recalls that it has welcomed the establishment of a financial stability mechanism to address the risks of default by sovereign borrowers , partly using Article 122 TFEU as the legal basis of this plan , and that it has noted the inherent democratic deficit and lack of accountability of the Council 's rescue package decisions , which did not include consultation with the European Parliament .
It also demands that the European Parliament be involved as colegislator in forthcoming crisis rescue proposals and decisions and underlines that , from a rational , practical and democratic point of view , consideration of the economic governance legislative package cannot be dissociated from the decision taken by the European Council to create a permanent crisis mechanism .
I voted in favour of this resolution which calls for democracy to be restored in the Republic of Côte d 'Ivoire ( Ivory Coast ) following the presidential elections which took place on 28 November 2010 .
The illegal decision by Côte d 'Ivoire 's Constitutional Council , whose members appointed the outgoing President , to change the results declared by the election commission in contravention of a law that the Constitutional Council has a duty to implement , goes against the will of the people of Côte d 'Ivoire as expressed when they voted in the elections .
This decision must be overturned because otherwise , this country will be unable to break free from the political deadlock that followed the elections and the instances of violence already being reported will increase .
In the interests of the welfare of the people of Côte d 'Ivoire and peace in the country , I therefore support the appeal to Mr Laurent Gbagbo and the call for him to step down and hand over power to Mr Alassane Ouattara , to whom the electorate gave their votes as a sign of their trust .
For many years , Côte d 'Ivoire was the archetype of good decolonisation .
The exemplary student of new-found independence , in the 1970s and 1980s , the country experienced considerable growth .
Unfortunately , a latent political crisis has gradually undermined Côte d 'Ivoire .
The last presidential elections brought the opposition leader , Mr Ouattara , to power .
The outgoing president , Mr Gbagbo , refused to hand over power .
Ever since , the country has sunk into unbelievable confusion .
Two parties are fighting for power and serious incidents have cost supporters from both sides their lives .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution calling on Mr Gbagbo to respect the results of the polls and make way immediately for his legitimate successor .
The text also supports the action of the African Union , which is currently putting pressure on the country in order to ensure a return to democracy .
The manner in which the second round of Presidential elections in Côte d 'Ivoire took place is regrettable .
Violence , resulting in deaths and injuries , eventually led to the evacuation of international observers , a fact that raises a big question mark over the correctness of this poll , but also over the post-electoral progress in this country .
I hope that this country , which was once a model of democracy for the African continent , will successfully rise above the impasse of electoral confrontation .
Massive participation at the ballot box , despite the tensions , expresses the major preoccupation of the Ivoirians for the future of their country .
I therefore believe that it is essential for the will of the citizens , expressed by voting in an election that has been cancelled six times in the past , to be respected .
Côte d 'Ivoire has the chance to bring to an end a decade of political , military and provisional government crises that divided the country into loyalist south and rebellious north .
The only viable solution is for the will of the electorate to be respected .
The situation in Côte d 'Ivoire is to be condemned at all levels .
It is worrying to note that the sovereign will of the electorate is not respected and that the presidential candidate who won the elections , according to Côte d 'Ivoire 's Independent Electoral Commission , has been blocked from taking up his post by the Constitutional Court .
There were related cases of serious attacks on freedoms during the second round of the elections , not least a climate of tension and violence that led to several deaths and injuries .
The political situation in Côte d 'Ivoire is untenable , the attitude of the Constitutional Court is unacceptable , and Mr Gbagbo 's ill grace in losing goes against the principles of democracy and the rule of law .
in writing . - I fully support the call in this motion for Mr Gbagbo to step down and hand over power to Alassane Ouattara , the democratically elected President of Cote d 'Ivoire .
We have a duty to make sure that the election results coming in from the polls are respected , for they express the will of the people of Côte d 'Ivoire .
The results issued by the Constitutional Council of Côte d 'Ivoire go against the will of those people .
We cannot accept this unconstitutional , anti-democratic hold-up .
On 28 November 2010 , Mr Ouattara was declared the legitimate winner of the presidential elections by the Independent Electoral Commission of Côte d 'Ivoire ( CEI ) and by almost the entire international community .
It is imperative for the stability of the country and the sub-region as a whole that the stalling strategy being used by Mr Gbagbo should be brought to an end as quickly as possible .
The political situation in the Côte d 'Ivoire is extremely critical .
In principle , I believe that it is not the job of the European Union to play the role of the world 's police force because foreign countries must be able to determine their own destiny without needing the blessing of the EU or USA .
However , in this case , we are not faced with the will of the people of the Côte d 'Ivoire , but rather with the tyrannical subjugation of this people by an established elite .
Some years ago , we had a situation in Europe where people were forced into a highly dubious form of state by political powers who had the necessary military means at their disposal .
It is important that these powers should not be driven from their positions by violent means .
However , it is equally important that peaceful means should be used to put pressure on these persons , so as to make it difficult for them to continue with their unjust policies .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
This resolution is motivated by the serious political and institutional crisis taking place in Côte d 'Ivoire following the second round of the presidential elections on 28 November 2010 .
The elections , which were monitored by the United Nations ( UN ) and the European Union , took place in a generally satisfactory way .
However , the results presented by Côte d 'Ivoire 's Independent Electoral Commission , announcing Mr Ouattara 's victory , were rejected by the country 's Constitutional Court , which reversed the result , alleging fraud in some areas and declaring the current president , Laurent Gbagbo , the winner .
As the only source of democratic legitimacy is universal suffrage , whose results were certified by the UN , the European Parliament is using this resolution , for which I am voting , to call on Mr Gbagbo to resign and hand over power to Alassane Ouattara , and to strongly condemn the acts of intimidation directed at EU observers .
Through this resolution , Parliament welcomes the European Council 's decision to adopt specific measures against those obstructing the process of peace and national reconciliation , and supports the EU 's decision to impose sanctions on Laurent Gbagbo .
in writing . - Huge consensus , today , on the vote on the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire .
The EP Resolution , voted through with a big majority , states that the EP considers that the sole source of democratic legitimacy is universal suffrage , the results of which have been certified by the UN , and therefore calls on Mr Gbagbo to step down and hand over power to Alassane Ouattara ; urges all the political and armed forces in Côte d 'Ivoire to respect the will of the people that was reflected by the results of the 28 November poll , as announced by the CEI and certified by the UNSG Special Representative ; and deplores the violent clashes that preceded the proclamation of the results of the second round of presidential elections in Côte d 'Ivoire and expresses its deepest solidarity with the victims and their families ; regrets also the political obstruction and attempts to intimidate CEI members , which ultimately delayed the announcement of provisional results , thus hampering the due course of the democratic electoral process .
I think it was a good idea for the Commission to attend Parliament today to report on the ban on the use of unenriched cages for laying hens , which will enter into force from January 2012 .
The implementation data are not very encouraging and , hence , very tough action is required against Member States that , out of indolence , have not made any progress for a while .
The prohibition of these cages has been known since 1999 , and those Member States that joined later were perfectly aware of having to take action on this issue according to precise timescales .
Delay is unacceptable .
Deadlines must be respected to make the European Union 's actions credible .
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union requires the EU to enforce its policies , bearing in mind the welfare of animals as sentient beings .
We must not always hide behind the problem of competitiveness , which should not be considered as an issue of quantity and prices but , above all , of quality , environmental sustainability and ethics , too .
The critical and aware consumer must be at the heart of a new economic model that the EU should spearhead .
I therefore hope that the Commission will proceed swiftly and determinedly to implement Council Directive 1999 / 74 / EC , to protect both animals and consumers .
I voted for this resolution , as I advocate some flexibility for those who have already started this adaptation process but who have been unable to complete it because of the current crisis .
From 1 January 2012 , the rearing of laying hens in unenriched cages will be banned , and this will establish the minimum standards relating to the protection of laying hens .
It is therefore important to know that the Commission can show what progress has been achieved by the Member States in preparing for the ban on the rearing of laying hens in conventional batteries from 1 January 2012 , what measures it will take against Member States whose producers do not comply , and what measures it will take to prevent potential unfair competition from third countries in the EU egg market from 1 January 2012 .
Just over 10 years ago , the European Union passed a directive intended to protect laying hens from the appalling rearing conditions in which too many farms were keeping them .
Basing their argument on the significant deterioration of the situation in the sector , undermined by rising feed prices caused by cereals market speculation , a number of Member States have requested a review of the directive .
It should be applied no later than 2012 .
Two years away from the deadline , many farms are nowhere near meeting the new standards .
Parliament 's current resolution calls on the Commission to stand firm on this issue .
It welcomes the consultation that the Commission has initiated with professionals from the sector , but urges the Commission to refuse the additional time that some farmers are requesting .
It has been 10 years since the directive entered into force .
After 1 January 2012 , eggs laid by hens kept in battery cages of less than 550 cm will no longer be sold .
However , many factory farms are still not up to standard .
There could be a shortage of eggs and rising consumer prices in cases where some Member States are not ready to comply with the ban .
This would also lead to increased imports of eggs from third countries , which do not always abide by European health standards .
That is why Parliament has sounded the alarm .
Producers and Member States have been called to order so that they will act quickly , particularly considering that , to date , they have had more than 12 years to comply with legislation .
Producers who have made investments in order to comply , and breeders of free-range hens , should enjoy fair competition within the European Union .
The issue raised here is fundamental , not just from the point of view of animal hygiene and welfare , but also the need to ensure the applicability and effectiveness of Directive 1999 / 74 / EC , preventing potential distortions of competition .
It has already been demonstrated in other situations relating to animal transportation that failure to apply and comply with EU rules by certain producers and distributors creates situations of unfair competition and market distortions .
The Union therefore urgently needs to demonstrate coercive capacity in the application and following of its directives throughout its territory , in order for the market to function more efficiently , and without deviations and distortions by respecting these same rules .
The banning of conventional battery cages in 2012 represents an enormous success for animal welfare .
However , these uniform standards must apply throughout Europe , otherwise they are pointless .
It is vital that we fight for this Europe-wide deadline in the interests of animals and of producers who have already invested in alternative farming practices .
In order to establish equal competition , the Commission must ensure that eggs that are not produced in the correct way are not allowed to reach the European market .
At the very least , consumers must be able to identify eggs and egg products produced in compliance with European standards .
I was the Christian Democrat spokesman on animal welfare in the German Bundestag when Parliament decided on this ban .
At the time , I defended the resolution because it was to apply to the whole of Europe .
I expect the Commission to take suitable steps to ensure that the deadline is met in all Member States .
This means that there should be no more conventional battery cages in use in Europe after 2012 .
The ban on rearing laying hens in traditional cages enters into force in January 2012 .
The risk that many businesses will not be in compliance alarms us .
We also fear possible shortages of supply and price increases on eggs , given that eggs from farms which are not in compliance with Council Directive 1999 / 74 / EC will be banned from sale .
I voted for the resolution because a delay would be unthinkable , but we have supported countries such as Spain and Portugal in bringing in an instrument that guarantees a ' soft ' transition for businesses which have begun to change their rearing systems but which will not have completed the process before the deadline .
It is not my desire to harm animal welfare and ask for a delay , but to underline a few essential points that need to be reiterated with force .
Firstly , for the principle of reciprocity , the European Commission is asked to implement a monitoring system to supervise the quality of eggs imported into the European Union and guarantee total respect of European standards and rules .
Subsequently , the Member States are asked to include measures in their regional development plans to support the laying-hen sector in this difficult time .
in writing . - I strongly support this resolution which demands that all the provisions of Directive 1999 / 74 / EC on the welfare of laying hens be fully implemented by all Member States by the deadline of 1 January 2012 .
It declares that any extension of the deadline , or ' phase-in period ' , for any Member State is unacceptable - considering that producers have already had 10 years in which to comply - and would have grave ramifications for the successful and timely implementation of any future animal welfare rules .
It also requests that the Commission launch swift and effective infringement proceedings , with heavy and dissuasive fines , for lack of compliance with all elements of the directive .
Eleven years on from a provision having been passed , it is hard to understand how it can be that so few steps have been taken for its implementation .
This can mainly be laid at the door of the Commission , which , in the past , has often watered down its former provisions , so that they were no longer taken seriously .
If it indeed proves to be the case that here , too , a lazy compromise will be reached , this will once again undermine the credibility of the EU .
It is my fervent hope that by 1 January 2012 , there will no longer be any illegal battery farms in the market or , at the very least , that these will be hit with such punitive taxes that they will no longer enjoy any competitive advantage .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of Amendment 2 initiated by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) because a large number of producers have already started to invest with a view to modernising their rearing systems or are at the point of launching such investments .
These investments cannot be implemented overnight and it would be unfair for the producers in question to be penalised .
This amendment will allow an important number of Romanian - and not only Romanian - producers to start modernising works in the coming period so that they will not have to cease their activities .
Council Directive 1999 / 74 / EC stipulates that from 1 January 2012 , unenriched cages can no longer be used .
European farmers will have to choose whether to convert their systems to use enriched cages - which are more spacious , to improve the animal 's wellbeing - or to rear laying hens on the ground , outside , or in organic systems .
According to recent surveys , it is thought that 30 % of European farms still use unenriched cages .
Real difficulties in adapting to the new system before the deadlines set by the directive have been observed .
This is the case in Italy , for example .
Through the Agriculture and Fisheries Council meeting of 22 February 2010 , the European Commission has stated that no exceptions are provided for in the application of the ban .
An amendment to the resolution , however , meant that a possible alternative solution was reached for those producers who have started to replace their systems of rearing in favour of the new cages .
I therefore voted for it .
The welfare of animals in general and of laying hens in particular is a serious business .
To prove it , not only did the European Union legislate on the subject by means of a 1999 directive prohibiting battery cages for laying hens from 1 January 2012 , but the transposition of that text also caused a disagreement between the Walloons and the Flemish in 2004 .
In this debate , it is essential to be sensible and to find a solution which takes into account both animal welfare and the economic interests at stake .
Those who say that Community rules should be complied with , that unfair competition between breeders should be prevented , and that a 12-year transitional period is ample time to write off the investments are right .
However , the opponents , who are demanding a little flexibility in the rules , especially at this time of austerity , and saying that the switch to enriched cages or non-cage systems will cost the poultry sector , a non-beneficiary of direct aid from the common agricultural policy , a huge amount of money , are also right .
That is why I supported the three amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which reflect the everyday reality for all European breeders .
in writing . - With the adoption of this resolution , the EP calls on the Commission to maintain the requirement for a ban on battery cages by 1 January 2012 , as laid down in the Welfare of Laying Hens Directive ( 1999 / 74 / EC ) , and strongly to oppose any attempts by Member States to secure a deferral of that deadline ; it stresses that , as a matter of principle , postponement of the ban , or derogations from it , would seriously harm the welfare of laying hens , distort the market and penalise those producers who have already invested in non-cage or enriched cage systems ; and it expresses its deep concern at the substantial numbers of Member States and egg producers behind schedule for meeting the 2012 deadline .
I definitely support the idea that a solution must be found to cases where a producer has already started to replace the cages , but will presumably not complete this process before the expiry of the twelve-year grace period .
Such farmers must be given assistance in order to ensure that they can complete the upgrading of their farms as soon as possible despite their meagre resources .
For this reason , I voted for the proposed amendment .
I voted against the resolution , although I am firmly in favour of protecting animal welfare .
There can be no disputing the need for adaptation to comply with the requirements of the directive , which introduces a ban on conventional cages , but we should give all Member States the same amount of time to implement it .
The difficulties faced by many European producers in adapting to the regulations that are to enter into force as of 1 January 2012 will bring about a shortage of table eggs on the market and a significant rise in the price of such eggs , a fall in the sector 's competitiveness compared to imported eggs from third countries , and , most likely , production being stopped or greatly scaled down .
Before the final introduction of the ban , we should assess the state of implementation of the directive , as an assessment of this kind could lead to proposals for transitional solutions for the gradual withdrawal of unenriched cages without putting producers who have already complied with the regulations at a disadvantage .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome you to the afternoon sitting .
The sitting is resumed and is the last sitting before the Christmas break and the New Year .
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the Executive Committee of the German War Graves Commission ( Volksbund Deutsche Kriegsgräberfürsorge ) from Baden-Württemberg under its chair , Mr Nothelfer .
Based in Baden-Württemberg , the Commission tends the graves of 90 000 victims of war and tyranny in Baden-Württemberg alone .
We thank you for your work and welcome you to the European Parliament .
1 .
Malaysia : the practice of caning
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Malaysia .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , Malaysia is a wonderful country with age-old traditions and cultural riches .
As members of the ASEAN delegation , we have frequently seen for ourselves how quickly and remarkably this country has grown .
The resulting increase in economic power has led to Malaysia achieving top ten ranking when it comes to world growth rates , a fact that has greatly impressed us .
It is for this reason that I would like to state on behalf of my own group , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , as well as all those here who signed the resolution , that we find it impossible to understand why Malaysia still practises this outmoded method of chastisement , which harkens back to the country 's colonial past and which seems almost mediaeval to us in Europe .
We are not alone in voicing this criticism : lawyers in Malaysia itself are equally opposed to the practice .
Caning violates all United Nations human rights agreements and we believe that things need to change quickly .
We welcomed the charter of the ASEAN states , which emphasises in several articles and the preamble that - and I quote - ' the promotion and protection of human rights ' is among the essential requirements of the ASEAN Charter , which has also been ratified by Malaysia .
Malaysia has long espoused democratic principles .
However , this also involves the rule of law with universal standards .
This is something we shall repeat again and again when we are in Malaysia and the ASEAN states , and the European Parliament will underline this with this resolution .

author . - Mr President , the practice of caning - the hitting of a person with a cane - is a form of corporal punishment that is often applied in Malaysia and this is a reason for concern , because tens of thousands of people are subject to this kind of punishment , particularly immigrants , and the list of offences that can lead to caning is growing .
Malaysia is thus violating its commitment to Resolution 8 / 8 of the UN Human Rights Council , which states that corporal punishment can be tantamount to torture .
The legal process leading to this form of punishment is often lacking and immigrants are not being informed about the charges against them , or are being denied the right of access to legal counsel .
We welcome the outspoken call by the Malaysian Bar Association - which represents 8 000 lawyers - for the abolition of caning .
The European Parliament calls on the Malaysian authorities to enact a moratorium on caning and all other forms of corporal punishment , while working on the abolishment of this law in letter and in practice .
The Human Rights Commission of Malaysia and the Malaysian Law Reform Committee should make adequate recommendations to the government concerning the abolition of corporal punishment laws .
Mr President , this resolution condemns the practice of caning in Malaysia .
The term caning should not be understood to mean an outmoded , harmless educational instrument , but is rather a horrific , demeaning and humiliating punishment , which is banned under the UN Convention against Torture .
Anyone who doubts this should take a look at a video showing how this punishment is meted out in Malaysia .
In terms of their brutality and horror , these images are nothing other than documentary evidence of torture .
Malaysia uses this horrific and humiliating practice to punish at least 66 misdemeanours and approximately 1 000 people are beaten in the country 's gaols every year .
In addition , in recent years , this brutal treatment has also been extended to migrants entering the country without papers and to drug addicts .
It is estimated that a group of between 350 000 and 900 000 people are affected .
We therefore urgently call on the Malaysian Government immediately to desist from this horrific , demeaning and humiliating practice and to repeal the relevant laws in the medium term .
Malaysia is a member of the UN Human Rights Council .
As the previous speaker pointed out , this body also equates the application of corporal punishment with torture .
For this reason , Malaysia would do well to remain in this body , but also to uphold the principles represented there .
author . - Mr President , Malaysia has moved towards a more Islamic form of governance in recent years .
This is of some concern because Malaysia could be an important ally for the EU , being a strategically placed democratic Asian country with a developed economy .
Sadly , Western concepts of human rights are less developed in Malaysia .
However , I am unsure as to why we have singled out Malaysia here .
Malaysia is a Muslim majority country and such punishments are commonplace in many Sharia law-based countries , and are mandated by the Koran which serves as the ultimate legal authority for all Muslims .
Indeed , caning is a relatively mild punishment compared to some of the other extremely brutal methods of punishment used in some Muslim countries , including amputation , lapidation and beheading .
Caning should also be seen in the Asian cultural context : for example , neighbouring secular Singapore also sentences criminals to caning , and the Indonesian province of Aceh , which receives a lot of EU aid , has recently introduced caning under its Sharia law policy .
In EU Member States , traditional implementation of corporal punishment is rightly banned , and let us hope that Malaysia one day will follow our enlightened example .
But it is not at all clear in my mind that caning is illegal under international law , as stated in the resolution .
Mr President , when you love someone , you have certain expectations of them .
It is the same when it comes to relationships between states .
States with whom we have a particularly close relationship do not fall into the same category as some terrible dictatorships on other continents .
Malaysia is a valued close partner of the European Union .
Its constitution is , in some respects , an example for a European constitution .
That is why we view what is going on in Malaysia so seriously .
Mr Tannock , caning in Malaysia was not introduced by Sharia law , but is a carryover from British colonial times .
Just as British colonial power no longer exists and Great Britain has changed in the meantime , Malaysia must also change and try to abolish this antiquated and barbaric punishment , which violates international law and human rights .
I want to be very clear on this .
For decades , Malaysia has been a country characterised by tolerance between the various ethnic groups and religious communities .
The country should stick to this path and it will do so as a particularly close partner of the European Union , which we hope will succeed in banning this barbaric form of punishment .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I would like to ask a question of Mr Posselt , for whom I have enormous respect .
I am not an international lawyer , but I can see no evidence whatsoever that international law forbids caning .
It is very clear that it forbids war crimes , crimes against humanity , genocide and so on , but caning , in my view , is not forbidden by international law .
The Convention on Torture , which Malaysia has not actually ratified , says that caning could amount to torture but is not always necessarily torture .
So could Bernd perhaps explain to me why caning is illegal - as he stated again and as it is stated in the resolution - and against international law .
If we do not stick to the facts , we bring this House into disrepute , in my view .
Mr Posselt , that was not , in fact , a question from Mr Tannock .

author . - ( DE ) Mr President , I interpret that last contribution as a question and would like to state in reply that caning does indeed constitute torture and that the prohibition on torture is integral to human rights and international law , irrespective of whether or not a particular country has ratified these principles .
Mr President , Malaysia is one of those states for which cooperation with the European Union , although recent and relatively modest , appears to be rather positive .
This is particularly true in economic terms of course , but also socially , in relation to education , women 's rights and the most vulnerable populations .
However , when it comes to democracy and human rights , the situation is far from ideal .
Worrying signs persist .
The situation we are discussing today is an unfortunate illustration of this .
While Malaysia has signed a number of international conventions , including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women ( CEDAW ) and the Convention on the Rights of the Child ( CRC ) , it still refuses to sign others and , in particular , the International Convention against Torture .
Malaysia is one of the countries that apply the death penalty ; indeed , this is a mandatory sentence for drug trafficking convictions .
Corporal punishment is common practice in Malaysia and can be administered to anyone : men , women - notably those who are accused of illicit sexual relationships - and even children , for schoolchildren guilty of serious disobedience .
What is worse , for those who are sentenced to receive such punishment , it is carried out with the help of doctors , in violation of their medical ethics , with said doctors being responsible for resuscitating the offenders before they suffer the rest of their sentence .
Worse still , in recent years , the Malaysian Parliament has extended the list of criminal offences that are punishable by caning .
Today , there are over 60 of them , including illegal entry into the country .
In addition , since 2002 , when this offence was created , thousands of refugees have suffered this punishment , this torture .
The Malaysian Government must stop these practices .
At a time when the European Union 's dialogue with Malaysia seems to be bearing fruit , should the European Union not do everything possible to persuade Malaysia to make progress in this area ?
Mr President , I would like to begin by quoting some data from a study conducted by Amnesty International this month , in December 2010 .
At least 10 000 convicts and at least 6 000 refugees are caned each year in Malaysia .
There are numerous canings in detention facilities , and Mr Tannock has said that , unfortunately , Malaysia is not the only country in which anachronistic punishments of this type are applied : there is also talk of Singapore .
What is , however , problematic in the case of Malaysia is the fact that a more significant number of crimes and offences attract a caning sentence : to be more precise , 66 in Malaysia , compared with 30 in Singapore .
We are talking not only about violent or sexual crimes , but also drug taking , and especially infringements of immigration provisions .
I concur , on the other hand , with the perspective that my colleague , Mr Posselt , has embraced , saying that we are talking about torture , which is absolutely prohibited under international law .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Parliament 's resolution is timely and important .
Thousands of people are subject to caning in Malaysia every year .
Caning is an inhuman and degrading form of punishment which should be abolished everywhere in the world .
Caning is a form of torture .
According to Amnesty International , a Muslim woman was caned last year in Malaysia where Sharia law is applied .
The reason for the punishment was drinking beer .
Amnesty International has also reported on the caning of refugees and immigrant workers in Malaysia .
We urge the government of Malaysia to abolish caning as a form of punishment .
We also call on the Malaysian Government to ratify the Protocol to the United Nations Convention on Torture , as well as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
Mr President , we are pleased by Malaysia 's economic development and the improved living conditions of the Malaysian people .
At the same time , however , we are incredulous at Amnesty International 's report describing the widespread use of the punishment of caning in Malaysia .
This really is a harsh punishment , use of which is often over the top , as it is sometimes meted out for minor and very dubious offences .
In my opinion , it is particularly cruel to hand down this sentence to illegal immigrants or people found on Malaysian territory without valid documents , including political refugees from Burma .
The ruthless nature of this punishment , however , conceals the unspoken truth regarding the traditional conditions and nature of the punishment of caning as practised in Malaysia .
Many of the misdemeanours which carry the punishment of caning are related to violations of Islamic religious law and customs deriving from this law .
An example of this is the case of Kartika Sari Dewi Shukarno , who was sentenced to caning in 2009 for drinking beer in a bar .
The situation requires our response .
Mr President , traditional Islamic Sharia law , which is applied even in many moderate Islamic countries , permits corporal punishment for infringements of the law .
There was the notorious case from Malaysia of a punishment of six strokes of the cane imposed on the model Kartika Sari Dewi Shukarno for being caught drinking beer .
After the announcement of the punishment , however , which was to have been performed with a rattan cane in a women 's prison , the punishment of six blows of the cane , handed down to a 32 year old mother of two children , was commuted to three months ' community service on the basis of a ruling by the Malaysian sultan , Ahmed Shah , who supervises compliance with Islamic rules in Malaysia .
Things went rather worse , however , for 46 year old Indonesian , Nasarudin Kamaruddin , who got 6 blows of the cane and one year in prison for the same offence .
Judge Abdul Rahman Mohamed Yunos , who also sentenced Kartika Shukarno , said of the judgment ' The aim of the verdict is not to punish but to teach ' .
A similar argument was used in defence of his ruling by Wee Ka Siong , Deputy Education Minister , when he justified the corporal punishment of children in schools , adding that the punishment could be carried out only by directors of schools or assigned persons , that parents would be informed about a punishment , and that a witness would be present when the punishment was carried out .
Ladies and gentlemen , what we are talking about is nothing exotic .
It is everyday life in the so-called moderate Islamic world .
We must therefore not hesitate to provide help to people in these countries in abolishing such mediaeval punishments and customs , if we can do so by means of diplomacy or in other ways .
( PL ) Mr President , we absolutely should condemn the use of caning and all forms of corporal punishment and inhumane treatment .
Malaysia cannot invoke its domestic legislation , under which at least 66 crimes carry the punishment of caning , in order to justify its ruthless methods , which are tantamount to torture and which are considered illegal by international law and conventions .
Amnesty International reports of an increasing number of refugees and emigrants subjected to caning in Malaysian prisons are also alarming .
The European Union , which has had more effective methods at its disposal to facilitate the protection of human rights since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , should show greater initiative in the fight against the brutal treatment of people throughout the world .
Furthermore , the observance of human rights should be a key condition set by the European Union for the development of further political cooperation with Malaysia .
( PL ) Mr President , Malaysia is an economic tiger .
It is a highly developed country which acts as a model for the entire region of South-East Asia .
This tiger faces a major problem , however ; namely , the use of caning as a punishment .
Of course , one can talk of respect for cultural identity , and of the fact that we Europeans should be particularly sensitive when it comes to imposing our models on other continents .
In this case , however , we really are talking about human rights , which are indivisible and transcend the borders of continents , races and religions .
It is my view that the European Parliament not only should , but must , resolutely defend the fundamental right of human dignity , and caning most certainly violates this dignity .
Mr President , inflicting physical pain is against human dignity .
Caning is a gross violation of human rights .
It is against the right not to be tortured , but also against the right not to be subject to inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment .
In Malaysia , over 10 000 people suffer from this form of corporal punishment every year .
Accounts show that the pain is so great that victims often lose consciousness .
Reports show that a number of officers carrying out the punishment are eager to accept bribes to spare the victims .
Therefore , in addition to gross human rights violations , we have government officials committing a crime by taking advantage of people 's suffering .
I call upon the Commission and the Council , as well as on the Malay Government , to urgently work for an immediate moratorium on the practice of caning , followed by its elimination from the law .
Beating up people and whipping people on behalf of the government must stop .
( RO ) Mr President , I consider it regrettable that in Malaysia , the practice of caning has reached such high proportions and is following an upward trend .
Instead of restricting this practice , the Malaysian Government encourages it .
The authorities invoke a groundless argument , according to which caning is legal and has a considerable effect , in the sense that it diminishes criminal activities .
Moreover , prison officers receive financial rewards for caning prisoners .
Estimates confirm that the situation is worrying : more than 6 000 refugees and 10 000 convicts are victims of this practice each year .
I believe it is very important that victims from outside of Malaysia should have the right to a fair trial .
Currently , they are refused basic services , such as interpreting or legal counsel .
( FI ) Mr President , caning by order of a court , where the person receiving the punishment is tied to a frame and his or her back and buttocks are beaten with a stick , is unethical and violates human dignity .
In Malaysia , this practice has reached epidemic proportions .
A state that considers corporal punishment an effective way to prevent crime is not one governed by the rule of law , and the EU should not extend additional trade benefits to such a country .
Such cruel and inhumane forms of punishment should be ended , in whichever country they occur .
With this resolution , Parliament is quite rightly urging the Malaysian authorities to put an end to corporal punishment and torture immediately , both in its legal system and in practice .
( PL ) Mr President , canings have been carried out in Malaysia since the 19th century , when Great Britain colonised the area .
The Malaysian Government has recently added yet more crimes to the list of those punishable by caning , and the punishment is meted out for as many as 66 different misdemeanours .
Prisoners sentenced to caning are detained in prison without any idea of when their punishment will be carried out .
Amnesty International estimates that around 10 000 sentences of caning are handed down every year , and that 60 % of those sentenced are illegal immigrants who do not even understand the punishment due to the language barrier .
The country 's authorities do not see any need to change the law , however , as they regard caning as an effective way to fight crime .
The European Union has been cooperating closely with Malaysia for eight years .
EUR 17 million were earmarked in the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective to develop the Malaysian economy .
It is therefore justified to call on our partner to ratify the UN Convention against Torture , and to condemn in no uncertain terms the practice of caning as incompatible with the position of the UN Human Rights Council .
( RO ) Mr President , more than 10 000 citizens are whipped or caned annually in Malaysia , where the legislation stipulates this punishment officially for 66 infringements .
The list of these crimes has been extended in the last few years , which indicates a worrying tendency .
The victims are both local and foreign , with numerous and grave abuses being committed against the latter , from the absence of the necessary information or an interpreter to the violation of professional ethics by doctors and the absence of legal assistance .
I , too , urge European institutions to intensify their efforts in relation to the abolition of this punishment which , under international law , is the equivalent of torture , and to exert pressure to bring about the observance of the right to an objective and impartial trial in Malaysia and the end of the mean treatment of migrants and asylum seekers .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission condemns the use of corporal punishment .
It conflicts with international human rights principles and norms , as set out by the United Nations . These principles are also reflected in the European Union guidelines for EU policy towards third countries on torture and other forms of cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .
The recent report by Amnesty International on the practice of caning in Malaysia is worrying .
However , the Commission would like to suggest widening the resolution to cover all countries where judicial caning unfortunately still occurs .
The European Union , together with the United Nations , has quite regularly raised the question of caning with Malaysia .
Some Member States also did so in the context of the ratification of the UN Convention against Torture and during the UN Human Rights Council 's universal periodic review , which took place in February 2009 .
Only last week , at the United Nations seminar on the occasion of Human Rights Day , Malaysia was urged to ratify more UN conventions , in particular , the UN Convention against Torture .
In early 2010 , the same question was raised by the EU Head of Mission directly with the Minister of Foreign Affairs .
It is an issue to which we pay a lot of attention .
The European Union and Malaysia will soon begin negotiations on a partnership and cooperation agreement , which will contain provisions on human rights .
Once this agreement enters into force , it will provide a sound formalised basis for a reinforced and regular dialogue with Malaysia on human rights .
In the meantime , we will continue raising this issue with the Malaysian authorities .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
2 .
Uganda : the Bahati Bill and discrimination against the LGBT population
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Uganda : Bahati Bill and discrimination against lesbians , gay men , bisexuals and transgender people .
Mr President , Commissioner , exactly one year ago , we adopted a resolution in this House concerning gays and lesbians and the Bahati Bill in Uganda .
Why return , one year later , with an almost identical resolution ?
Because the problem is far from solved .
Firstly , the evangelist movement ' The Family ' , which was behind this Bahati Bill , has not given up , and we can still see this bill reappearing in Uganda .
The second reason is that , last October and November , Uganda 's Rolling Stone newspaper carried out a name and shame campaign and published a list of Ugandan homosexuals , who were immediately tracked down and attacked and are still in hiding as outcasts today .
The Ugandan Constitutional Court has stopped the publication of this newspaper but it is clear that the atmosphere has deteriorated .
This is a manhunt .
Thirdly , only 13 African countries recognise homosexuals ' rights .
The remaining countries have very different laws , but some of them - Sudan , northern Nigeria , Mauritania - still punish homosexuals with death .
Yet , and I shall end with this , very recently , the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries made a statement - a somewhat one-sided one in my view - to the effect that they were aware that this issue regarding homosexuals bothered us slightly , but that these aspects were part of their culture .
No , they are human rights , they are universal values , and we really do want these universal values to be strongly defended by the Commission and by the entire European Union .
author . - Mr President , societies in Africa are , in general , socially conservative .
In many African countries , sadly , homosexuality is indeed outlawed .
Many people in Africa feel threatened by efforts to promote homosexuality , particularly when those efforts are led by NGOs and organisations based in the west .
There is a widely held perception in some parts of Africa that liberal democracies are trying to push their own , more tolerant , values on societies with very different and ancient traditions .
But , be that as it may , it does not excuse or justify the rampant homophobia that exists widely in some parts of Africa .
Sadly , this homophobia is often stirred up by governments and their media mouthpieces .
Uganda is yet again in the news for the extremism and hysteria of some of its legislators .
They are supporting a bill that would impose the death penalty , or life imprisonment , on homosexuals , depending on the nature of their so-called crime .
I , like the ECR Group , reject this draconian bill , which would be an atrocious violation of individual rights , and call on President Museveni to veto it .
Uganda is a country in which the majority of people survive on a dollar a day : surely the country 's legislators can find better ways to serve the interests of Ugandan society than to make gays subject to criminal prosecution .
author . - Mr President , the so-called Anti-Homosexuality Bill before the Ugandan Parliament provides for the punishment of homosexual acts by imprisonment for terms ranging from seven years to life , or even the death penalty .
The European Parliament strongly condemns this bill and , in so doing , we are not imposing European values on other states , as some have suggested , in an attempt to avoid responsibility for human rights violations and responsibility for protecting citizens from being attacked on the basis of their sexual orientation .
The real threat and the climate of fear were underlined in the October and November issues of Rolling Stone , a local newspaper , which listed the names and personal details of people alleged to be homosexual , inciting readers to harm or hang them .
Several people were consequently attacked .
In fact , homosexuality is legal in only 13 African countries and it is a criminal offence in 38 others .
In Mauritania , Sudan and northern Nigeria , it is punishable by death .
The Ugandan authorities are obliged , in accordance with the Cotonou Agreement , to observe international and human rights , and the Commission , the Council of the European Union and the External Action Service should also make full use of the toolkit for promoting and protecting the enjoyment of human rights by all LGBT people .
author . - Mr President , the Anti-Homosexuality Bill by David Bahati in the Ugandan Parliament that provides for the punishment of homosexual acts by imprisonment of between seven years and life , as well as the death penalty , is simply unacceptable .
Let us remember that in Africa , legal homosexuality only exists in 13 countries , and is a criminal offence in 38 countries , whilst in Mauritania , Sudan and northern Nigeria , homosexuality is punished by death .
This is why we need to reiterate once again the fact that sexual orientation is a matter falling within the remit of the individual 's rights of privacy .
It is guaranteed by international human rights law , according to which equality and non-discrimination should be promoted , while freedom of expression should be guaranteed .
This is why we need to denounce again any attempt to incite hatred and advocate violence towards any minority group , including on grounds of sex or sexual orientation .
We need to remind the Ugandan authorities of their obligations under international law and under the Cotonou Agreement .
This is why I also ask the Commission and the Council , and the European External Action Service as well , to make full use of the toolkit to promote and protect the enjoyment of full human rights by lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people in their dealings with Uganda .
Mr President , the attempts being made to discriminate against Ugandan citizens on the grounds of their sexual orientation are a serious matter .
On this issue , Uganda has the support of many African countries which do not want the international community or the European Union to exert pressure on them to decriminalise homosexuality .
The misunderstanding is based on the fact that we believe that a ban on discrimination in this area is a universal human right , as Mrs De Keyser said before .
The majority of African countries do not see it the same way , and this is why dialogue is so difficult .
We say that we cannot remain silent on such matters , and they say that we are interfering in things that have nothing to do with us .
The draft amendments to Ugandan legislation really do represent a radical change .
They introduce the possible use of the death penalty for repeated infringements of the prohibitions already in place , or for aggravated homosexuality , although it is not , in fact , clear what this is supposed to mean .
We do not agree with these proposals , and we hope that they will not be passed .
Mr President , Uganda is one of the African states where homosexuality is still severely repressed .
Indeed , it has one of the most notorious and harshest reputations in this area , since Uganda , under the leadership of American fundamentalist evangelists , of which the Ugandan Head of State is a close associate , has launched a veritable crusade against homosexuals .
We have lost count of the numbers of people who have suffered persecution and torture simply because of their sexuality .
Muslims and Christians have united - a first in the country - to condemn this abomination .
Christopher Senyonjo , a 70-year-old Anglican bishop , was banned from officiating by his superiors for having been one of the few to have taken a stand in favour of homosexuals .
The bill already mentioned may indeed reappear at any time .
It goes as far as to sentence to death homosexuals suspected of being HIV positive or of having relations with minors . It calls for them to be reported .
The local newspaper Rolling Stone , which has nothing to do with the magazine of the same name , actually published lists with the names and addresses of gay leaders under the revolting headline : ' Hang them ! '
The publication of this rag has been temporarily banned , but the damage has been done , as has already been said .
In Africa , homosexuality is very often seen as an evil from the West which is causing Africa to lose its ancestral values .
NGOs say that 500 000 of the 32 million inhabitants of Uganda are gay .
Many of them apply for asylum in European countries .
Could we at least do our best to ensure that special consideration is given to these applications , and indeed to all men and women who are victims of oppression and torture ?
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I am alarmed by the use of criminal law against consenting same-sex relations taking place in private .
This is already part of Ugandan law and the punishment can be life imprisonment .
However , the Bahati Bill would make things even worse .
The death penalty could be used , while association and expression of LGBT issues would be effectively banned .
The new bill will increase the climate of fear and hostility in a country where persecution of LGBT people is already under way .
People would be required to report on each other on privacy matters .
The lives of these people will be endangered .
Human dignity will have no meaning in Uganda if such a law is adopted .
We must not let this happen .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , of course , much has changed in this last year .
On 23 November , this House itself reiterated the principle of the universality of human rights and non-discrimination as a basis on which to enhance our partnership with the JPA .
This House also called for the reinforcement of the principle of non-negotiable human rights clauses and sanctions for failure to respect such clauses , inter alia , with regard to discrimination , etc. based on sexual orientation .
The fact is that these countries choose to work with us .
They choose to have partnerships with us .
We have the ACP JPA , we have the Cotonou Agreements .
Therefore , we are asking them to engage with us on shared , universal principles .
These are non-negotiable .
If they do not want to operate on that basis , I call on the Commission and the Council to take the necessary sanctions to reinforce the fact that we have principles which we will stand up for .
Equally , in the future of the EU-Africa Strategic Partnership , we urge that all actions conducted under the terms of the various partnerships be pursued without discrimination on any grounds , including sexual orientation .
It is not colonialism to stand up for the rights of others .
Human rights are universal and indivisible , and to stand back and do nothing when somebody else 's basic human rights are attacked is to be complicit in that action .
You cannot promote homosexuality in Africa .
Anyone in Africa who woke up and said : ' Today I am going to be homosexual ' would be insane .
Their life would be under threat and their family would have to turn them in to the police .
Imagine you are that person and take the action necessary to defend those rights .
Mr President , the United Nations Convention on Human Rights , the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , as well as the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , ban discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
The European Union not only has obligations in relation to human rights within its territory , but also an international duty to insist on compliance with these rights and to criticise abuses when dealing with third countries , particularly when we provide financial support through the European Development Fund to third countries like Uganda , which have entered into partnership agreements with us .
Accordingly , we actually have the right to comment when these third countries fail to meet the human rights requirements set down in such partnership agreements .
Hence , Uganda must respect international human rights standards because it was party to the Cotonou Agreement , which sets down our organised development aid to the ACP countries .
Just one year ago , we called on Uganda not to follow through on its plans for a law to criminalise homosexuals .
One year on , the situation has deteriorated .
There is still the threat of long prison sentences or even the death penalty .
With others , I myself demonstrated in front of the Ugandan Embassy in May of this year .
This had no effect .
We wish to emphasise once again that the EU is generally opposed to the death penalty and to homophobic legislation of this kind .
Mr President , this is an interesting and important debate .
I would like to draw your attention to two problems .
Firstly , the fact of the matter is that Uganda is not an island of discrimination in a sea of respect for human rights .
Three quarters of African countries have extremely harsh regulations on this issue , which are tantamount to discrimination .
This is unquestionably not so much Uganda 's problem as a wider problem involving the whole continent and African culture .
The second question is as follows : it goes without saying that Uganda does not lead the field in respect for human rights in Africa .
We know of many examples of violations of human rights , which means that this matter is part of a wider problem , and we must , of course , speak openly about this problem .
( RO ) Mr President , our resolution is aimed at extremely serious cases of human rights violations and , unfortunately , the punishment of homosexuality as a criminal offence is the norm in Africa .
This is reflected in the legislation of 38 states , with only 13 African states considering it legal .
In this context , the bill attempting to enforce certain sanctions in Uganda , from prison sentences to capital punishment , represents a serious attack against human rights , including the right to privacy .
The publication in a local newspaper of a black list of 100 individuals accused of homosexuality and the incitement of readers to hang them is an example of a concrete threat to a community blamed for its sexual orientation .
As indicated in our resolution , our measure is not aimed , as we are often accused , at the imposition of specifically European values , but at the defence of human rights , which is one of the major objectives of the European Union .
I believe that in this sense , the European External Action Service and the other European institutions need to impose more severe sanctions in order to ensure compliance with the international agreements to which Uganda is a signatory .
( RO ) Mr President , we also discussed Uganda and homosexuality in this House several months ago .
Since then , nothing significant has happened .
Certainly , sometimes it is said that ' no news , good news ' . In this case , however , this is not true , because while David Bahati 's project was not voted for , it was not withdrawn , either .
It remains blocked in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs , and all the international pressure exerted did not manage , in the end , to bring about this effect , namely , the withdrawal of the project .
What is truly horrific , and some of my fellow Members have already expanded on this , is the anti-gay campaign that is taking place in this country .
We obviously continue to count on the rationality of the authorities and , eventually , on the victory of a principle which says ' No to discrimination ' .
Mr President , the hate campaign in Uganda against gay and lesbian men and women is truly appalling .
The whipping up , by some religious elements and by sections of the media , of a vicious and reactionary homophobic campaign , which includes threats to kill gay people , means that very many lesbians , gays and bisexual and transgender people in Uganda are now living in great insecurity and fear .
It is contemptible that some politicians are also using this issue and whipping up hatred , proposing even the execution of people who are gay .
I salute the courage of members of the gay community in Uganda who bravely fight each day against this menacing threat to their identities and their very lives .
The homophobic campaign is driven by smears , lies and distortions about gay people and what being gay means .
The strongest message must go out to the Ugandan Government - including a review of aid , although , of course , we do not want to hurt ordinary Ugandans .
We should encourage active solidarity with organisations in Uganda which champion the rights of gay people , to assist them in this crucial fight for justice and human rights , and for the basic right to be who you are .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the draft Anti-Homosexuality Bill which was introduced in the Ugandan Parliament raises serious human rights issues .
The protection of the human rights of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people is a priority for the EU .
I fully share the European Parliament 's concerns about the situation in Uganda , but also in other countries where punitive and discriminatory legislation against LGBT people has been adopted or is under consideration .
The Commission considers that the criminalisation of homosexuality as foreseen in the draft bill goes against obligations under the United Nations Human Rights Convention , to which Uganda is a party and by which it consequently has to abide .
The draft bill also goes against the United Nations declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity .
The EU Presidency and the EU Head of Mission in Uganda raised this issue with the Ugandan Government on several occasions during meetings with the President , Prime Minister , Minister of Foreign Affairs and Minister of Justice in formal political dialogue meetings , and also with the Uganda Human Rights Commission .
The publication by the Rolling Stone newspaper on 2 October 2010 of a list with the photographs and names and addresses of people who were identified as gay , together with the headline ' Hang them ' , was an outrageous act that put the lives of these people at risk , and we fully condemn it .
The European Union delegation continues to monitor the situation closely , together with the EU Member States ' missions represented in Uganda , as well as with partner countries like Norway and the United States and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights .
The matter has also been addressed in the technical Human Rights Working Group , which is a forum for developing partners in Uganda to discuss , monitor , coordinate and take concrete action in human rights-related cases .
The Commission intends to keep raising its concerns in relation to the draft Anti-Homosexuality Bill and to other actions to persecute LGBT people in Uganda on every occasion .
The Commission will continue to support local human rights organisations in their efforts to change attitudes in the country and to improve the legal situation for LGBT people .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the next debate .
3 .
Eritrean refugees held hostage in Sinai
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the subject of Eritrean refugees held hostage in Sinai .
author . - Mr President , about 250 Eritrean migrants are believed to be held hostage in the Sinai desert and inhumane treatment and rape are reported while these people await a ransom that needs to be paid to human traffickers for their release .
Recent events are part of a network smuggling sub-Saharan migrants through Egypt to Israel that has been operating in the Sinai since 2007 .
The Egyptian authorities are making welcome efforts to investigate the information provided by the UNHCR .
Diplomatic procedures with the Egyptian authorities should be stepped up by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees to eliminate the trafficking networks and prevent people from being smuggled .
At the same time , Egypt should improve the treatment of refugees according to international standards .
This means that , during the justified defence of borders , no excessive or even lethal force should be used against immigrants or refugees , and this advice is something that we might also give ourselves in the EU once in a while .
Mr President , the situation is very serious .
We think that this issue - which is also being trailed by Europe 's media - ought to be dealt with by the European Union and by Parliament , as well as urging the Commission to look into it , since it is a real humanitarian emergency .
In this case , the Member States must do everything to try and help these refugees to leave that territory and we think that they could be accepted in European states .
We call on the Commission to do everything possible to carry out this action , including using the funds available through the European Fund for Refugees .
author . - Mr President , the ECR Group condemns the appalling treatment being suffered by these innocent and mainly Eritrean victims of what amounts to a modern-day form of slavery inflicted by people traffickers .
We welcome , too , the efforts made by the Egyptian Government to investigate the allegations and secure the refugees ' release , but we should also be focusing on why these unfortunate individuals flee in the first place .
The answer is because the regime of Eritrean President Afewerki is one of the most repressive on the planet .
Anyone with a chance of fleeing his dictatorship does so , and some are able to build a better life for themselves elsewhere .
Those unable to leave Eritrea are either subject to open-ended conscription in the army , or have to scratch out a living on the fringes of an economy bankrupted by years of futile war with neighbouring Ethiopia , widespread corruption and mismanagement of the economy .
Eritrea has never held a national election .
Recent disclosures from the WikiLeaks website show that US diplomats described Afewerki as a cruel and defiant leader .
I have no compunction about saying so publicly .
We should do all we can to unseat this appalling African tyrant , we should end all EU aid to his regime and we should suspend the Cotonou Agreement privileges that his country enjoys .
Mr President , every year , there are thousands of people who , driven by the difficult situation in the Horn of Africa , try to cross the border between Egypt and Israel .
Many of these people end up , unfortunately , in the hands of Bedouin traffickers .
We are talking about criminal networks that have no consideration at all for human dignity , as the lives of these people become a bargaining chip .
According to the information provided by NGO activists working for the protection of these emigrants , incredible sums were requested , reaching up to USD 8 000 for the release of each person .
Certainly , we cannot remain indifferent to the suffering of these people who are subjected to a treatment of exceptional cruelty .
Moreover , I would like to draw your attention to the vulnerable situation of women , who are repeatedly subjected to rape .
At the same time , I believe that we should have a constructive attitude in this case .
This means that we should recognise the efforts undertaken by the Egyptian authorities for their release and , in particular , support this country in the fight against human trafficking .
We therefore have need not only of tough words , but of cooperation and concrete actions in this extremely complex issue , where a single state cannot cope .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation of the Eritrean refugees currently in the Sinai desert is very serious , as has already been described by several fellow Members .
Naturally , we must deal severely with the human traffickers who are currently holding these refugees hostage and demanding extremely high ransoms for them .
However , at the same time , we must also protect the victims , because we cannot just want to deal harshly with the traffickers and then completely forget the victims .
We also need to acknowledge the reasons that led them to be in the Sinai desert : their migratory route used to be through Libya , but the agreements between Italy and Libya , and between the EU and Libya , portrayed so many times here by the Commission as good news , mean that people coming from what has - quite rightly - been called a ' giant concentration camp ' and ' Africa 's North Korea ' have nowhere to run .
Action is needed , therefore : not just action in Egypt , which is clearly doing far less than it should be , but also in the European Union itself .
To start with , I call on the European Commission to quickly send a delegation to Egypt in order to find out what the situation is on the ground .
Action is also needed in all our institutions , because Eritreans are a clear case for resettlement , a policy that we have alongside the European Refugee Fund .
These refugees cannot return to Eritrea and cannot remain in a transit country : the only solution is resettlement .
Ladies and gentlemen , do you know why the resettlement package is not moving forward ?
It is not moving forward because in May , Parliament had already done its part of the codecision procedure on the resettlement case , but because of the famous dispute over delegated acts , the Council refused to do its bit .
If the resettlement package had been adopted , we would now have the emergency procedure that Parliament inserted into the report that I myself wrote and which was adopted here with 500 votes : the European Commission would be able to start an emergency procedure to resettle these refugees .
As the Council did not do its part in what we should be calling ' a co-indecision procedure ' , those people are in the Sinai desert , who knows for how long ?
This co-indecision procedure has consequences for the real lives of real people and it is time that the Council did its share of the chores .
Mr President , it is thanks to a telephone call between an Eritrean priest in Italy and an Eritrean hostage that the European public learned that unprincipled human traffickers are now threatening to shoot the stranded Eritrean hostages if a ransom is not paid .
The hostage takers have shown no scruples and have already beaten or shot some people .
This brutal crime prompted a closer look at what is happening at the border between Egypt and Israel , an area in which an increasing number of refugees are stranded as they try to enter Europe or Israel , but lack the necessary papers .
There is a military exclusion zone on the Egyptian side .
Anyone entering this area will be answerable to a military tribunal .
According to Human Rights Watch , at least 85 unarmed refugees have been shot there since 2007 , trying to cross the border .
The Israeli Government talks of more than 1 000 migrants trying to enter their country without papers each month and has started to increase security and monitoring along the border .
In addition , a large detention camp has been set up in the Negev Desert .
We are calling on the relevant governments to cooperate with the United Nations Refugee Agency and to guarantee the protection and rights of refugees at their borders .
However , we also clearly recognise that we in Europe have a responsibility for the fate of those migrants who are turned away from our outer borders and who find themselves unable to return to their homes , suffering human rights violations as a consequence , as in the case of these Eritrean refugees .
Mr President , the situation of the Eritrean refugees in Sinai is tragic .
They are looking for a better life , but they often meet with death , torture and oppression .
They are exploited and cheated .
The Egyptian authorities are attempting to fight the problem of human trafficking , but their response is not always effective .
We must help the refugees , the hostages and all those who need our help .
We should support the Israeli and Egyptian authorities in their fight against human trafficking .
It is also worth giving some thought to the reasons behind these dangerous occurrences .
I believe that we should aim to improve the situation in Eritrea itself and in other countries in the Horn of Africa , since improving the situation in African countries may reduce migratory pressure .
We will not solve the problem by combating the social ills which are themselves caused by migration .
We can only limit the less desirable effects , and the extent to which the determination of refugees is preyed upon .
I would ask you to support the motion for a resolution by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
We are convinced that our motion for a resolution is an improvement on the joint resolution in this instance .
Mr President , Egypt is not just turning a blind eye to the horrific treatment and exploitation of African refugees attempting to escape over Sinai to Israel from their countries , specifically Somalia and Eritrea .
Egypt is also deporting them , even though they obviously qualify as refugees and asylum seekers , as they come either from one country that is in a terrible struggle with terrorism and without law or order , or from another - Eritrea - that is one of the most oppressive and tyrannical in the world .
In fact , the Egyptian authorities are practising a policy of shoot to kill and 85 migrants have already died in Sinai since 2007 , according to a Human Rights Watch report .
We call on the Egyptian authorities to comply with their obligations as regards human rights and migrants and refugees in particular , and for them to work with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees .
We also call on the European authorities to do the same and to fully support what Mr Tavares was saying on this subject regarding the possibility of resettlement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us be honest .
The resolutions , as they are currently worded , are a watered down version of what we started out with at the beginning of the week .
Let us once again be clear : ' The situation is serious ' .
We are also highlighting the fact that Eritrean refugees in the Sinai are being held hostage .
Yet , we are not prepared to discuss the links between Italy and Libya and the closing of Europe to migrants , as a result of which political refugees have had to flee to other places .
They are now having to take routes which are even more dangerous than before .
Anyone who leaves Eritrea automatically becomes a political refugee , because it is impossible to go back and , if you did , you would be putting your family in danger .
What pains me is that we , in this House , are not prepared to say : if Europe so badly wants to protect itself from migrants , it will have to open up its embassies in Eritrea , in order to make it easier for people to apply for asylum .
We were not permitted to include that proposal in this resolution .
When I hear the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) refer to all the things that need to happen in Egypt , then I think : what is it that we have to do and how can we refuse to accept that people are at risk here , simply because we are reluctant to take on the responsibility ?
We are shutting people out and , in so doing , we are putting lives at risk .
Mr President , the Sinai border has become a route via which thousands of Eritreans fleeing their own country attempt to get a better life .
In their illegal pilgrimage for freedom , however , they are dependent on the assistance of smugglers who are willing , at a price , to help the refugees across the Sinai border , even without the necessary papers .
In this lawless trade , refugees in the hands of the smuggling gangs have almost no rights at all , and are dependent on the vicissitudes of fate and on the whims of those into whose hands they have , for a fee , entrusted their own fate .
The death of seven Eritrean refugees killed on the Egyptian-Israeli border reveals to us something of the grim plight of refugees illegally journeying in search of freedom .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is therefore quite right for us to engage in a solution to this problem and , together with the governments of the affected countries , to help to find a civilised solution to the problem of the Eritrean refugees .
Mr President , on 7 December , the UNHCR expressed concern that some 250 Eritrean refugees are being held in Sinai by Bedouin smugglers .
We are aware that these refugees were compelled to pay a specific amount of money for their wish to live in better conditions .
Reportedly , the refugees are kept in containers in the desert and are often beaten .
The attitude of the Eritrean Government itself is alarming : instead of protecting its citizens , it considers them unwanted dissidents .
We call for rapid and joint action , primarily by Egypt and Israel , to stop the traffickers , to dismantle this organised crime network and , certainly , to strengthen efforts to protect current and future refugees by implementing UNHCR provisions and standards .
( RO ) Mr President , right from the outset , I wish to emphasise that I support without reservation the resolution put forward by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Despite the clarity of the text , an agreement has not been reached with the other groups for the adoption of a common resolution , which is regrettable .
The situation in the Horn of Africa is an alarming one .
This region has become one of the important action centres of organised crime groups , given the high number of African emigrants in transit in this area .
The 250 hostages have suffered an inhuman and degrading treatment , and their situation is getting worse .
Moreover , the prerequisites of an imminent release do not exist , as the families of the hostages cannot pay the requested ransom .
Therefore , the European Parliament should send out a clear message for their release .
Urgent action must be taken against criminal organisations , they should be brought to justice , and torture camps should be permanently closed .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , naturally , I deeply condemn the way the Eritrean refugees are treated , and likewise of course , I support the fact that the European Union should take steps to resolve the situation of these refugees as soon as possible .
However , the direction formulated in this report is , to put it simply , a dead end .
I consider two points to be utterly bewildering .
That we set up a fund in order to aid these refugees is completely acceptable to me insofar as there are currently millions of citizens in the EU living in existential uncertainty and extreme poverty .
Over three million people in Hungary are living below the poverty line , the majority of pensioners cannot afford to pay for their medicine and , as a matter of fact , this trend has been on the rise across Europe .
Therefore , we should first be looking to help people in Europe while , at the same time , also expressing our empathy with the refugees , of course .
The other issue is that Member States should admit the refugees voluntarily .
When will you realise that the European Union is saturated with immigrants ?
The EU should act as a mediator between Eritrea and the Eritrean refugees to ensure their safe return home .
( RO ) Mr President , the vast majority of Eritrean citizens that can now be found in the Sinai Desert have fled out of the way of an oppressive regime and , as such , should be regarded as refugees according to UN standards .
Therefore , I believe that we need to insist that Egypt meets its international obligations to provide them with assistance .
However , the matter of greatest concern , I believe , is the inhumane treatment these migrants are subjected to when held as hostages in the desert in expectation of a ransom .
In particular , the claims of rape by dozens of women are revolting and should mobilise the international community .
In the same way , human trafficking in Africa has reached alarming proportions .
Dozens of migrants were killed by Egyptian security services in recent years while attempting to cross illegally into Israel .
I believe that human trafficking in this area should be combated with other methods , and I think that access on the part of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) is necessary in order to ensure vital assistance for these people .
( PL ) Mr President , Eritrean refugees are in a tragic situation .
When considering this tragedy , however , we should also remember the reason for this state of affairs .
The fact of the matter is that fundamental human rights are widely violated in Eritrea .
Mass persecution occurs on a huge scale , with political opponents , Christians and also thousands of ordinary people as victims .
This is the real reason behind the tragic problem we are discussing today , and this is why we must do everything to change the EU 's policy towards the Eritrean authorities , all the more so when we remember that the current leader of the country was warmly welcomed in Brussels by the European Commission in 2007 , even though he is responsible for such terrible suffering by so many people , which forces them to flee and brings about ever more tragedies of this kind .
This is why it is time for a pragmatic and decisive policy towards this tyrant .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission shares the concerns of the European Parliament .
The reports received speak of several hundred refugees , from Eritrea , Ethiopia , Sudan and Somalia , apparently being held hostage in Sinai by traffickers requesting hard payment for their release .
Since the first notification , we have been following the case , establishing the facts , assessing the situation and taking appropriate action .
The European Union delegation in Cairo has close contacts with local civil-society organisations and liaises with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ' regional representation in Cairo .
They are very much following the case .
In coordination with the embassies of the EU Member States , the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been approached .
The EU has expressed our concerns , as well as our strong belief , that the Egyptian authorities should take appropriate measures to liberate these people and grant them appropriate protection .
There are reports of ongoing investigations to find the group of refugees , and we hope that things will be clearer in the next few days .
This case is not the only cause for concern .
Migrants and refugees in Egypt still suffer from many protection gaps .
The most serious incidents are reported in the Sinai .
Many migrants intending to cross to Israel via the Sinai border are subject to abuse and mistreatment .
We have raised this issue several times with our Egyptian counterparts in the framework of the regular subcommittee meetings discussing either migration issues or political affairs , including human rights .
The latest occasion when the point was raised was at the meeting of the EU-Egypt Association Committee on 14 December in Cairo .
The EU has regularly invited Egyptian authorities to improve the quality of the assistance and protection offered to asylum seekers and refugees , and has offered financial and technical assistance in this endeavour .
The EU has also invited the Egyptian authorities to ensure that the principle of non-refoulement is observed for all migrants in need of international protection , including Eritreans .
The EU has asked that the UNHCR be given full authorisation to implement its mandate throughout the entire territory of Egypt , including in the Sinai region .
There have been some positive developments that should be stressed .
In the spring of this year , Egypt adopted new legislation criminalising human trafficking and also protecting its victims .
Another welcome development was the adoption of a Transplant Act , which criminalises organ trafficking .
We hope that the Egyptian administration will now take effective measures to ensure efficient implementation of this legal framework , and we have offered our cooperation in this field .
We will continue to support the work of the UNHCR and civil-society organisations to ensure better living conditions , as well as proper legal protection , for migrants and refugees living in the country .
We will continue to follow wi