Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session adjourned on Thursday , 15 January 2009 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for this part-session as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 29 January 2009 , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday : Mrs Roure has withdrawn her request for a brief presentation of her report on minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers and refugees in the Member States .
The report will therefore be put to the vote on Thursday .
Thursday : The Union for Europe of the Nations Group has requested that the item on the situation in the Philippines be replaced with an item entitled ' Refusal of the extradition from Brazil of Cesare Battisti ' .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , having consulted many of my fellow Members , I would ask you for an amendment to the agenda just as you have said .
Specifically , I would ask if the Battisti affair can be included as an urgent matter .
As a matter of fact , a few days ago , the Brazilian Government decided to refuse to extradite the terrorist Cesare Battisti , who had been sentenced to life imprisonment for committing four murders , and granted this killer the status of political refugee .
This decision , as well as being an affront to the institutions and to Italian justice , is an insult to the memory of the victims and to their families , and has outraged public opinion .
That is the reason for this request that , among other things , I believe should be heard , and because the request initially came from the highest public officials in Italy , starting with the President of the Republic , Mr Napolitano .
That is therefore the reason for the request .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( HU ) In the Intergroup for Regional and Minority Languages we have drawn up a report for the purpose of protecting traditional national minorities .
Why is this important ?
Many of the new Member States , among them Romania , for instance , have no legislation for minorities .
Last year we witnessed uniformed policemen beating up civilians in Slovakia .
Ever since the new government took office in Romania , we have noticed that the symbols of minorities are being removed , that it is seen as a problem if someone speaks more than one language , and that several hundred children were accidentally left out of school enrolment .
This is why we think it important for the European Parliament to produce a report , a resolution , guaranteeing the protection of minorities , the protection of traditional ethnic minorities . Thank you very much , Mr President .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , the conflict between Russia and Ukraine and the natural gas supply cut in January resulted in heavy losses for a few European countries , especially Bulgaria .
The direct losses for the Bulgarian economy for just a few days amounted to more than EUR 230 million , which is equal to the amount needed to start the Nabucco project .
This has left our economy in a precarious state and has forced us to seek cooperation in order to reopen the blocks at the Kozloduy nuclear power station .
The dialogue on this must be reasonable and calm , and based on good analysis .
The solutions are difficult , however , let us not prejudge them and dismiss them outright , as the Commission has unfortunately signalled .
I consider that Bulgaria and some of the worst affected countries must have the opportunity to gain additional funding from the European Development Plan , and not just a minimal share of the EUR 20 million which has already been allocated for gas projects .
It is inexplicable that the worst affected country should receive the least amount at a stage when almost EUR 3.5 million will be allocated for energy projects .
We will shortly start the discussion on energy strategy .
I call upon all Members to show that we have a vision for energy independence , that on the verge of elections we can overcome our political differences , and that we can protect the solidarity and mutual assistance that has joined us together .

( ET ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Czech Presidency began one month ago , but it has already managed to spit in our faces and insult us with its gift : Estonia is covered with a hammer and sickle , there is a drunken man on the floor of a Finnish sauna , Germany has a swastika , Italy has football players holding balls near their genitals , Bulgaria is covered with toilets , etc. etc .
This is how the artist who made the Czech Republic 's gift to the European Union portrayed the nations and countries of the European Union in his work .
Art can and often must shock , but is the mocking of another country and people the most fitting way to do so ?
The Czech Government speaks of the artist 's freedom of expression : true , but here that freedom has definitely been used in the wrong context .
The government is apparently not permitted to interfere with the artist 's creative freedom : this is also true but , in giving this gift , the Czech Government has accepted the message that this gift conveys , and , as the gift-giver , it , and not the artist , must now bear responsibility for the consequences .
It is difficult to understand how the leadership of the Czech Republic can consider itself entitled to insult other Member States .
As a representative elected from Estonia , I expect an answer and an apology from the country that holds the presidency , so that I may relay it to the Estonian people .
Unfortunately , none of the representatives of the presidency are here , but I believe that my request will reach them .
( PL ) Mr President , five thousand juggernauts drive through the town of Augustów every day .
Every day children go to school , walking along the side of the road itself , because there is no footpath .
Almost every day one of them dies under the wheels of a juggernaut .
Eco-terrorists have blocked construction of a bypass , in the name of protecting birds from noise .
For every week that this development is held up , one of the children of Augustów has to pay with his or her life .
Neither the eco-terrorists nor the judges of the European Court of Justice send their own children under the wheels of juggernauts .
The lives of the children of Augustów are , however , being accorded less importance than the well-being of birds .
I am a supporter of care for the environment and of action to protect nature .
However , when human life is involved , we must not squander it so heartlessly .
I will direct a question to the European Commission : how many Polish children have to pay with their lives due to construction of the bypass being blocked ?
In making the decision , were their lives considered at all ?
- ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to draw the European Parliament 's attention to the deterioration - if such a thing were still possible - of the human rights situation in Tunisia .
Since 11 December , Sihem Bensedrine , a well-known human rights defender and editor-in-chief of Kalima , has been the subject of press harassment and slanderous remarks that are absolutely intolerable and incompatible with the rule of law .
On 23 January , Mr Amin , who is the coordinator of the Maghreb Coordination of Human Rights Organisations , was refused entry into Tunisia .
On 28 January , Radio Kalima , which has been broadcast via satellite since that date , was completely surrounded .
Its journalists were imprisoned , and those who came to their aid were manhandled in the street .
This radio station is still being surrounded by the Tunisian police , with the result that freedom of information and expression are being undermined .
Tomorrow there will be the appeal hearing of the Gafsa workers , who are fighting against corruption and against their exploitation in this Tunisian coal mining area , with a denial of justice that we saw during the first hearing .
The heads of mission in Tunis are concerned about the situation ; they have discussed it , and are perhaps discussing it at this very moment .
They were meeting today .
I call on you , Mr President , to take a major political initiative in order to put a stop to these systematic human rights violations in Tunisia .
Our new and former colleague Martin Kastler has now arrived too .
He tells me he was caught in a traffic jam .
There are two ways to avoid being late : either by setting off earlier or by improving the trans-European networks .
Mr President , the murder of prisoners of war and of civilians captured during wartime constitutes one of the most severe violations of international law .
The third and fourth Geneva Conventions state clearly that such acts fall far below the standards of international law and render the perpetrator liable in the eyes of the international community .
It is in this same spirit that Article 2 of the European Convention of Human Rights declares the taking of life a flagrant violation .
The recent confession by the Turkish actor Attila Olgaç to the murder of 10 Greek Cypriot captives during the Turkish invasion in Cyprus in the summer of 1974 has brought to light once more the crimes committed by Turkey and entails an inescapable responsibility for Turkey to open its archives for the investigation of the fate of all missing persons .
The international community , in which the European Union is a significant player , must put all possible pressure on Turkey to comply with international law , the related decisions of the European Court of Human Rights , and all relevant UN resolutions .
( SK ) The motto of the Czech Presidency ' Europe without barriers ' should not be just a slogan , but must be a clear response to current challenges .
The Presidency should deal with the issues that worry European citizens for whom the existing barriers make it impossible to exercise their rights on EU territory .
The European Union has fifty million Europeans with various health problems who in everyday life come up against various difficulties .
Many of them have turned to me with requests regarding the need for mutual recognition of ID cards for severely disabled people .
Handicapped citizens cannot use these cards in all EU Member States .
As an example , this makes it difficult for them to park their cars in designated parking spaces .
I have submitted a question to the Council and to the Commission and I hope that measures to harmonise these cards will be adopted as soon as possible .
' Europe without barriers ' must mean the removal of all barriers , including physical , social and architectural barriers , and the prevention of any discrimination against handicapped people .
( RO ) The documents from the meeting on 5 February in Prague mention a debate on the topic of the Barcelona objectives concerning public childcare services , with the emphasis on home childcare .
I wonder whether the Czech Presidency is aware of the European Commission report from October 2008 , which indicates that more than six million women aged between 25 and 49 state that they are obliged not to work or can only work part-time because of family responsibilities .
Home childcare must not be detrimental to public childcare services .
As a social-democrat , I believe that investing in public childcare services is beneficial to society as a whole .
I urge the Czech Presidency to consider what assistance can be provided to Member States enabling them to improve their public childcare services from a quantitative and qualitative perspective , especially during the current crisis .
( BG ) This week a referendum will be held in Switzerland on the free movement of people .
The Swiss people will decide whether the agreement between their country and the European Union will be extended both in terms of time and scope , and whether it will include the citizens of Bulgaria and Romania .
With this decision Switzerland will facilitate and define not only how things will develop in the future , in terms of whether we will apply visas and borders , but will also decide whether certain responsible decisions linked to economic development from the last 30 years will continue to be applied in the future as well .
The policy of freedom of movement of citizens is a contributor to economic development , both in Switzerland and in the European Union , and also to the improvement of our general standard of living .
I openly hope that the result of this week 's referendum in Switzerland will be a positive one , because an opposite , negative result would once again lead this beautiful partnership and cooperation to the barriers which we once had , to restrictions and to all the inconveniences resulting from a lack of agreements .
It is for this reason that I hope that our Swiss friends will support our common future and I invite both Member States of the European Union and the Commission to continue our mutual cooperation with Switzerland in good harmony and with good results for all citizens of the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , at the meeting in Davos German Chancellor Angela Merkel called for the building of a gas pipeline from Russia to Germany on the Baltic seabed .
Mrs Merkel has once again proven her understanding of European solidarity .
Yet the countries of Scandinavia , as well as Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia and Poland , have expressed reservations and opposition to the gas pipeline project .
Mrs Merkel has shown what importance she attaches to the voices of ecologists , who are warning of the threat to the Baltic .
For Mrs Merkel there is no significance in the fact that the construction costs will be several times higher than the costs of building an underground pipeline .
I have a question : could it be that , following the example of her predecessor Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder , Mrs Merkel was looking for a job with Gazprom ?
Are the leaders of the German left and the German right aware that by showing this attitude they are undermining the authority , dignity and cohesion of the European Union ?
( HU ) Mr President , according to the Charter of the United Nations , all peoples have the right of self-determination .
This also applies to the 1.5-2 million Hungarians in Transylvania .
Two years ago the Székely National Council organised an informal referendum on regional autonomy for Székely Land .
In this referendum carried out using mobile ballot boxes , in spite of an artificially instigated anti-Hungarian propaganda campaign , 99 % of the 210 000 voters asked voted in the affirmative .
Recently , a significant number of local governments in Székely Land launched a new initiative for a comprehensive official referendum .
The state bodies and their local representatives , the so-called prefects , are making every effort to hinder Székely Land 's Hungarians in the peaceful , lawful and democratic expression of their will .
I ask Parliament and President Hans-Gert Pöttering to keep a close eye on further developments concerning the referendum in Romania , and to extend protection to the local governments that are under threat from the authorities . Thank you .
- ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic partnership agreement between the Cariforum and the European Union is inaugurating something bad for the outermost regions ( ORs ) of the French West Indies and Guyana .
Worse still , the agreement on which I will have to give my opinion does not respect the mandate that was set by the European Council , or the European Union 's strategy for the Caribbean , or its strategy for the ORs , all three of which explicitly mention the need for the regional integration of the ORs within the Cariforum and for the creation of an interregional market between these two parties , aimed at the overall development of the region .
I am concerned .
For 10 days now a terrible strike has been taking place in Guadeloupe , bringing everything to a standstill , oil included .
This strike is lasting so long because the people of the French West Indies and Guyana are suffering from the cost of living , which is one and a half times higher than in metropolitan Europe .
Although this has so far been a purely French problem , it has now in fact become a European one , and the Commission 's refusal to negotiate a specific OR-Cariforum agreement for us is in my view a disgrace .
( EL ) Mr President , recently we have heard about , we have read about and we have seen civilians being bombed and children being exterminated .
Recently we saw a gentleman from Turkey who admitted in public that , during the invasion of Cyprus by Turkey in 1974 , he murdered 10 handcuffed Greek Cypriot soldiers .
What we have not seen , Mr President , is a willingness on the part of the International Criminal Court in The Hague , a willingness which was so evident when it came to those involved in events in Yugoslavia ; the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is still chasing them .
Consequently , I think that it is a legitimate demand for us to ask Parliament to tell us if there is a list of countries which come within the jurisdiction of The Hague Court or if there are countries which are indifferent to and dismissive of this Court .
I think that our demand to know which countries and citizens are being brought before the Court in The Hague as defendants and which are not is a legitimate demand .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
I asked to speak because of a tragic accident that occurred three days ago in Croatia .
An 18-year-old man stepped on a landmine and became one of the already numerous victims , among them Italian , Dutch and other European fellow citizens .
Croatia is not party to the comprehensive mine clearance programme being financed by the Commission from 2008 to 2013 , and yet the number of such mines that have been deployed is unknown .
Though Croatia has never produced any mines of this sort , there are life-threatening antipersonnel mines along some 1 000 kilometres of its territory .
I respectfully ask the Commission and you , Mr President , to intervene so that Croatia may also benefit from European aid - just like Bosnia , Ukraine , Kosovo and Cyprus - since this is an extremely costly and highly dangerous operation .
I have been speaking in my capacity as Chairman - on the EU side - of the EU-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee . Thank you very much for the floor .
( EL ) Mr President , demonstrations by farmers in Greece , together with other demonstrations in Europe , are sending out important messages of change in current perceptions about farming and the food issue , by demanding the reform of European and national policies .
When , at European level , economies are collapsing , all confidence has been lost in the financial system , small and medium-sized enterprises are gradually disappearing and employment is shrinking , we cannot turn a blind eye to the problems accumulating in the countryside , in farming , in the rural economy and in regional employment .
It would be a good idea for the Commission and Parliament to start a dialogue and to present proposals in a bid to deal with the problems , not only so that small and medium-sized farms survive , but also to get them out of the crisis over coming years , to activate the intervention mechanism and to strengthen the crisis management mechanism - so that even loss of income can be covered - and national policies , which could be made more flexible without this necessarily meaning cofinancing of the common agricultural policy .
( LT ) European leaders recently expressed the view that they were disappointed with the leaders of Ukraine and Georgia .
They are beginning to doubt whether they can democratise those states and lead them into NATO and the European Union .
Such views and talk can only support Russia 's policies and its special forces .
Right before our very eyes we can see Russian provocations whose goal is to weaken President Yushchenko , President Saakashvili and the West-oriented policies they are implementing .
There are invisible provocations as well .
The best way to see how they are organised would be to examine the KGB archives .
Only naive politicians in contemporary Europe can believe that Russia no longer carries out such blackmail and provocations , even though it is led by KGB officer Putin .
The latest information provocation is that Georgia kidnapped a Russian soldier .
It was fed to Europe all week .
Later Russia admitted that the soldier himself had in fact deserted , but the black propaganda had already done its damage .
One gets the impression that Russia is playing games with tanks , gas pipelines , information and misinformation brilliantly .
However , it is above all the naivety of European politicians which allows Russia to play such games .
( PL ) Mr President , taking advantage of the fact that the attention of world public opinion is now focused on questions related to the economic crisis , the Chinese authorities have used their extensive apparatus of oppression to increase pressure on the Tibetans .
The campaign , which is to last 40 days , is directed mainly against the participants in last year 's protests .
Summonses to police stations are increasing , as are disappearances , incidents of intimidation and unexplained deaths .
We cannot exclude the possibility that one consequence of the repression will be expressions of unrest from the Tibetans , who will be driven to take extreme measures .
The Chinese security services and army will respond by brutally pacifying these protests , and it may turn out that we are dealing with deliberate provocation from the Chinese authorities , who will be counting on the fact that even democratic governments will restrict themselves only to tentative protests during the common struggle with the economic crisis .
The European Parliament should express itself clearly and decidedly on this question , and therefore today I will permit myself to submit a draft of an appeal to the Prime Minister of China .
Let us together send a signal to the communist regime that we do not consent to the violation of basic rights of the people of Tibet .
( RO ) The European Commission has declared 2009 as the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
Creative thinking is the key to success in a global economy , a fact recognised by the European Union a long time ago .
Indeed , innovation is an integral part of both the Commission 's climate change package and the plan for revitalising the European economy .
For its part , the European Parliament must become more actively involved in promoting creativity as a driving force for innovation .
Last year the energy and climate change package was adopted and the written declaration on fibromyalgia was approved for which I would like to thank you once again .
These documents pave the way for innovation and creativity in areas of paramount importance such as health , by identifying new treatments for fibromyalgia , and energy , by making the new alternative energy sources more efficient .
( HU ) Mr President , Hungary , too , entered the Schengen area on 21 December 2007 , and yet there are certain issues that have still not been settled on the Austro-Hungarian border .
The Burgenland authorities are not really speaking to us .
Therefore , in June 2008 , my Hungarian compatriots submitted a petition to the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , which we immediately forwarded to Commissioner Jacques Barrot .
Mr Barrot eventually responded , four months later , saying that he did not have sufficient information regarding the petition and that they would try to contact the person who submitted it .
Two months after this reply , I myself contacted the person who submitted the petition and asked how things stood .
I was told that to date no one from the Commission had been in touch ; this does indeed make it difficult for the Commission to obtain information .
When I went back to the Commission staff , I was told that they would examine the matter ' within the best delay ' .
I would like to ask the Commission what the expression ' within the best delay ' means , and I would like to express my hope that the campaign for the elections due to be held four months from now will not likewise be conducted by Mr Barroso and Mr Jacques Barrot ' within the best delay ' .
Thank you very much .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , here is a one-minute rapid snapshot of the still rampant European racism .
In Hungary , a few days ago , a police chief constable who had made a racist statement was acquitted and then reinstated after reference was made to a supposed internal investigation .
The investigation did not address the question of whether or not the racist statement had in fact been made .
In Romania , in the municipality of Tărlungeni , near Braşov , a wall has been erected between the Roma and non-Roma families .
In response to a question from a local child asking why they are being separated , the father may perhaps reply : because those living on this side of the wall are bad people , while those on the other side are good people .
Ten days ago we voted to adopt the report of the delegation to Italy ; since then , a week ago , Italy deployed armed forces against the Roma after two crimes committed by persons unknown .
The police forces are sweeping through Roma families with helicopters , dogs and armed police officers . Thank you very much .
( PT ) The number of workers affected by unemployment in Portugal is growing exponentially .
Every day , companies announce cutbacks in production , layoffs of workers or even complete closure .
Amongst the most serious cases is the threat hanging over around 2 000 workers at Qimonda , in Vila do Conde , following the declaration of bankruptcy of the parent company in Germany .
On Wednesday , a delegation of workers from both countries will be here in Parliament , expecting solidarity and also our support in their fight to defend their jobs .
However , the scandal of delays in payment of wages and other remuneration owed to workers is also increasing , as is happening in cork companies , some textile companies , and the ceramics and metallurgy sectors , amongst others .
This situation is creating serious social problems , increasing poverty and even causing tragic situations in cases of members of the same family working in the company .
I was able to ascertain this only days ago at Subercor , a company based in Santa Maria da Feira ( part of the Suberus group , in the footwear sector ) , where workers are struggling because they are not receiving their wages and there are couples who are going hungry and already have no food for their children .
These are terrible situations caused by the crisis which is devastating us , the consequences of which can be seen in human faces and people 's lives .
I therefore appeal not only for solidarity but for these serious problems to be solved .
( HU ) Mr President , popular opinion in Hungary has been following with great interest the developments in the water cannon case in Hungary , and would like to have a clear view of the issue as soon as possible .
We request the Commission 's assistance in this matter .
This issue concerns the fact that the Hungarian Government continued throughout 2006-2007-2008 to hold to the view that it had purchased new water cannons at the expense of the Schengen Fund , and that these were used in Budapest on 22 October 2007 to disperse the crowds .
At the end of 2008 , the Minister for Justice and Law Enforcement stated that this purchase was not paid out of the Schengen Fund , which is an EU resource .
The competent European Commissioner confirmed that the cannons had not been purchased out of the Schengen Fund .
A day later , a secretary of state at the same Ministry stated that the Hungarian Government had covered the purchase of the water cannons from the domestic sources of the Schengen Fund , contradicting the European Commission .
My question is : has the Commission looked into whether the Schengen Fund was used in this case as intended , and has it sought to ascertain the truth with regard to the water cannon purchase ?
After these events , the credibility and transparency of the actions not only of the Hungarian Government , but also of the European Commission , are at stake . Thank you very much .
Mr President , last Monday the British Government announced feasibility studies into five tidal-power schemes in the Severn Estuary : three would be barrages and two would be lagoons .
The EU has rightly set ambitious targets for renewable energy , but the idea that achieving these targets will be pain-free is a delusion .
The Severn barrage could supply up to 5 % of the UK 's energy needs , yet this would challenge interpretations of the Habitats Directive .
The result of legal arguments - or public opinion - blocking the scheme would be to prove the truth of Nietzsche 's dictum that madness is rare in individuals , but common in parties , groups and organisations .
The EU and the British Government should ponder Jeremy Bentham 's philosophy that we should look for the greatest good for the greatest number .
( EL ) Mr President , it has taken a long time to release the Balkans from unproductive nationalism which is out of step with European standards of behaviour and values .
It would appear , however , that some people need to hear this message again .
In October 2008 , the government of the Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia filed an application for Community financing for Corridor 10 , which crosses its territory .
Just two months later , in a scandalous decision which was even published in that country 's official gazette , they decided to name this route ' Alexander the Great of Macedon ' , thereby blatantly insulting the interim agreement with Greece , which makes express provision for the avoidance of government propaganda and the use of symbols which incite hostility , hatred and violence .
I call on the European Commission to link the application for Community financing with the repeal of this scandalous decision , which reminds us that there are still nationalists in the Balkans .
We are building a Europe in which there is no room for nationalism .
( BG ) Last Wednesday the European Commission announced its proposal regarding the programme for reconstruction in the field of energy security .
In line with this proposal Bulgaria is to receive only a share of the EUR 20 million earmarked for the project linking Bulgaria with Greece .
Only a share of EUR 20 million earmarked from billions for projects !
In my country in these instances we have a saying : ' The mountain laboured and brought forth a mouse ' .
All this after a big gas crisis !
As you know , Bulgaria was most seriously affected and is the only country completely reliant on Russian gas .
It is officially said that ready-to-go projects are being financed , but suspicions have arisen .
The crucial project that Bulgaria has proposed for the expansion of the Chiren gas storage facility can be finalised within only a few months .
If it lacks support , Bulgaria will take on this project independently , but where does that leave European solidarity and justice ?
Again last week an influential European journal wrote that , as a result of this crisis , support in Bulgaria for Eurosceptics will rise to 20 % .
I hope that this is not an accurate calculation .
However , if the Commission continues with such behaviour towards Bulgaria , it will make a decisive contribution towards this .
Mr President , two and a half years ago , I found out that the European Commission had initiated proceedings against Denmark in the European Court of Justice because Denmark had introduced a 2 % threshold for hydrogenated fats in food .
The Commission did this even though there was scientific evidence to the contrary , which showed in fact that hydrogenated acids are extremely difficult from the point of view of coronary disease etc .
Two years ago , therefore , I decided - in conjunction with two of our colleagues , Dan Jørgensen and Linda McAvan - to draft a written declaration .
We were supported by 254 Members of Parliament from 25 different Member States , which was huge support .
Recently , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety published a report which gave the maximum level as 2 % , which is exactly what Denmark was doing .
Therefore , on the basis of the medical and scientific evidence , I call on the Commission now to adopt fully the 2 % threshold , which Denmark 's system introduced and which is recommended in this report from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
( SL ) I once again note with regret that , whereas the status of the Italian and Hungarian minorities in Slovenia has been regulated in an exemplary manner and each minority has its own representative in the Slovenian Parliament , Slovenian minorities do not enjoy the same kind of support in the countries in which they live .
Despite the treaty signed in Budapest , there is no political will in Hungary to allow the Slovenian minority to have its own representative in parliament .
Moreover , the latest reports indicate that the only Slovenian museum in Hungary is to be closed down because of funding cuts .
Yet this museum is the Slovenian minority 's only centre of cultural life in Hungary and has received only EUR 16 000 in funding .
While Slovenia earmarks EUR 14.5 million a year for its Hungarian minority , Hungary earmarks a mere EUR 400 000 a year for its Slovenian minority .
For this reason , we justifiably expect the Hungarian Government to improve its financial and political support for the Slovenian minority .
The financial crisis cannot be used as an excuse to cut funding allocated to minorities , whether in Hungary , Italy or anywhere else .
Mr President , in spite of the agreement between the Greek authorities and farmers , the farmers are still blocking the cross-border traffic road between Bulgaria and Greece at the Kulata-Promachonas crossing .
The continuing 14-day blockade of border crossing points between the Republic of Bulgaria and the Hellenic Republic of Greece has caused considerable financial losses to the Bulgarian hauliers .
I and 14 other Bulgarian Members of the European Parliament have sent a written question to the Commission on the measures taken under Regulation ( EC ) No 2679 / 98 .
We acknowledge the fundamental rights and freedoms of European citizens .
However , we are convinced that this Regulation should be significantly improved so as to avoid another case of continuous blockade of transport between Member States in total breach of the fundamental principles of the internal market , such as free movement of goods and persons .
- ( FR ) Madam President , nine days ago the regions of Aquitaine , Midi-Pyrénées and Languedoc-Roussillon were hit hard by Storm Klaus .
The damage is extensive , and I call for these regions to receive emergency European aid .
I have in mind , in particular , the European Union 's Solidarity Fund , but also the Structural Funds and the Rural Development Fund , and I am also thinking about the authorisation of state aid .
I should like to draw your attention , ladies and gentlemen , to the fact that , in May 2005 , the European Parliament adopted the report by Mr Berend on the reform of the Solidarity Fund , in order to extend its scope .
The matter is currently at a standstill within the Council of Ministers .
It is imperative that there be a positive outcome to it soon .
European citizens expect the European Union to protect them and to offer them practical assistance .
Allowing these French regions to receive emergency aid , but also seeing through the reform of the Solidarity Fund , would represent , in the eyes of Europeans , cast-iron guarantees that the European Union 's duty and purpose is to be at their side in difficult situations .
( EL ) Madam President , farmers with small and medium-sized holdings have been on the streets for a fortnight in a fight which has shaken the entire country .
The common agricultural policy , which is jointly formulated and implemented by Greek governments , and agreements within the framework of the World Trade Organization have resulted in a reduction in agricultural output , in a drastic cut in the income of farmers with small and medium-sized holdings and in their speedier eradication .
Greece 's agricultural balance of trade has gone from being in the black to being in the red to the tune of approximately EUR 3 billion for 2008 alone .
Instead of meeting the basic demands of small and medium-sized farms , the New Democracy government is trying to mislead them with meaningless announcements and , at the same time , is mobilising the special forces in order to suppress their fight .
The Communist Party of Greece and the workers support the fight of small and medium-sized farms against the common agricultural policy and the entire anti-grassroots policy of the European Union and bourgeois governments .
They also support their demand for guaranteed minimum prices for agricultural and livestock products , which will cover the production costs and improve the income of small and medium-sized farms .
Madam President , as the economic crisis deepens , major issues leading to industrial action are emerging in the United Kingdom , flowing from the compulsion for unrestricted free movement of labour within the EU and the procurement requirements in regard to major public contracts , whereby contracts won by foreign companies are resulting in a significant influx of foreign workers , putting local workers and local unemployed at a disadvantage and depriving them of opportunities .
In this , I believe , many will come to see the price being paid by the United Kingdom for EU membership .
We are being compelled to subject ourselves to labour market laws and to the supremacy of EU law and the rulings of the European Court of Justice .
Procurement policy , which prohibits preferment for local contractors and workers , is stoking up more and more resentment of the EU and its inflexible regime .
( EL ) Madam President , two years ago Parliament adopted a resolution almost unanimously .
In this resolution , it called for the fate of the missing persons in Cyprus to be ascertained .
Two years have passed and no progress has been made .
The Turkish army was asked to give the competent committee all the information in its possession , but nothing has been done in this direction .
On the contrary , today we have a public confession by a Turk who was a soldier at the time and who , for reasons of conscience , because he cannot take it anymore , has confessed that he killed 10 Greek Cypriots .
The Turkish army knows about both these crimes and about others and , without doubt , there is not a civilised person today , of Turkish or any other nationality , who does not condemn these war crimes .
What , however , must we do ?
We must step up our efforts to persuade the Turkish army to supply information to the competent committee in order to put an end to the suffering of the missing persons ' relatives .
Madam President , as you know , there have been widespread protests in my country about an Italian company which has won a contract in an oil refinery in my constituency , and has only used Italian labour for the contract .
The outcry is understandable if indeed the company in question has reserved the right to its own nationals and not allowed British nationals to work .
That would be a violation of European Union law ( discrimination on grounds of nationality ) , as it would be if the company were undermining British legal requirements , which it must observe under the Posted Workers Directive .
If , however , the protesters are saying that only British companies should have had the right to tender for that work and only employ British labour , then , of course , the protesters would be making an argument that would not be correct .
They should bear in mind that there are over two million British citizens who work in other EU countries , and only a million non-British EU citizens who work in Britain .
The slogan ' British workers for British jobs ' must mean enabling British workers to compete in a well-trained way and without suffering discrimination .
It cannot mean reserving things solely to the nationality of the country concerned , either in Britain or in any other Member State of the European Union .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in two days ' time , I am delighted to say , we will welcome here the President of the Palestinian Authority , in a formal sitting .
On that occasion , the President of the Authority is coming to the Chamber of the Europe of homelands that is destroying the European homeland , whereby the Mediterranean is only fit as a tomb for the poor and for those who are condemned to starvation and extermination .
We here represent - look , it is time for nationalist protests , and everyone from all sides should take part - the scourge of the Europe of homelands that is destroying the European homeland and we have a duty to tell Brussels this .
In two days ' time , a Palestinian will speak .
The fact that 80 % of Israeli citizens are in favour of Europe , unlike the Jerusalem Government , as the Adenauer Foundation has shown , also shows that even the people of Palestine , Lebanon , the southern Mediterranean and Tunisia are not entitled to move themselves to revolution ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Given the current climate in Europe , guaranteeing energy security is becoming a priority .
Diversification of energy transit routes can be guaranteed by interconnecting Europe 's gas networks , which also supports solidarity between Member States , one of the European Union 's fundamental principles .
In addition to the financial contributions made by Romania and Hungary themselves , the European Commission proposed last week the allocation of EUR 30 million for the completion of the Arad-Szeged gas pipeline project , the financing for which has been suspended for more than five years .
This project is of paramount importance .
The gas pipeline will not only link Romania and Hungary , but will also provide a connection to the European Union 's gas network .
Once the pipeline is completed , Romania will be able to both export and import gas on the European market , not only in normal conditions but also in situations where there is a European energy crisis .
With this in mind , I am calling on your support so that the Commission 's proposal is implemented as quickly as possible .
( DE ) Madam President , the meat scandal in Ireland has made waves throughout Europe , including Austria where , as a bizarre consequence of the scandal , Irish meat was sold as Tyrolean bacon .
In my view the only solution to this EU-wide problem is a compulsory declaration for fresh meat and meat products , which would contain the following information : place of origin ; duration of the animal 's journey to the abattoir and from there to the point of sale of the meat ; if the meat comes from outside the EU , the country of origin should be specified precisely .
In addition , it is high time the European Union had these things checked by inspectors .
So that this can indeed be done , I call on the Council , the Commission and you , ladies and gentlemen , to take steps to ensure that European consumers can no longer be misled in this way .
( SL ) We have seen and heard reports that the long-standing civil war in Sri Lanka is coming to an end .
However , it was military predominance , not political achievement or any lasting solution , that drove the Tamil Tigers out of their last major stronghold .
This military solution is fraught with problems .
We see winners and losers , the losers being the tens of thousands of local civilians who are withdrawing or fleeing in fear of government units .
Experience from the Western Balkans teaches us that military victories and formal cessations of military hostilities are often followed by the killing of the losers or their supposed sympathisers by the winners .
Victories can leave a trail of individual , uncontrolled acts of retribution , but frequently also organised killings , which the perpetrators usually seek to conceal .
I am not trying to accuse anyone ahead of time .
I am just trying to point out that the European Union must also take immediate action to ensure an international presence and international supervision during this most critical post-conflict period , a period which leaves the civilian population , who are fleeing in fear , in the greatest peril .
Madam President , many will be aware of the recent dioxin scare in the Republic of Ireland .
Beef farmers in Northern Ireland were also caught up in this problem because they imported the compound feed which caused the problem in their animals .
The Northern Ireland Executive has now offered the farmers 25 % compensation , which will mean ruin for them .
The Executive is having problems finding the matching funds , and will not be able to draw the 37.5 % that is available from the European Union .
I understand that the Government of the Republic of Ireland has made it clear that it will not be accepting any responsibility , even though the feed mill was licensed by it and under its control .
There is also a substantial amount of infected pigmeat at one plant .
This is a very serious and dangerous problem and must be resolved as soon as possible .
( RO ) The European Union is busily preparing to negotiate a post-Kyoto agreement in order to continue reducing the causes of climate change .
Member States must gradually reduce their carbon dioxide emissions .
European companies must urgently invest in modernising their production installations in energy-intensive industries , to be able to maintain the current level of production , save jobs and protect the environment .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that during the current economic crisis European enterprises are failing to obtain the credits which they very much need to be able to modernise .
It is not a case of European enterprises having to produce less , but simply in a more intelligent and environmentally friendly manner .
I call on the European Commission , the European Investment Bank and Member States to make the EU 's sustainable economic development a priority and to guarantee , through the European economic recovery plan , the conditions required so that European enterprises can modernise and remain competitive in an increasingly tough market .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
The European Union faces the challenges of guaranteeing stability and security , improving the prosperity of its citizens and building a common European future .
The historical , national and ethnic minorities are of enduring value to a diverse Europe .
Respect for the rights of these minorities has not yet been satisfactorily ensured .
The existence of documents such as the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities , as well as the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , inspires confidence .
It is clear that until each Member State of the European Union has ratified these documents , further efforts are needed .
Parliament should make it a goal to create a binding framework agreement that will guarantee the protection of national minority communities , recognising that various forms of autonomy and self-determination , based on the principle of subsidiarity , represent reassuring solutions to the situation of minority communities . Thank you very much .
- ( FR ) Madam President , allow me to express my full support for the citizens and families affected by Storm Klaus , which hit southern Europe , and particularly south-west France , more than a week ago .
The consequences of the storm are tragic .
It caused 11 deaths , more than one and a half million homes have been left without electricity , and 300 000 hectares of forest have been hit , that is to say 40 % of the forest in the Landes region .
Around 30 to 40 million m3 of trees have been brought down .
Since 2002 the European Union has been endowed with a Solidarity Fund that enables emergency financial assistance to be given to European regions hit by such natural disasters .
The Council of Ministers must - and I shall echo the conclusions of Mrs Laperrouze here - release this Solidarity Fund , and I hope that Parliament will make sure that this happens very soon .
( PL ) Madam President , we are about to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the beginning of the Round Table Talks in Poland .
It was then that rulers and opposition sat down to talks , and to reflect together on the solution to Poland 's problems , both problems of an economic and social nature , and also the most important problems of our political system .
The opposition was represented primarily by Solidarity , which was founded in 1980 , headed by Lech Wałęsa and the organisation 's advisors .
On the government side the negotiators were the authorities of the crumbling socialist economic system , the creators of the state of martial law in Poland .
As a result of the Round Table Talks and settlements , elections were held in June 1989 , which led to the establishment of the first government led by a non-communist : Tadeusz Mazowiecki .
It was that government which showed us that the right direction for Poland to take was not only freedom and democracy , but also integration with the European Union .
The changes which took place in my country then triggered the march of many countries of Central and Eastern Europe towards freedom , democracy and integration with the EU .
That concludes the item .
Impact assessment of the compromises reached in the Doha negotiations on NAMA and services at the end of July 2008 ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the impact assessment of the compromises reached in the Doha negotiations on NAMA and services at the end of July 2008 .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , we are facing the greatest economic challenge for a generation , and in that challenge both developed and developing countries face difficult and very important decisions .
We need a positive effect from globalisation to respond to the negative effects of globalisation .
It is my strong belief that , wherever we begin to look at what we need to do , we will end in the conclusion that completing the multilateral trade round - the Doha Round - is of vital importance to us .
I probably do not need to remind honourable Members of what history teaches us about protectionism , the importance of keeping our markets open and the possibility for our businesses to be able to trade across the world .
I probably do not need to tell all honourable Members that , simply within the rules of the World Trade Organisation , if countries moved from applying their tariffs the way that they do at the present time to applying them in the way they are allowed to do under the rules , then the cost to trade would be something of the order of EUR 260 billion .
I am sure I do not need to remind honourable Members that , as the developing nations consider the future , they are deeply concerned about what will happen to some of the aid that has been available to them so far .
So , in terms of where we are : we know the value of a deal that is now 80 % complete and that in July 2008 80 % of what needed to be done was done .
Within that agreement , the value is of the following order : the gains in the developing countries would be of the order of EUR 12-14 billion annually ; there would be new access to emerging markets in emerging countries , such as China ; we would have the opportunity in the European Union for new exports , diversified in new ways - for example , in chemicals and textiles - and in services there is a potential for EUR 14 billion of trade .
Another fact at the present time is that the non-tariff barriers - the non-tax barriers - in China alone in 2007 cost European Union companies EUR 20 billion .
This is a hugely important round .
I have just returned from Davos , where discussions between trade ministers reinforced the need to get back to the negotiating table and , of course , the technical discussions are continuing in Geneva .
We all wait for the new American Administration to review its trade policies , as it currently plans to do , and to reach the same conclusion that we have reached .
We look forward to the G20 on 2 April 2009 and the opportunity it affords world leaders in terms of looking to resolve the financial and economic crisis and having the opportunity to discuss again the need to complete the round .
Then there are the Indian elections in April or May , which of themselves will be the moment for an existing or a new government to return to this subject .
Of the outstanding issues that were left on the table , there is the special support mechanism , which , in the end , was the issue that prevented the talks from continuing between India and the United States .
There are new proposals being considered .
A decision is still to be taken on cotton , but again there are proposals on the table .
For the United States there are real issues about particular sectors .
There is no doubt there is still much to do , but it is my strong belief that , with political will , all these issues can be resolved , and the alternative is not an option .
For us , issues around services are very important and will follow on .
In conclusion , we are at the moment at a particular point where the need to complete this round is very obvious and very clear , and I look forward , on your behalf - as well as that of the Commission - to continuing my efforts to ensure that we do .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the trade in industrial goods and services is indeed of strategic importance to the European economy .
The European Union is , as we all know , the biggest exporter in the world and the main source of direct foreign investment .
The European Union is one of the most open markets , while eminent partners of ours maintain high trade barriers .
We are seeking a substantial reduction in the tariffs applied and for unjustified , non-tariff barriers to be addressed .
In addition to industrially advanced third countries , there are also emerging economies which need to make concessions in proportion to their degree of development and their sectoral competitiveness .
However , Commissioner , the problem is not only one of removing barriers : differences in regulatory systems are generating additional costs for exports , putting European products at a competitive disadvantage compared with imports from countries with more flexible standards and , in many cases , are raising the question of the safety and protection of European consumers .
The prolonged failure to reach agreement is exacerbating the climate of economic uncertainty and is damaging the credibility of the multilateral trade system .
Bilateral and interregional agreements can only be supplementary in nature .
Furthermore , the economic crisis may trigger the erection of unilateral , restrictive or distorting trade barriers .
There are already examples of this , of limited scope at present , as the relevant report by the Director-General of the World Trade Organization , Mr Lamy , testifies .
The protection clause for US products adopted by the House of Representatives is a step in the same worrying direction .
I would say that to return to unilateral approaches is not a solution .
Today more than ever we need to manage the challenges jointly , with more positive integration and by establishing or strengthening international regulatory systems with systemic convergence .
We need a new international economic architecture .
We need more transparent and balanced global trade governance and , on this point , Commissioner , we await an integrated proposal for ' globalisation with a European face ' which will take account of the changes already made and of the link between the commercial and economic dimension for a transparent , democratic and efficient Europe in the world at this time of crisis .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , we in the Party of European Socialists are committed to a successful outcome of the Doha Development Round , yet the ticking of the political clock has created a situation where , if you like , progress is on hold .
Commissioner Ashton made the point that in the United States we have a new , and from my point of view , very welcome , administration in that of President Obama , but we are waiting for a review of trade policy , which may take some time .
In April or May there will be elections in India .
The one place Commissioner Ashton did not mention was the European Union itself , where we have our own European Parliament elections in June , and following that a new incoming Commission , in which I hope Commissioner Ashton will continue to serve as Trade Commissioner .
Yet that does not mean that there is nothing to do in the interim .
Europe must continue to emphasise its commitment to development and free trade within the context of ensuring an end to exploitation and meeting the need for sustainable development .
I agree with Mr Papastamkos : free trade on this basis can be a win-win situation for all participants .
The current financial and economic crisis is a reason to move forward and not to retreat .
Commissioner Ashton and the Commission can try to prepare the ground for a compromise between the United States and India .
It was obstinacy on both sides , in my view , that acted to scupper a successful conclusion at the last time of asking .
Matters may be 80 % agreed , but we need the other 20 % .
We have one new administration in the United States .
The outcome of the Indian election may give us another .
In the mean time , we have no choice but to continue to pursue bilateral agreements .
I welcome the progress made in last week 's negotiations on the free trade agreement with the Republic of Korea , where I understand we are close to reaching an agreement which , again , will benefit both sides .
I am the rapporteur on the free trade agreement with ASEAN , and have to say that the negotiating basis is creating an institutional road block .
We need to consider the possibility of looking at a coalition of the willing and able among ASEAN who can , if you like , sign off on an agreement .
As with India , there is in my view currently no governmental will to achieve an outcome .
After the election , Delhi 's incoming administration , whether new or old , must put up , or we the EU must move on to those who want not just to talk , but to arrive at a conclusion .
Finally , I welcome Mr Pannella , the next speaker , who is the new ALDE spokesman on trade .
Maybe a visit to the Committee on International Trade would prove appropriate .
We would welcome him .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that to some extent we could start - given that these terms have been rather widely circulated over the last few days - what we have to do , Commissioner , with a strange kind of comparison between the man of Doha , or ex-Doha - as we hoped - and the man of Davos .
I do not feel that this is an adequate distinction , clearly , but it is interesting .
We now find ourselves , as you told us Commissioner , somewhat dependent on events that are not happening in Europe : events in the United States , events in India , and Mr Ford also just reminded us of important areas such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations or South Korea .
The real problem , however , is to what extent we , today , the Commission and the European Union , are capable of withstanding that outbreak of nationalism , which was mentioned a moment ago , and of autarchic ideas and new protectionist illusions , which is liable to make your work , Commissioner , and the work of our European Union too , very difficult .
I believe that , in this electoral campaign , it will be extremely important to understand how far the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe can manage , together with other participants , to find a way to develop our proposal , the proposal for which you were made spokesman , Commissioner , and to what extent we can really manage to make it a European proposal and not just a proposal , or I should say , our centre of Brussels against a series of capitals that are each already doing their own thing , as unfortunately happened many times in the last century .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , there is no point in denying it : during the July negotiations , the Bush Administration and the European Union were caught in their own trap by India and China .
What is more , contrary to the hypocritical assertions of liberal economists , for whom the failure of Doha would have been a disaster for poor countries , it was no such thing .
On the contrary , for these countries in difficulty it represented an historic opportunity , in a context marked by significant fluctuations in the prices of raw materials .
Even the experts admit , the gains that the poorest countries could have hoped for were well below the tax losses caused by the demise of customs duties in these same countries , duties that would have reached the sum of USD 60 billion .
During these negotiations , the Commission , tangled up as it is in its liberal dogmas , displayed a total lack of responsibility towards the people of Europe , going so far as to propose damaging , even sacrificing , car manufacturing on EU territory in order to succeed in reaching an agreement .
As far as the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) and the Commission are concerned , there are only consumers and never wealth creators .
It is this take on matters that is at the root of the current crisis since , by making competition the be-all and end-all of everything , it is pushing us in the direction of yet more salary deflation , and hence the absolute impoverishment of workers and the methodical destruction of all social protection .
Were the Doha Round to be concluded , it would be a disaster for all nations .
Moreover , what is particularly painful in the current context is the fact that , in spite of the considerable damage recorded having been taken on board , there is a desire to continue in the wrong direction , no matter what the cost .
There is an urgent need to revolutionise the WTO so that democracy may be established there .
( NL ) The Doha negotiations have been ongoing for some considerable time now and it is to be applauded that Europe has made real progress towards drawing our positions closer together .
Europe has put forward a far-reaching proposal on agriculture but , unfortunately , our efforts have not been reciprocated by other countries .
This is another reason why it is so important to look at the package as a whole , which means including NAMA ( Non-Agricultural Market Access ) and services .
You can be assured of my whole-hearted support in your efforts to reach a rapid agreement .
As Europeans , we need to guard against protectionist practices , which are increasingly rearing their heads , mainly due to the poor situation with the world economy , but also under the banner of protecting food safety .
As Europeans , we need to reiterate our unwavering commitment to the concept of reciprocity .
If we are open , then they need to be open too .
What should we be expecting in this respect from the new US President and the package of measures he has just announced ?
What can we expect from China ?
It is , in fact , primarily in this regard that we look to you to act , since , in these times of economic and financial crisis with mass redundancies and shrinking economies , it is precisely this market opening that has the potential to further our interests .
Madam President , our questions have been framed with the intention of highlighting the benefits our citizens can expect from such a package of measures and what we are able to offer in such a package .
I fully understand that you cannot respond to these questions in the short time available here , but I want to challenge you , in the coming weeks and months , to be transparent when communicating with citizens about the issues on the table and what these mean for them .
This is of particular importance as the European elections approach , and I hope we can count on you to keep this matter high on the agenda .
( PT ) In the context of this very serious financial and economic crisis , it is absolutely essential to make progress in concluding the Doha negotiations .
At a time of crisis , there is always a tendency to give way to the temptation of protectionism .
Protectionism is actually a kind of neurosis which tends to affect societies and states at times when they are faced with serious crises , such as the one we are experiencing .
We must therefore clearly fight against the possible emergence of this protectionist temptation , because we know from history where that leads us .
It leads to the general impoverishment of the world community and in no way contributes to solving the grave problems that confront us .
One thing , however , is protectionism , which is to be criticised absolutely and should be resisted , and another , quite different thing is the need to guarantee the protection of legitimate interests in the various areas of the world into which we are divided .
That is where the European Union also has an obligation to uphold the interests of Europeans , and not just the interests of Europeans as consumers , but also the interests of Europeans as producers .
That is why it is important to proceed with the multilateral Doha negotiations .
Whilst we know that protectionism is in fact a mistake , we also know that uncontrolled liberalisation of international trade inevitably leads to very serious disasters from an economic and social point of view .
The only way to avoid such uncontrolled liberalisation is by possibly establishing an agreement in the appropriate forum , that is , the World Trade Organization , a multilateral agreement that establishes rules to safeguard the legitimate interests of all the parties concerned .
The role of the European Commission and of the European Union , in this case too , is precisely to restore Europeans ' confidence .
There is also a crisis of confidence in Europe today in terms of the capacity for defence and political regulation of those who represent it , whether the Member States , the European Commission or the European Union as a whole .
Therefore , the challenge we face is precisely that of helping to put an end to this crisis of representation and confidence by ensuring that we are advancing along the right path .
The right path , in this case , is to guarantee a multilateral agreement which safeguards all our legitimate interests .
( EL ) Madam President , a strategic choice of the European Union and of the bourgeois governments , in the middle of the deep capitalist crisis - a crisis in the accumulation of capital and overproduction which is also infesting the Member States of the European Union - is to use the World Trade Organization as an important prop with an active role in imposing the full liberalisation of trade and commerce , privatisations and takeovers and the penetration of the European monopolies into new markets .
The aim of the Doha Round talks is to coordinate an all-out attack by capital , so that the multinational companies can plunder the raw materials of third countries and increase the exploitation of the workers throughout the capitalist world .
The anti-grassroots common agricultural policy is the consideration for promoting the objectives of the European Union to liberalise the markets in non-agricultural goods and services in order to safeguard jobs in the imperialist pyramid .
Obviously , we are interested in international trade and its development on the basis of mutual benefit .
However , it is impossible , under capitalist conditions , for global trade to be equal and based on mutual benefit .
That is why the fight by the workers in an anti-imperialist , anti-monopoly direction urgently needs to be stepped up , in order to bring about radical change both at international level and in each individual country .
Madam President , the Doha Round broke down last year .
This is an extremely serious state of affairs .
Progress towards global free trade over the last few decades has lifted an incredible number of people out of poverty on a scale that has actually changed the world .
Now , however , the world 's economy is in a very deep crisis .
This is not a result of free trade and this form of globalisation , but a result of a global financial crisis .
In this way , the situation is similar to the one we experienced at the end of the 1920s .
This sort of financial crisis results in a global depression .
The last time , it brought Hitler to power .
It led to the horrors of the Second World War and to 50 years of communist slavery throughout half of Europe and half of Asia .
These are important issues that we are talking about here .
The most important cause of the global depression at that time was a resurgence of protectionism .
Country after country introduced duties , quantitative restrictions , ' buy domestic ' rules and competing devaluations .
There is actually a high risk of this state of affairs being repeated this time round .
There are many worrying signs .
President Obama actually won the election from a protectionist platform .
We are seeing the first signs .
There is now a large package on the table which does , in fact , include a ' buy American ' clause relating to steel for the construction industry .
This may be the beginning .
If the door has been opened , other countries will discover that they can do something similar , given how bad things look .
Those countries that are currently badly affected around the world and within the EU will be tempted to promise their workers and their undertakings protection against foreign competition .
The trends are clear to see .
If this process starts it will not be possible to stop it .
This really will be disastrous .
The EU is the largest trading bloc in the world and therefore has considerable responsibility .
In the area of commercial policy , the EU speaks with one voice , and , for once , that is a good thing , but what will that voice actually say now ?
There are grounds for pessimism .
The key to success lies in the agricultural sector .
However , the campaigning by France and Germany to get the EU to buy in milk powder and butter and to start subsidising the export of dairy products does not bode well .
This is the politics of small-minded self-interest instead of statesmanship .
Therefore , the Council and Parliament should immediately issue clear statements to the effect that the EU will defend free trade throughout the world and open up the way for progress in the trade in agricultural products . Nothing can be more important than that .
Thank you for the opportunity to speak .
( SV ) I would like to begin by agreeing with the previous speaker that the Doha Round is extremely important , but I would like to add that it has probably never been more important than it is right now .
I believe that , precisely in the midst of this financial crisis , we have a greater need than ever before to show that the global trade system actually works .
To put the Doha Round behind us and say that we cannot achieve global agreements on trade would , I believe , be a disaster that could undermine the whole of the global trade system .
The failure of the Doha Round will probably never be more costly than it is right now .
The fact that the Doha Round is more important now than ever before is precisely due to the financial crisis .
As I see it , the greatest risk that we face with this financial crisis is not the lack of capital for the lending market ; the greatest risk is that it triggers protectionist trends .
We have seen this throughout history .
It happened during the 1930s and literally resulted in disaster for the world 's economy , and it also happened in the 1970s .
I believe we can already see signs that the world thinks it can solve these fundamental problems by means of greater protectionism , despite the fact that there is a risk of the protectionism spreading and creating an even greater crisis in the world economy .
This is happening in the area of services , financial services and the trade in services , in particular .
In the financial services sector we are seeing protectionism increase very rapidly .
Returning to the Doha Round as it looks today , the main criticism that I had during the entire period that we were negotiating in the Doha Round is probably that it began to be about agriculture , agriculture and more agriculture .
I think that this is an extremely narrow agenda , and I actually think that world trade deserves a very much broader approach , particularly in light of the fact that agriculture is a relatively small part of world trade if we compare it with industrial goods and services combined , for example .
I also believe that it accounts for a relatively small part of the growth potential , particularly , perhaps , here in Europe .
New opportunities for access to markets and new market openings globally , in particular for the trade in services , but also for industrial goods , are , I believe , most important for setting the wheels in motion and reviving global growth .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission a question .
What does the Commission intend to do and what initiatives does it have underway to enable the broadening of the Doha Round in order to get us away from this tiresome situation in which we are all sitting around and reproaching everyone over agricultural trade , agricultural trade and only agricultural trade , when we know that what the world economy needs is a very much broader trading agenda that also includes trade in services and industrial trade . Thank you very much .
Madam President , I should like to welcome the Commissioner .
Her predecessor , Mr Mandelson , was well known in Ireland , for reasons with which I am sure she is very familiar .
The issue of the Doha Round is not being talked about amongst the people of Europe .
It is being discussed in places like this , but when I meet people who have lost a job , for example , they do not say , ' Let 's do Doha ' .
So I think there is no connection between Doha and economic development , despite all of the theory that is advanced here .
On the globalisation of financial markets , I could suggest that this is a case where globalisation has failed us - although perhaps it would be fairer to say that it is the regulation of financial markets , or the lack thereof , that has failed us .
I am interested in Commissioner McCreevy 's recent comments to the effect that some of the problems in this area have been caused by Member States ' regulators building empires .
That is perhaps for another debate , but it exemplifies how , though we talk of globalisation as being a great thing , that has not been true in the financial sector .
On agriculture - which was addressed by the other speakers just prior to me - I gathered that agriculture was not the sticking point at Doha .
But it is a very serious issue and one that I have huge concerns about .
Maybe it is because I am older than the last speaker - who is in my political group - that I regard agriculture as rather important , because it produces food and is therefore higher up the scale than he placed it .
I think we should remember that .
We voted in this House on a report that I produced about global food security .
We are concerned about it , as we should be .
It should be an issue that is discussed at the Doha level .
Another issue is how European producers - farmers - can be competitive when in the European Union we have different , higher , standards of animal welfare in relation to the environment , which are not addressed at the WTO .
You will only bring our citizens with you on this journey if those issues are addressed at the WTO .
Quite frankly , I think there was never an occasion when we needed direct discussion of these things in this Chamber , and in Geneva , more than we do now .
I would ask you if , in your concluding comments , you could address some of those very real issues , so that people realise that they are being discussed .
I do not see the Doha Round developing at the speed that you are suggesting .
Perhaps I am wrong .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of the Doha Round , it would interest me to know how the Directorate-General for Trade intends to safeguard the tariff quota that underpins the competitiveness of the European fermentation industry .
The tariff quota serves a very important function , because the fermentation industry must remain internationally competitive .
Secondly , how will you respond to the steel clause that the US Congress has just adopted , which would prohibit the use of EU steel in the United States ?
( PL ) Madam President , the objective of the Doha Round was to help the poorest countries with their development , to lift them out of poverty .
On one hand therefore , we must do everything to help , but on the other hand we must not forget our own businesses or farmers .
I would therefore like to ask a question : how can we protect our small and medium-sized enterprises from bankruptcy , and how can we protect our small farms from competition from China , India or Brazil ?
Let us say loudly and clearly that , in order to import any kind of product to the EU , irrespective of whether this is shoes or beef , specific standards must be met .
Then we will be able to speak of equal competition .
Completing the negotiations in the coming months will be extremely difficult , because there is a lack of political will on the part of the leaders who really count in the negotiations .
There is a danger that protectionism will increase because of the current world economic crisis .
( PL ) I would like to say that , while listening to the last debate in Doha in Qatar , I had the impression that the developing countries have a grievance against us , the developed countries .
Perhaps it is a kind of echo of former colonialism , or that they are accustomed to receiving direct aid , and so to receiving a kind of charity .
It seems to me that wealthy countries can help through good trade , good standards , and training .
Nothing is more essential than to make local enterprise independent , and build horizontal relations between the countries of Africa , Asia and also Latin America .
I also think that it is precisely providing services that teaches management , cooperation and good standards .
In connection with this , the accent on opening the market to services is very important for both sides .
Madam President , thank you for providing me with another minute , because it is important for my comments about agriculture .
There is an impression that European farmers are the only ones with concerns .
However , the truth is that at Doha the Indian negotiators are concerned about their small farmers and the dire consequences that a move to free trade would have not only for individual farmers but also for social stability in their country .
So the issue of agriculture is across all of the negotiating partners and we need a little bit of honesty about that .
Commissioner , perhaps , again , in your concluding comments you might address that .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I shall try to address briefly the concerns that Members have raised .
Mr Papastamkos , I agree with you on the legal and regulatory burdens .
It is very important that these are addressed properly .
It is important to resolve them , and I also agree on the importance of safety in that context .


A number of Members , notably Mr Lundgren and Mr Rübig , as well as Mr Papastamkos , talked about the ' Buy American ' provision that is currently going through Congress .
Members will know that this is based on the 1979 Trade Act .
We already have that provision , but through the Government Procurement Agreement we have reciprocal arrangements whereby nations which sign up to it can bid for those projects .
What we are hoping - and we have been talking to the Americans about this - is that we end up where we were before .
I have read the legislation .
I too am very concerned about it .
I am going to America at the end of February to meet the new United States Trade Representative , who , we hope , will have been through his confirmation by then , and Members can rest assured that these are very important issues to be raised .
Mr Ford raised some of the issues about bilateral relations .
Korea is progressing , and on ASEAN I am looking for the flexibility which Mr Ford and I have discussed before , in order to try and move forward on that , but I agree too that there is no substitute in terms of value and importance for the multilateral arrangements .
On what we said about India , Prime Minister Singh has made it clear he is very committed .
I agree with Mrs McGuinness that the question of agriculture for India , which I shall also return to , is very important .
I was with Kamal Nath in London last week , debating Doha , and he as Trade Minister for India raised exactly same the point as Mrs McGuinness about the incredible importance of low-level subsistence farmers .
I fully agree with her comments and indeed with what the Minister was saying .
Mr Pannella , I do not think that we are quite at the mercy of events .
I think we as Europe have to push forward , use our influence and make it absolutely clear that we agree with what you said about the critical importance of battling against protectionism .
It is a big challenge and one of the challenges contained within it is communication , making sure people understand .
Mr Hénin has not stayed for my response , unfortunately , but it is not a matter of sacrificing industry for consumers .
This is about industrial growth and development .
It is about protecting workers ' jobs , because we know the importance of trade and export to doing precisely that .
As for institutional change at the WTO , we could spend our time on that , but I want to spend my time on finding practical ways through this difficult economic period .
Mrs Wortmann-Kool talked about services .
I agree this is very important .
It is very important too to be transparent .
I could not agree more with that .
Mr Assis , protecting our interests , not protectionism , is absolutely right .
There is a fundamental difference that we have to be clear about , and we have to make sure of protecting the work force in all of this .
On agriculture , as I said , it is critically important to make sure that we are able to develop our industries .
This is about food production , and it is very important in the Doha round .
My colleague Mariann Fischer Boel has worked very hard to make sure that the European position on agriculture is secure .
It forms a fundamental basis for all the work that I do in our bilateral , regional and multilateral talks to make sure that the best opportunities are provided to protect all of our agriculture in the future .
As for the fermentation industry , Mr Rübig , I understand these issues are currently being discussed , but I will be more than happy to come back to you with specifics .
Finally , on small and medium-sized enterprises , Mr Siekierski , it is very important that we are protecting our small businesses .
I am working closely with Günter Verheugen to get enterprise and trade collaborating effectively to make sure that we provide opportunities for small businesses to tell us where they need markets to open , to support them in helping those markets to open , and to support them in trade .
The debate is closed .
Production and employment in the textile and clothing sector in various EU Member States ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on production and employment in the textile and clothing sector in various EU Member States .
author suppleant . - Madam President , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , I would like to set out what is at stake here .
It is about production and employment in the textile and clothing sector in various European Member States .
The European Union and China have agreed to a joint surveillance system relating to exports of certain categories of textile and clothing products from China to European Member States , but this system expired on 31 December 2008 .
During the last two years , 350 000 jobs have been lost , and the number of companies was reduced by 5 % during the same period .
In the light of the growing number of enterprises that are ceasing to operate , or relocating production , leading to an increase of unemployment in several regions , I would like to put the following questions on behalf of the International Trade Committee :
Has the Commission or any Member State proposed or requested the extension of the dual surveillance mechanism beyond 31 December 2008 or any other measures in that framework ?
What measures does the Commission intend to adopt to protect production and employment in the textile and clothing sector ?
Will the Commission continue to monitor real-time market developments , import statistics and customs monitoring and keep the sector informed of the latest developments ?
What is the current situation regarding the proposed regulation on ' made in ' labels ?
What measures have been taken by the Commission to address the proposals adopted by Parliament in its resolution of 13 December 2007 ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is understandable in this climate that there is concern about the success of manufacturing in the face of competition , and of course textiles are very important .
Employment has continued to drop and production has fallen again - and that is after a couple of years of relative stability .
Of course the sector is at the cutting edge of globalisation .
Small and medium-sized enterprises play a huge part in this .
Following the end of the Memorandum of Understanding in 2005 , we did have the agreement on the joint surveillance system - to which Mrs Wortmann-Kool drew our attention - and it has given us early information about trade flows .
We are therefore better able to react in the event of being faced with a sudden surge in our industry .
It is also a further step in the transition to open markets designed and developed - as I am sure Members know - with the economic players concerned and in discussion with Member States and with Parliament .
By promoting a process of gradual change , we have helped the sector adapt .
That has been supported by the social partners .
They did not ask for an extension of the voluntary growth levels under the Memorandum of Understanding ( MOU ) when it ended in 2008 , nor have they been asking for a continuation of the surveillance system into 2009 - though I appreciate that some Member States would have preferred us to do so .
Imports from China have increased overall , but within reasonable limits .
Significant increases in some categories - such as for example dresses , trousers and pullovers - have been balanced by drops in textile imports from suppliers in other countries .
So , overall in 2008 , only a slight overall increase was realised and markets have absorbed that reasonably well .
The right political responses are not to close our markets or monitoring of the imports .
We need to ensure that all businesses can change , adapt , trade and innovate out of current conditions .
It is precisely to help businesses like this that the economic recovery plan was endorsed .
That , of course , represents a huge boost of 1.5 % of EU GDP , which should help the textile and clothing sector .
The challenges for the sector predate the current slowdown .
Eight of the fifteen applications under the Globalisation Adjustment Fund have been to support textile workers .
The Commission is ready to support initiatives to set up partnerships in the textile and clothing sector designed to anticipate restructuring with the aim of protecting employment and , overall , the sector benefits from the fact that there is a long-standing framework for social dialogue .
We welcome Parliament 's resolution on the future of the textile sector .
We move forward in market access , in funds from the Lead Market Initiative , and in every free trade agreement , as causes dedicated to environmental and social standards .
Of course currency devaluation remains on our agenda .
Madam President , textiles and clothing are a globalised sector of the economy par excellence , a sector which is characterised by continual change in terms of the place of production and constant restructurings and adjustments to new situations , such as the liberalisation of international trade .
For many Member States of the European Union , including Greece , this sector is an important source of exports and employment .
However , the considerable number of production units relocating and the constant reduction in employment have taken on worrying dimensions .
In addition to structural problems , the acute discrepancy between the import tariffs of the European Union , on the one hand , and of its most important competitors , on the other hand , is playing a negative role .
Commissioner , we are talking about a sector which represents an extremely high percentage of overall seizures of pirated products on the borders of the European Union , a percentage which is constantly rising .
In this instance , I consider the proposal to set up a European observatory on pirated products to be a good idea , so that we can achieve better coordination between the competent authorities , Member States and Commission services and also conditions of effective cooperation with the private sector .
I think we need to adopt regulations on the ' made in ' label , which will help to safeguard conditions of fair competition and consumer protection .
The establishment of more effective rules of origin is important in terms of the application of tariff quotas within the framework of the generalised tariff preferences and regional agreements .
We are being called upon to shape a new framework of cooperative relations between the agencies that implement industrial and regional policy and commitments and to effectively support European undertakings , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , so that they can maintain and further improve their competitive specialisation .
I refer to the production of high added value products in terms of quality and design , innovation and the use of new technologies .
We would like to thank you for your replies to the oral questions .
I would like to stress that , as is well-known , the textile sector makes a particularly important contribution to the GDP of all the Member States , including Romania .
We are well aware that this sector creates new jobs , especially for the female workforce .
I agree with and support the measures which you are proposing because , being aware of how important trade is in the current economic crisis , we need to realise how important the measures are which we need to take to protect jobs .
Bearing in mind that the joint surveillance system for textile imports from China was stopped at the end of last year , which I understand was an important tool for monitoring the market , I would like to suggest to the Commission that it attaches greater importance not only to the textile sector but also to other vulnerable industrial sectors such as steel , chemicals and machines .
I would also like to suggest that the European Commission presents on a regular basis impact studies , statistical data or other elements and relevant instruments for these sectors .
I would like to congratulate you once again on the measures you have proposed for access , free trade , funds and the environment .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that we are facing an extremely serious industrial crisis , and the European textile industry cannot escape this crisis , which is also a product of the financial crisis .
It is clear that delayed consumer spending is affecting European high-end products , including those from my country , Italy , in a sector that has seen , as the Chairman of the Committee on International Trade pointed out , the loss of 350 000 jobs and 5 % of businesses .
At this point , however , I believe that more than financial support , this sector , like other industrial sectors , requires rules , and requires , as has already been pointed out , genuine reciprocity .
While we can understand that , with regard to emerging countries , there are leanings towards really opening up the market to promote the development of those countries and thus new markets , much less understandable is a lack of reciprocity in terms of legislative barriers and tariff barriers with regard to the most developed countries : the United States , Canada , Australia and Japan .
It is for that reason that certain fundamental issues - on which commitment has , I believe , existed more on paper than in practice - such as the issue of origin marking , must once again become the main focus of attention within the Commission and the Council .
Europe needs new rules , but it also needs reciprocity and increased efforts to fight counterfeiting and piracy , to take real action on anti-dumping measures and , specifically , to approve the regulation on origin marking .
You see , Commissioner , if we take part in a boxing match with one hand tied behind our back , we cannot win .
I would also like to reiterate that it is a problem that concerns the United States together with us , and does not just concern China or India .
They have rules on traceability , which they impose on our products as well , but which we do not have .
This , then , is a fundamental issue , with regard to which I believe the Commission 's initiative needs to be stepped up much more than in the past , because we have seen that when it wants to , it can manage even to convince those who would argue , as was the case on the issue of the environment .
To conclude , I feel that there are some measures that are costly and others that are less costly , but the costly ones are part of a package to tackle the crisis , which is about to be launched .
They include the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , more credit made available to promote investments and strengthen the capitalisation of small and medium-sized enterprises , more funds for research for the textile technology platform , and more support for exports by small and medium-sized enterprises .
The less costly measures are specifically the regulation on origin marking , the protection of intellectual property , anti-dumping and the fight against counterfeiting .
If we can put forward all these costly and non-costly measures , I believe that we will help Europe 's economy without changing the rules on competition and without falling into neoprotectionism .
In the wake of other initiatives , we proposed to the Committee on International Trade of the European Parliament that an oral question should be raised with a debate in plenary on production and employment in the textile and clothing sector in different Member States of the European Union , because we consider this urgent and indispensable .
We also proposed that this debate should include the participation of the Council and be concluded with a resolution by this Parliament ; however , these proposals did not have the support of other parliamentary groups .
More than a year has passed since the debate held in this Parliament on 12 December 2007 .
We raised the alarm at the time that , if measures were not taken in defence of production and employment in the textile and clothing sector , we would continue to be faced with the slow agony and destruction of a large part of this strategic sector .
Since then , and as had happened previously , thousands of jobs have been lost and innumerable companies closed , with 350 000 jobs and 5 % of companies having vanished in the last two years alone .
Is that what the European Commission claims to be competing through restructuring , we would ask .
Since then , and as was the case previously , workers have continued to be faced with unemployment - all too often without payment of the compensation or back pay due to them - with intensified exploitation , with more insecurity , with late payment of wages and with deregulated working hours .
Certain causes and people are responsible for this situation , such as those who promote the liberalisation of the textile and clothing trade and the relocation of production with a view to maximum profits , thus pitting a large part of the sector against competition based on double standards defined from the start .
Faced with this situation , the European Union has either turned a deaf ear or taken mitigated measures which far from provide an answer to the problems and needs of the sector .
The European Commission does not consider the textile and clothing industry to be special , as it claims to , unlike other sectors .
Together with urgent measures which need to be implemented by each Member State , the European Union also has a duty to provide a response to the grave problems with which the sector is contending .
Commissioner , when will binding rules on attaching labels of origin be applied , with the adoption , for example , of the ' made in ' regulation ?
When will the same consumer safety and protection requirements be applied to imported products as are demanded for products made in the European Union ?
How will the European Union continue to monitor in real time import trends and customs inspection and control , keeping the sector fully informed and invoking safeguard clauses wherever necessary ?
How will it use the 2007-2013 financial framework , including the so-called Globalisation Adjustment Fund , to uphold production and employment in the textile and clothing sector , in particular in the small and medium-sized enterprises affected by liberalisation ?
When will there be a monetary and foreign exchange policy that does not penalise the exports of certain Member States ?
When will the Community programme , proposed by this Parliament , be created , and the financial resources to modernise and promote the sector and the diversification of industrial activity be unblocked , particularly those directed at the least favoured regions which are dependent on it ?
- ( FR ) Madam President , the European textile and clothing sector is a sector that has been hard hit over the last few years by the damaging effects of globalisation .
Today , in spite of some still painful wounds in certain European regions , this sector has been able to change direction , not least through the development of technical and innovative textiles .
However , let us not undermine this industry 's capacity for recovery by being lax and negligent .
Indeed the European Union must maintain the political will to create a consistent competitive framework for its businesses , by remaining vigilant and by taking practical and effective action when this proves necessary .
For the Union to do this , Commissioner , you must continue to monitor the customs statistics of imports arriving from China and you must keep this sector informed of the most recent developments .
We must keep a close eye on matters and we must be responsive .
The European Union has the means to do this : the trade protection instruments are a perfect example of such means .
Therefore , I will continue to hammer home the point that a Europe that protects is not a protectionist Europe .
However , my concern today , Commissioner , is based on the unprecedented increase in seizures of counterfeit textile and leather articles , articles that are impregnated with azo dyes or nickel , which put the security and the health of European consumers increasingly at risk .
This is a phenomenon that , as you can well imagine , is not about to go away with the economic crisis that we are going through .
That is why I call on you to work with the Member States to implement as quickly as possible the four-year action plan on combating counterfeiting and piracy , with the creation of a European counterfeiting observatory and the strengthening of the European customs system .
Making it mandatory to indicate the origin of goods sourced from third countries , harmonising the customs control procedures , and punishing violations of intellectual property rights by criminal prosecution are the battles that we have to fight on behalf of our businesses , our jobs and the citizens of Europe .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , this case is a very concrete one in which the distinction we made a short time ago , in the previous debate , between protection and protectionism , applies very well .
We must say ' No ' to protectionism which impoverishes , but protection to safeguard fundamental rights of Europeans is absolutely necessary .
This is a very important sector in various European regions and countries , as is the case of the region that I come from , the region of Northern Portugal .
It is of crucial importance to the regional economy .
It is a sector that has been particularly exposed to the globalisation process .
In a serious financial crisis like the one we are undergoing , this sector is experiencing absolutely tragic times .
The European Union and the Member States should pay more attention to the textile industry , opting for defensive measures and offensive measures .
The defensive measures entail the use of all the mechanisms and instruments of commercial defence that are at our disposal .
It also involves maintaining a political dialogue with our main partners to combat situations of real monetary protectionism and situations that threaten the legitimate interests of European producers .
To defend European producers , employers and workers is to defend European citizens and also to defend European consumers .
That is what we must be aware of , once and for all .
At the same time we have to use these defensive measures in compliance with principles as simple as those that have already been set out here : the principle of reciprocity and the principle of the permanent fight against unfair competition .
We are not asking for any special treatment for the European Union or for the most affected regions of the European Union .
We are simply demanding that there be rules and that those rules be based on fundamental principles of reciprocity .
However , while the European Union and its Member States must not hesitate to fight for the instruments of commercial defence which prove most appropriate at any time to be applied , we must also develop offensive policies and measures .
This , in fact , has already been happening , in terms of modernising the sector and also in the areas of human resources development , investment in vocational training , technological modernisation and development of the regions .
There are regions , and I know one of them well , which , as I have just said , is the region of Northern Portugal , that are faced with truly tragic situations and it is necessary to confront them head-on .
( LT ) This year up to 50 % of the jobs in Lithuania 's textile and clothing sector may be lost .
Almost 20 000 workers may become unemployed .
This would not simply be a consequence of the economic and financial crisis .
The textile industry has to withstand unequal competition conditions and apply higher manufacturing , work , hygiene and ecological standards .
It is very difficult to compete with China 's subsidised production due to the imbalanced exchange rate , bank lending policies , absence of depreciation deductions and tax policy .
Moreover , China and other countries are constantly increasing market access barriers affecting EU products .
What does the Commission think of a situation in which the price of a Chinese product is less than the raw materials used to manufacture it ?
What actions does the Commission plan to take to restore equal competition conditions , the so-called level playing field ?
Moreover , I would like to ask for concrete facts to be produced showing how the Helpdesk department , established by the Commission to aid small and medium-sized businesses , is helping the textile industry to initiate investigations into the application of market protection measures in obvious cases of unfair competition ?
For your information , linen textile manufacturers have now been trying for two years to initiate an anti-dumping case against linen fabrics of Chinese origin , but so far have been unable to do so because the Commission does not provide any assistance .
What does the Commission suggest textile manufacturers do ?
( NL ) Commissioner , you said a moment ago that , in overall terms , the situation with textile imports from China in 2008 turned out better than expected .
I feel duty bound to vigorously contradict your statement , as the figures paint a completely different picture .
In fact , last year textile imports from China went through the roof .
There is no doubt that if we look at T-shirts , trousers , dresses and pullovers , in other words the vulnerable product categories , there has been a near doubling of imports in the space of just one year , and that is clearly a cause for great concern .
It means that the surveillance system we have had in place all this time is not working .
As we all know , the double-checking system is no longer in operation .
This situation , Lady Ashton , is untenable because there are no real sanctions we can apply ; we have no clout .
As the previous speaker said , the figures also show that there is something fundamentally wrong with the prices of these massive imports of Chinese textiles .
Prices have dropped by nearly a third and this drop cannot be attributed to exchange rate differences alone .
Moreover , Commissioner , the production costs in China have risen sharply again over the past year , which suggests that these prices are practically dumping prices .
We are counting on you not to let this simply pass unchallenged .
As stated by Mrs Wortmann-Kool earlier , 350 000 jobs have been lost over the past two years .
To a large extent , this is the result of unfair competition and we need to formulate a response to this situation .
That is not the only matter of concern , Commissioner .
As you know , credit insurance is much harder to obtain in the current climate , and this is having a direct , pernicious effect on exports .
The French Government has already developed a system of additional credit insurance for the clothing and textile sector .
It would be worth considering whether we could recommend this system and streamline it further at European level .
I am not suggesting harmonisation , but that we attempt to put initiatives in place at European level to promote the French system to some degree .
Can you give us a commitment that , using the powers at your disposal , you will implement initiatives in this respect ?
These initiatives do not have to cost anything .
It is simply a matter of political will and coordination .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , as we have recently witnessed , the textile sector is suffering a major crisis that has led to many closures , relocations and redundancies , particularly in regions that specialise in this industry .
In view of the current economic crisis , the European Commission should act as quickly as possible in conjunction with the Member States to alleviate the socioeconomic effects of this restructuring .
These changes have been particularly dramatic for the regions and families affected .
I think that workers in the textile and clothing sector should be given assistance and that social measures should be drawn up in the form of plans to help companies that are undergoing restructuring and currently find themselves in very difficult circumstances .
It would be desirable to direct a substantial part of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to restructuring and retraining in the textile sector , in particular for the small and medium-sized enterprises that make up the majority of the sector in the European Union .
The SMEs have suffered significantly from the effects of the liberalisation of the market .
Furthermore , the import control system should be re-established , in particular with reference to Chinese imports , due to their volume .
This is not at all a matter of promoting trade barriers .
It is more a matter of compensating for the negative effects of this significant change .
We should not forget that the European Union is the second-largest exporter in the world of textile products and clothing , which makes it necessary to guarantee optimum access to the markets of third countries .
This is essential to the future of the textile and clothing industry in the European Union and in particular for SMEs .
All of this , of course , must be carried out while guaranteeing fair competition on the basis of the promotion of social and environmental standards in these countries .
In this regard , the provision of accurate information for consumers , for example the regulation imposing ' made in ' labelling , which we know has not been implemented , would be of great use given that it would mean that imported products would be subject to the same consumer safety and protection requirements as those manufactured within the European Union .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am going to try to put the questions very succinctly .
My first point is the question of the European Union 's special monitoring mechanism for textiles , which ended , as mentioned , on 31 December 2008 .
What is lacking , Commissioner , is the punctual and routine publication of statistical data on imports , exports and prices , as happens in the United States .
Without these data , the European Union is prevented from reacting to any unfair practices and the Commission itself is incapable of defining its strategy .
I would ask you to attend to this , as other Members have already done .
Secondly , producing within the European Union increasingly entails complying with safety regulations , social regulations and environmental standards .
REACH , for example , is a recent initiative that creates even more requirements for us .
It is important that the Commission has a clear strategy that can be seen and monitored for imported products to be subject to the same requirements .
In what way , in the current free trade agreements , are these aspects being duly safeguarded ?
As for ' made in ' labelling , can it really help to solve this problem ?
Thirdly , the European Union has launched an economic recovery plan to combat the current crisis .
What role will commercial policy play in this context ?
What is the Commission preparing to do at this time , when a series of other countries , such as China , are starting to launch an increasing number of non-tariff barriers so that our European imports cannot access Chinese markets ?
What proposal does it have with regard to updating or adapting the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , as well as the aid available within the framework of the Structural Funds to improve the immediate situation of the European textile industry ?
Lastly , could it be that the crisis we are going through will finally make the Commission aware of the devastating impact of an over-valued euro on the European economy ?
How can the Commissioner raise awareness - I am about to finish - among her fellow Commissioners and the entities which deal with European monetary policy in terms of rebalancing ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what would you do , Commissioner , to speed up the opening of the Chinese and Indian markets ?
The main thing , of course , is that we should be able to export our products to those countries .
Very many European companies have invested in China , building or acquiring factories there .
That is why a more open market is really the top priority .
What scope is there for you - in cooperation with Commissioner Kovács , where appropriate - to provide the textile industry with tax incentives , such as shorter depreciation periods , with a view to enhancing companies ' creditworthiness ?
That would naturally help to safeguard jobs as well .
When the Basel II Accord is implemented in the future , there will therefore be a need to have structures in place that serve to make firms more creditworthy .
( PL ) Commissioner , I do of course want to express strong support for the views of our fellow Members who say that our small enterprises should be protected from the marketing of low-quality goods and counterfeit and pirated goods .
I remember that the representatives of the Association of Producers of Tuscany asked us during their visit for recognition of the fact that they do not need protection , but clear confirmation that the ' Made in Italy ' mark will be visible only on their Italian products .
Now I want to add something and inform the Commissioner that in fact she has the rather difficult task of resolving a certain dilemma .
On one hand consumers of course want to buy cheaper products , in other words at a low price , irrespective of whether the goods come from China or from some other country , and on the other hand they must know that the cost of this may be that their own fellow citizens lose their jobs .
Perhaps a campaign informing people of this will help you , as someone who supports finding a resolution to this dilemma , by asking questions and making proposals which will meet with the support of society .
For this is about the consumer , and not only about the Commission .

( CS ) Thank you , Madam President , I have just one brief remark on the whole complex subject of the textile industry and the impact of globalisation on it .
I believe that it is probably wrong just to apply protective measures .
The most important aspect is to raise the level of technology and the quality of production in Europe and to move the European textile industry forward by switching its structure into the field of speciality products and towards a level of quality which cannot be achieved by the Asian competition .
This is a feasible option and some companies in Europe are already going down this route and creating new market segments , where they feel comfortable on the whole .
I believe that such efforts should be Europe-wide in nature and require a well-considered concept .
- Commissioner , may I say first of all that I am pleased to see you here again in this Chamber .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me respond to a few of the points that have been made .
A number of honourable Members - Mr Papastamkos , Mr Susta , Ms Ferreira , Mr Grau i Segú and Mr Zaleski - talked about the ' made in ' proposition .


I think the proposal the Commission has put forward is sound and should be adopted and that it is in the interests of business .
However , as honourable Members know , I do not yet have a majority in the Council , and any support that honourable Members can give in getting that majority would be most welcome .

A number of Members - Mr Susta , Ms Saïfi , Mr Assis in particular - and Ms Budreikaittalked about the Trade Defence Instruments and the importance of making sure that we operate the mechanisms we have effectively .
I committed in my hearing to ensure that I would do that , and I am continuing to do so .
Concerning intellectual property , it is important that we have an action plan , and I intend to deal with that .
I also want to address the particular point about the helpdesk and small businesses .
It is specifically designed to help small businesses address issues of defence .
I am very grateful .
If honourable Members would like more information or are concerned about that , they are very welcome to contact me .
' Protect not protectionism ' is a very big theme of the discussions .
I would just like to say - perhaps particularly to Ms Plumb and Mr Ransdorf - that these are important differences .
It is very important to fight protectionism ; it is important to make sure we are supporting our industries to be able to compete and trade in the future .
A number of interesting ideas were raised , such as impact assessments for industry , and I will feed those to my colleague Günter Verheugen .
He well understands the importance of collecting data and statistics , but I will make sure that he hears of the concerns you have raised .
We must look at all the initiatives on the table and how we deal with access to markets , as has been said .
I would say to Mr Guerreiro that I accept absolutely the strategic importance of textiles and clothing and its value to the discussion we have had about accelerating markets .

My final comment is addressed to Mr Rübig : I cannot tell you in one second about how we need to accelerate the opening of markets in India and China , but I am more than happy to discuss that at your convenience .
- The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The import of cheap textiles from China to Europe is a problem which has grown recently as a result of the gradual liberalisation in world trade .
The Chinese textile industry , which has a cheap labour force of many millions at its disposal , has an obvious advantage over European producers , which specialise mainly in branded products .
In relation to the progressive displacement of domestic production by more competitively priced imports from China , we can see negative social effects , which especially concern those regions that have for centuries specialised in the manufacture of clothes .
As we are currently struggling with one of the most serious economic crises in history , the threat of impoverishment of large areas of the Community is even greater .
The uncontrolled influx of cheap clothing from Asia also means the problem of counterfeit branded products , which further weakens the position of European producers and exposes consumers to serious risks associated with the low quality of imported products .
There can be no doubt that , as a result of the expiry of the agreement on bilateral monitoring at the end of 2008 , immediate action is necessary to extend this system .
It is also advisable to establish a high-level group within the EU , whose function would be to monitor the influx of Chinese textiles and inspect their quality .
Bearing in mind that in the face of economic recession the protection of jobs should receive special attention from the governments of the Member States and the Commission , I appeal for the matter of the protection of the European textile market to be given priority status .
Consequences of the recent gas crisis - Second Strategic Energy Review - Challenge of energy efficiency through information and communication technologies ( debate )
- The next item is the joint debate on :
the Commission statement on the consequences of the recent gas crisis ;
the report by Mrs Laperrouze , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the Second Strategic Energy Review ;
the oral question to the Commission ( B6-0003 / 2009 ) by Mr Remek , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the challenge of energy efficiency through information and communication technologies .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to start by congratulating the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the rapporteur Mrs Laperrouze .
They worked very hard to prepare this report on security of supply as early as this February plenary in 2009 .
When she started work , no one could have expected that we would have full gas supply from Russia via Ukraine , and this definitely draws more attention to the issues of security of supply .
Concerning the gas crisis , what is the current state of play ?
All the volumes nominated are reaching their destinations , so this means that most of the consumers have full supply of gas .
There is still one stream missing in Poland ; we are working on it .
It is exceptional in that it was supplied by RosUkrEnergo , which is now out of the deal , but we are also working towards full restoration of gas supplies to all parts of the European Union that have been affected by the crisis .
As the supply agreement is for 10 years , we can expect this agreement to provide a good basis so that we do not see this type of situation in the future .
I would also emphasise , though , that all the EU monitors are still in place following the flows of gas and we expect that there will be no need for them in the future .
I have written to my colleagues in Russia and Ukraine asking how we should proceed with monitoring in the future , because in my opinion , if we trust the deal and if it is stable , then no monitoring is needed now ; however , the monitors are currently there .
I believe that we should not remain idle on this transit issue .
We should continue to work with both sides - with the supply side , Russia , and with Ukraine as a transit country - and we should really ensure that there is separation between the gas supply to Ukraine and transit flows going to the European Union , and that these transit flows are financially beneficial for Ukraine too , bringing profit to the country and giving it much-needed economic benefits .
We will continue to work on this issue , but basically we can say that the gas crisis is over .
What are the lessons to be learnt ?
I mentioned this the previous time , but the lessons are that the EU is more robust than we expected .
It is true that in this difficult situation EU countries worked with one voice through the Presidency and support from the Commission .
We have seen much evidence of solidarity when member countries helped other member countries .
We also have the strong realisation that the internal market worked where it could work .
I was also very pleased about the strong and coordinated response from the European gas industry , first of all demonstrating a common position vis-à-vis Gazprom , but secondly also in creating a common proposal that could be useful in case there is no permanent agreement between Russia and Ukraine .
What were the weaknesses we discovered ?
The first was the lack of infrastructure .
That was quite obvious , and that was also partly why the market could not work .
The gas price and the spot market have not increased particularly but this is just because in some parts of the European Union where the gas supply was needed most there was no additional possibility to deliver gas . '
There were some cases where solidarity could have been greater .
We have also seen other cases where there was not sufficient transparency , and we definitely need a stronger coordination mechanism to address the crisis .
The Strategic Energy Review that was proposed by the Commission back in November addressed five areas where Mrs Laperrouze and the ITRE Committee go into more detail and streamline these .
They are : energy efficiency ; use of local resources ( and I would like to mention that , for 2008 , 43 % of installed capacity comes from wind energy ; it is the biggest capacity installed , and wind is a local energy ) ; external relations , i.e. that we are working with our colleagues ; crisis mechanisms ; and infrastructure .
I believe that one important point where the Commission will make a lot of further effort is on the call in this report for the consolidation of activities in different areas , because we have really developed a lot of activities on the energy and climate change package implementation , on the technology , on external relations , on the internal market .
But it is very important to see how to consolidate these , and what additional steps if necessary we should take .
I shall end with one particular proposal that the Commission elaborated , very much related to this issue , but also to the general economic crisis that we face .
It is the part of the recovery package related to energy .
There are three issues on which we are proposing that the funding be used .
EUR 3.5 billion is for infrastructure - it is not to support each and every project but to increase the diversification of gas flow from south , west , and east , and to try to get a balanced and sustainable gas supply mix .
On electricity , looking at the weakest points , these are the isolation of Baltic countries and the Iberian Peninsula .
Then there are two issues that are sometimes seen as a luxury , but in my opinion they are extremely important issues : offshore wind - it is crucial that we have public support for the projects that are ongoing - and carbon capture and storage .
These are absolutely necessary in achieving our climate change objectives globally , but will also give a much-needed boost for European industry to develop the technology that could be used in the future .
So we are looking at combined security of supply , technology objectives and also European recovery objectives .
I believe this is the right proposal .
The volume of funds is not huge , but I believe they are going in the right direction and the public should be involved to strengthen security of supply in the European Union .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our debates on this Second Strategic Energy Review have of course been marked by this new gas-supply crisis between Russia and Ukraine .
This crisis has brought to light shortcomings , the fragility of the interconnections and the European Union 's difficulty in reacting and in speaking with one voice .
It has revealed , for the third time , the need for a common energy policy .
However , I must say - and our Commissioner has just pointed this out - that we are now seeing progress and more cooperation and solidarity among Member States , and thus hopes of a solution with which to manage these crises .
I should like to thank the Members who have done a great deal to enrich this report , which we drafted quickly , since we were informed of the communication in November .
I am not going to explain in detail everything that we set out in this resolution , but I shall perhaps instead point out what messages the Committee on Industry , Research and Industry wished to put across with it .
The context is as follows : the climate constraint is going to get tougher , the European Union 's security of supply is being threatened by ever more serious and frequent crises , and its competitiveness may be harmed .
This implies the need to think differently about energy consumption and use within the European Union , to think differently about our energy resources , and to allow ourselves to exploit this considerable source of jobs that exists in the energy sector , jobs that are so crucial in the context of the economic crisis that we are going through .
What are we proposing ?
There is the short term : promoting the 3x20 by 2020 vision of the energy and climate change package so as to turn it into European energy policy .
This is a joint action at several levels - global , European , national and local - which means that the main priorities that we have indicated are of course energy saving , energy efficiency and the development of renewable energies , since the European Union 's potential in this area is great .
In particular , the objective of 20 % energy efficiency will have to be made binding .
Secondly , the European Union 's security of supply will have to be improved through investment in the networks and , in particular , in the interconnections .
Solidarity among the Member States means that the networks must supply regions that are isolated and highly dependent on a single supplier .
This also means that the Directive on the security of the gas supply will have to be revised in order to make it a European crisis management tool .
Improving the security of supply also means strengthening and structuring the dialogue with transit countries and producer countries .
These energy interdependence relations need to be developed , particularly those with Russia and the Mediterranean area .
Thirdly , having an internal market is a crucial factor in terms of the security of supply .
How , though , can a Member State be supplied via another Member State if the interconnections are weak or non-existent ?
Fourthly , we need to identify the best practices at international level .
In this regard , let us strengthen our exchanges of information with Japan and the United States - California , in particular - but let us not delude ourselves : our relations with these energy-consuming countries are founded on both cooperation and competition , especially in terms of energy technologies .
Then there is the long term , which is very important .
The task is to predict the future of the European Union 's energy supply .
We should be able by , say , 2010-2020 , to write road maps on a scenario basis for the European Union 's supply in 2050 .
To do this , ambitious objectives must be set with regard to the fight against climate change .
Our committee is proposing a reduction of 60-80 % , but perhaps in future of at least 80 % , in CO2 emissions , a 35 % increase in energy efficiency and a 60 % share of renewable energies , to be achieved by 2050 .
Our Parliament is calling for this road map to envisage developing the share of the different energy sources so that investments can be planned in means of production , interconnections , and research and development .
In the energy mix for 2050 the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has confirmed the share of nuclear energy alongside the other energy sources , such as renewable energies , as well as the desire to develop means of energy storage and to use solar energy , which is an infinite resource .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , you already have the text of the question put to the Commission on the solution of energy efficiency problems through the use of information and communication technologies ( ICT ) , so please allow me to add a couple of remarks .
I should like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs and other members for their efforts , which have contributed a whole range of ideas to the final version of the resolution embodying the question put to the Commission .
A compromise solution was eventually found for almost 90 proposed amendments and the document was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
We are just at the very beginning in our efforts to improve energy efficiency using ICT .
Perhaps it seemed to us in the autumn of last year that we were in fact preparing a review and a strategy for the future .
The events of recent weeks have confronted us with a new set of realities .
Both the financial crisis and the interruption in the supply of gas to some EU Member States , as already mentioned , have established the need to take all available steps in order to meet the energy challenges as quickly as possible .
The same applies to the need for a pronounced improvement in energy efficiency ( the efficient use of energy ) with the broadest possible application of ICT .
It is more than obvious that , without the sensible and , I should like to emphasise , considered and most wide-ranging application of these technologies , we shall succeed neither in reducing energy consumption nor in limiting the adverse effects of climate change .
With the help of specialised centres , research institutes , representatives of important industrial sectors and state authorities in Member States of the Union , we have attempted to chart the situation regarding the use of ICT for enhanced energy assessment .
Any attempt to reduce energy demand should not be allowed to run counter to the ambitions of the EU to maintain competitiveness and sustainable economic development .
We can definitely not go down the extreme path of ' making savings , whatever the cost ' .
It is true that reducing energy demand is one of the most effective means of limiting emissions of greenhouse gases .
However , we are also involved in concepts such as intelligent grids , intelligent buildings and more efficient measurement of energy consumption .
We are talking about the application of ICT in transportation and construction , limiting the movement of goods , more efficient lighting systems and solutions such as nanotechnology etc .
In short , it is hard to find a sector in which energy efficiency cannot be improved with the aid of ICT developments .
In preparing the document , we simply confirmed that all our attempts to deal with energy demands in the EU are closely interlinked and interdependent .
As a result , the support we , as the EP , have given to the Galileo Project will be reflected in efficient transportation , movement of goods and people and so on .
I am pleased to mention here that in the EU we already have more than one example of the successful application of ICT in the more efficient use of energy .
It is good that there is talk of the need to publicise these examples as a positive motivator for the public at large .
We basically know what must be done .
It is just a matter of translating words into action .
Otherwise citizens in the Member States will lose confidence .
For many , unfortunately , we are more a bureaucratic debating club than an institution which is able to help them overcome obstacles and improve their lives .
Without exception these words also apply to the overall energy policy , as dealt with in her report by our fellow Member Mrs Laperrouze .
I was the shadow rapporteur for the document on the second strategic review of this policy and I should like to thank Mrs Laperrouze for her excellent work in eventually achieving a compromise solution for her report .
The result is more realistic and persuasive than the original text .
As was to be expected , the approaching EP elections have seen the onset of a certain degree of populism directed towards the voters .
Great ambitions have appeared and people like to hear them .
However , their fulfilment lies often beyond the borders of reality .
Yes , we should all like to meet energy demands exclusively by means of renewable sources .
That would be ideal .
However , I personally would urge realism .
The same applies to the attempt to force into the document a staggering 80 % reduction in emissions by 2050 rather than a more realistic 50-80 % .
Opponents of nuclear energy are again attempting to exclude this emission-free source , which is vitally important for Europe , from the overall energy mix .
It must be perfectly clear to anyone who does not simply wish to follow the fashionable line and exploit the fear of nuclear energy that we simply cannot manage without it .
We shall have to invest in a new generation of nuclear power plants , safe storage and reuse of fuel and nuclear fusion .
I consider it sensible that the report in essence supports the inclusion of nuclear power in the mix .
Finally , it is important , in my view , to attempt a better integration of energy grids , for example with the Baltic States .
These states were left in the lurch for years by simply making promises .
I also appreciate that we have here again an idea of better coordination in the use of transmission networks , using perhaps , if we so wish , some kind of central control system .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me first thank Mr Remek and the ITRE Committee for having worked so much on a topic which is of utmost importance , because it is true that through ICT we can make a major contribution towards combating climate issues and achieving a 20 % reduction in both consumption and carbon emissions .
It is a huge challenge , we know , but it is not insurmountable and can only be achieved if we know how to use ICT .
That is why the Commission is not talking but acting in the following way .
Firstly , we have been working on a communication on a comprehensive strategy for ICT to address our energy and climate problems .
This strategy will be accompanied by a recommendation in which we set the tasks , the targets and the timeline for actions in the ICT sector , actions by stakeholders and by Member States .
These actions aim to accelerate the adoption of ICT as an enabler so that we can master the energy demands of our homes , of our businesses , and of our society at large .
Now , at what level ?
Firstly , of course , at the level of ICT products themselves .
Their carbon footprint is of absolute importance and I know that the industry is working on this .
We hope this work will be achieved by investing in research .
The second level is ICT as an enabler across the board and in all sectors of economic activity .
We need incentives here in order to change behaviour - as the rapporteur said , ' penser autrement ' - but this will only happen in governments , in administrations , in businesses , and for citizens , if they understand what potential there is for making savings .
That means we have to measure what we have now and what we do better .
If we do not measure , we will not have results , and that is why we need a baseline against which improvements can be measured .
The challenge of measurement and of quantification will be at the heart of our proposal .
Also at the heart of this proposal is how we proceed from research results to innovation and practical achievements .
Of course , we started with research .
The Commission 's R & TD funding programmes aim to exploit this potential in the systems and infrastructures for services too .
The most significant results are expected in areas such as electricity distribution , buildings , transport logistics and lighting .
The rapporteur is right : you need to have cross-sectoral participation in those projects .
That is also why we established cross-sectoral research projects and worked very closely together with the industry to reduce the time between research and development and innovation .
That is also the reason why , in our innovation programmes , we supported the demonstration and validation of new solutions and technologies in real world settings in order to maximise their set-up .
Reducing the footprint of ICT products also forms part of this research .
As regards funding , we have so far invested more than EUR 4 000 million in this initiative .
In the recovery plan proposed by the Commission , public / private partnerships for R & D are high on the agenda , with one of the three initiatives we propose being energy efficient buildings , a domain where ICT will of course play a predominant role .
One of the pilot projects being put into action now is the intelligent transport system .
We have already invested a lot in in-car intelligent systems and we are now moving to the next step , which is the relationship between the car and the road and traffic signs .
I agree with the rapporteur here that it will be very important to have our own satellite programme to become more efficient in that respect .
Madam President , I wish to congratulate Mrs Laperrouze and to thank her for the cooperation which we enjoyed over this entire period .
On behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I shall give you the headlines of some of the basic proposals which we put to Mrs Laperrouze .
Firstly , there should be a common European foreign policy on energy , with the emphasis on security of energy sources and energy routes .
At a time when battles are centred on energy sources , we all understand the importance of this proposal .
Secondly , we must deepen our relations with other countries , primarily with countries which produce energy , but also with countries via which energy routes run , in other words transit countries .
Thirdly , we need a new generation of binding energy interdependence clauses .
These clauses are extremely important , especially in the negotiations which we conduct with other countries and in particular , for example , as this is a topical issue , in the negotiations which we are conducting with Russia on a new agreement to replace the 1997 agreement .
We referred to the fight over energy sources , an important issue which led us to differentiate between energy sources and the routes via which energy reaches us .
There are many important projects at the moment .
I should like to mention the South Stream pipeline , the TGI ( Turkey-Greece-Italy ) pipeline , the Nabucco pipeline and I must , of course , mention the Caspian region , as we debate it on many occasions .
I have here a map of the Caspian Sea and I believe that , when we look at the Caspian Sea , we must look at all sides , including the Azerbaijani side and the Turkmenistan side ; we shall be debating this issue in the European Parliament tomorrow or the day after tomorrow , but I would remind you of the importance of Turkmenistan and , lastly of course , Iran .
Energy is one of life 's basic necessities .
However , mankind ceased some time ago to be satisfied with merely basic living conditions ; we have also been striving to attain the kind of social development which makes our lives easier .
This is why energy follows the economic trends of any given society .
However , we have only recently started looking at the prosperity of the individual from a more holistic perspective and we no longer measure it solely in terms of his or her purchasing power .
Hence , as far as energy is concerned , we need to strike the right balance between the safety and reliability of supplies , environmental protection and action on climate change , and competitiveness .
Our political group promotes all three of these objectives as the cornerstone of the common European energy policy and , in that respect , we welcome the Laperrouze report .
Climate change and the problems we experienced in January with the transmission of Russian gas to Europe testify to the importance of diversity when it comes to the common energy policy . The European Union must introduce projects that will strengthen our energy infrastructure as soon as possible , in order to facilitate the importation of supplies along different routes .
In this regard , we need to ensure that we are able to import gas both from different transit countries and from different energy exporting countries .
The implementation of the Nabucco project is exceptionally important in this regard .
In addition , we need to enrich our energy mix .
Essentially , it needs to include a higher proportion of energy sources that do not result in greenhouse gas emissions , hence both renewable energy sources and nuclear energy .
We cannot totally turn our backs on coal , either , but we have to ensure that we use the best possible technologies , such as those enabling carbon capture and storage .
I would like to stress that efficient energy use is our priority task .
However , numerous studies have shown that we need to invest our financial , intellectual and creative powers in generation and transmission capacities .
Even with all the measures I have mentioned , we will not be able to reduce import dependency to zero for some time yet .
In order to minimise the problems involved in energy importation , we need to formulate an effective foreign energy policy .
For this reason , I would like the Lisbon Treaty to be adopted , so that any institutional obstacles preventing the formulation of foreign policies can be removed .
I allude here to Ireland , and we expect the Irish people to solve this problem .
However , our expectations of a common foreign energy policy will be more realistic if we take concrete action in the fields that we have already defined as part of the common energy policy .
I am of the opinion that we should adopt the third gas and electricity liberalisation package as soon as this parliamentary term , together with uniform market rules for the entire Union .
In conclusion , let me present my opinion on the amendments tabled .
I think that this Laperrouze report is of sufficient quality as to eliminate the need for any substantial amendments .
The long-term objectives , which we will fulfil through the 20-20-20 package and which have been supported by both the European Council and the European Parliament , should remain unchanged .
Our political group will not support any amendments which seek to reduce the diversification of energy sources .
However , we will support those amendments which seek to increase the number of supply routes and improve energy safety in the Union .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report and thank her for her cooperation .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , may I express my thanks to the rapporteur , Anne Laperrouze , for the truly cooperative manner in which our deliberations were conducted ?
Let me also extend my thanks to the staff of the secretariats for their invaluable contribution .
Against the backdrop of the latest gas crisis , the Second Strategic Energy Review is extremely well-timed .
Security of supply and solidarity among the Member States must be at the heart of the European energy policy .
I firmly believe that it would make a distinct improvement if the call contained in this report for greater diversification of the gas corridors were answered .
Moreover , before the end of this year the Commission must also present a proposal for the revision of the Gas Directive of 2004 in order to incorporate a requirement for binding and effective national and EU emergency plans .
However , as members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , we attach fundamental importance to the duty of EU Member States to keep a special eye , even in normal times , on the most vulnerable consumers in society , namely those who are victims of fuel poverty .
There is still a lack of national strategies for tackling this problem .
That is why my group has tabled an additional amendment calling on Member States to make real efforts to address this problem .
The report emphasises the particular importance of energy saving and energy efficiency .
The most efficient and cost-effective ways to improve security of supply are quite clearly to increase energy efficiency and to make energy savings .
At the same time we must have ambitious and realistic aims for Europe 's future energy supply .
I am pleased to see that we are moving in this direction , for example by calling for the target of a 60 % share of renewables in our energy mix by 2050 .
The report also emphasises the special significance attaching to local initiatives in the quest for a successful climate and energy policy .
The Covenant of Mayors has a key role to play in this respect , but it is also important to support other , similar approaches , like the idea of a Covenant of Islands .
The bottom line , however , is that our objectives will be difficult to achieve without investments in the infrastructure of energy networks and further liberalisation of the internal market .
We need a functioning single energy market with fair competition and with guaranteed free network access and equal distribution rights for all producers .
The coming weeks will be crucial in this respect .
What we need are the creation and development of a smart electricity network comprising ICT-based combined power stations and decentralised energy production .
That is the only way in which energy resources can be efficiently channelled into the areas where they are really needed .
We need a European ' supergrid ' that taps into and links the enormous potentials in the North Sea , the Baltic and the Mediterranean region .
Where the report is untenable , however , is in its call to the Commission to draw up a specific road map for nuclear investments .
For this reason my group has tabled an amendment that clearly underlines our common interest in nuclear safety while emphasising that whether Member States invest in nuclear energy must remain their own sovereign decision .
My own personal opinion is that we do not need nuclear energy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , last year 's energy review was a timely update , and I congratulate Anne Laperrouze for her rigorous report on it .
The issues raised are highly complex , but we can boil them down to this : Europe needs an energy policy that gives us sustainable , affordable and secure resources of energy .
Sustainable by breaking our umbilical dependence on the fossil fuels that are choking our planet ; affordable by guaranteeing a stable and realistic cost to consumers ; and secure by freeing European citizens from dependence on unreliable or monopolistic suppliers .
This Friday , a group of Commissioners will meet Prime Minister Putin and his team of ministers .
Energy is on the agenda , and our side should make clear that we cannot tolerate a dispute between Russia and Georgia evolving into a European gas crisis in the depths of winter .
Assurances should be sought , but notice should also be served .
This has happened before , and it must not happen again .
The time has come fundamentally to reassess Europe 's energy supplies .
This view is shared by members of all groups in this House , who should unite in leading the charge to make it happen .
That is why this week a small group of us , including Mr Hammerstein , who will speak later , will launch a cross-party pamphlet , Making the Green Energy Switch at a Time of Crisis .
I am grateful to all Members who contributed their ideas , and I am startled by the degree of consensus that exists .
There is an appetite in this Chamber to work fast , to work together , in search of a lasting solution to Europe 's energy crisis , and we must harness that .
Of all the potential plans to open up a new energy era , one stands out : it is called the supergrid , or DESERTEC .
The French Presidency cited it as a possible operation project for our new European Union for the Mediterranean .
A number of Members , including Ms Harms , recently visited southern Spain to see the technology in action : solar thermal power from North Africa and sun-rich land in southern Europe harvesting energy from the sun , generating the equivalent of one and a half million barrels of oil per square kilometre per year .
Transported through energy-efficient , high-voltage direct current cables , that power could be fed into a European supergrid , taking renewable energy from across the EU - tidal power from coastal regions , wind and wave power from windswept north-western Europe , and biomass and geothermal power from wherever they flourish .
Upfront , there are costs .
The German Aerospace Centre estimates it would cost EUR 45 billion to build , but it also says that it would save consumers many times that amount in reduced energy bills over the next 35 years , and the investment would create thousands of jobs .
This is a bold project for an energy future that is sustainable , affordable and secure .
That is the energy future that Europe must champion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to Mrs Laperrouze for her work , with which I agree to a large extent .
I am , however , confused with regard to certain aspects , perhaps due to excessive reliance on the Commission 's assessments .
Firstly , I feel that the predicted trend in gas demand is restrictive .
If that is the case , I fear it will have a negative impact on sources of financing for projects .
With regard to infrastructure , the relevant projects are at different stages of development .
Rather than redefining their order of priority in an abstract way , while seriously overlooking the Mediterranean area , it would be advisable , instead , to reassess them in terms of development times , financial structure , available supplies and the link between public support and private commitment .
Mrs Laperrouze next recommended diversifying the sources and routes of supply .
One example is the Southern Corridor .
With regard to these issues , I feel a programmed approach is required , divided into phases .
Indeed , in the case of the Caspian , only gas from Azerbaijan will be available in the first phase .
Access to other countries will occur in the second phase , therefore making the market more complicated in political , regulatory and infrastructure terms .
The Commission 's proposal for a Caspian Development Cooperation can overcome these problems , if it will be tasked with , among other things , facilitating the development of missing infrastructure .
The penultimate aspect is that solidarity mechanisms are undoubtedly fundamental for the Union 's energy policies , as well as in relation to the Treaty of Lisbon .
It would be advisable , however , for the feasibility of these measures to avoid , in addition to potential distortions , excessively cumbersome procedures .
Finally , I would like to turn to external relations .
Apart from the role of the Energy Charter , enlarging the Energy Committee , particularly to include transit countries as well as the field of renewable energy , is an important objective
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in spite of the good atmosphere in which we worked on the Second Strategic Energy Review , I regret to say that we did not manage to obtain the corrections to the Commission 's proposal that I believed necessary .
To my mind , the title ' Strategic Energy Review ' has strong connotations of building for the future .
If we take a look at this review , however , we have to conclude that it is all very much rooted in the past .
At the heart of this strategic energy plan - and I am afraid the Laperrouze report does not put this right either - is the old energy mix of coal and nuclear power , and indeed there is an extremely sharp focus on the nuclear pillar once again .
I do wonder , Commissioner Piebalgs , what has happened to the proposals you presented to us at the start of this legislative term , when you told us that the great risks associated with nuclear energy had to be brought under control , that the problem of nuclear waste , the funding of decommissioning and all these issues had to be resolved before the Commission made any positive moves towards the development of nuclear energy .
Not one of these issues has been resolved , and yet the Commission is now launching this pro-nuclear offensive .
The fact that one of the greatest debacles in the history of the Western European nuclear industry is taking place right now in Finland , that the amount in dispute between the Finnish electricity company and Areva has now reached EUR 2.4 billion , because so many extra costs have arisen at the Olkiluoto site , does not seem to worry you in the least .
What , I wonder , is the sense of this new investment drive in a sector which , despite receiving decades of public investment - far exceeding the volume staked in all the other sectors - is once again producing this kind of mess .
I would very much like to know whether you actually mean all of this seriously or whether other hands are pulling the strings .
In my view , this mix of coal and nuclear power is precisely the strategy that has driven the energy policy of the European Union up a blind alley .
I have said enough about nuclear power , but the wasteful use of fossil fuels - something else that the review does not really address at all - has also contributed to the present climate disaster , and the essential adjustments to this outdated strategy of yesteryear are not being made in this review .
In the deliberations on Mrs Laperrouze 's report , my group established clear priorities .
It goes without saying that nuclear power was not one of them , but we tried to bring about real changes in other areas too .
We wanted the target of a 20 % reduction in the consumption of primary energy to be made binding at long last .
That did not happen .
We expect a realistic proposal for the development of the ' supergrid ' , in other words a network that must be able to incorporate really large capacities for the generation of energy from renewable sources by the North Sea , in other coastal areas or in southern desert regions .
There was no real sign of any of these things at all in either the report or the Commission 's proposal .
We also believe that it was a big mistake to leave the whole realm of transport out of this strategic planning process on energy , because we - like you - want to get away from dependence on oil .
You have decided that transport matters should be discussed separately , but in our opinion this issue should be one of the key focal points of strategic energy planning .
Diversifying gas supplies is all very well , and it is certainly something we should do , but at the same time every effort should be made to ensure once and for all that gas is used efficiently , otherwise diversification will get us nowhere at the end of the day .
I was appalled last week to learn that the European Commission 's Recovery Plan is revisiting all of these strategic distortions and adopting the same backward-looking approach as this Strategic Energy Review .
I must announce on behalf of my group that we shall be supporting neither the Laperrouze report nor the Strategic Energy Review and that we shall also endeavour in the context of the Recovery Plan to argue the case for sustainability and common sense .
Mr President , Commissioners , solidarity is a lovely word .
It generally belongs to the vocabulary of the left .
Solidarity should not just be called for in the name of anti-Gazprom and anti-Russia policy , but also to prevent general energy poverty .
Energy is also needed in the form of electricity and heat for poor people .
The major problem with the European energy strategy is that it was not built from scratch , but is rooted in each country 's own geography , history and energy economics .
If there is a common strategy and its structures are harmonised , it will mean that there will be winners and losers .
There are countries which are being forced to abandon their tried and tested structures in the name of solidarity .
That cannot be solidarity .
Harmonisation of the electricity networks also means harmonising the price of electricity .
In practice it will not be done with reference to the lowest prices , but some average prices .
In that case there will be losers : those countries with cheap electricity .
In the same way , the money used in the EU budget to finance gas pipelines will have to be found by countries that do not use them .
Mrs Laperrouze is right when she says that network investments are for the Member States or the companies in them to make , not the EU .
The EU cannot be an oil , gas or electricity network operator , and large sums in EU budget funds should not be used to support investments in networks .
Furthermore , our group would like to remind everyone , as Mrs Harms has , of the problems that are known to be associated with the use of nuclear power .
While , on the one hand , carbon dioxide emissions are cut , on the other , the volume of plutonium increases .
The Laperrouze report has addressed the important issues relating to energy supplies that are currently facing the European Union .
The recent gas conflict between Russia and Ukraine by no means left the European Union unscathed .
The report details a number of lines of policy for the European energy market that could limit the vulnerability of the European Union in the event of another conflict .
I am in favour of pursuing greater diversity in the energy sources and partner countries from which the EU imports energy , in other words diversifying the energy supply .
The gas conflict between Russia and Ukraine has underlined the urgency of this issue once again and I sincerely hope that the Nabucco project - to give one example - will come to fruition in the near future .
In specific terms , this aspiration means that the European Union and the Member States need to focus to a greater extent on regional integration .
At present , the networks of a number of Member States are still too isolated and , consequently , they are too dependent on imports from third countries .
The creation of new connections between the energy networks of the Member States will also allow the internal market to operate more effectively .
To further improve the operation of the internal market , there also needs to be complete separation of ownership of the production companies and the network companies .
This is the best way to counteract asymmetric market opening .
Meanwhile , several Member States have been looking at restarting nuclear power stations closed under agreements with the European Union .
This would not appear to be the best way forward .
Rather , investing in a greater number of cross-border connections would more effectively reduce dependence on one or more third countries in the long term .
Other important lines of policy in the report with which I am in full agreement are increasing energy efficiency and increasing the share of sustainable energy .
However , the Member States have differing opinions on the question of whether nuclear energy has a role to play in reducing CO2 emissions .
This is pre-eminently a matter for the Member States to decide , rather than the EU .
More clarity on this in the report would have been welcome .
It is to be hoped that this will be rectified through the amendment process .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , so far I have noticed how very putatively and abstractly what is best for Europe is decided in this Chamber , but it was the Bulgarian voters who sent me here and therefore I am more interested in what is best for my motherland Bulgaria .
For us , the patriots of ' Ataka ' , energy independence for Bulgaria is a number one priority .
During the ' talks ' , which we call ' EU dictates ' , we were required to close down reactors 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 at the Kozloduy nuclear power station .
I want to remind you - and if you do not know , then you can keep this in mind - that these units had fully passed all checks and were declared to be totally safe .
At the beginning of 2007 my colleague Dimitar Stoyanov posed a question to the European Commission asking whether there was such a requirement for all these units to be closed down in order for Bulgaria to be accepted into the EU .
As it turned out , such a requirement from the European Commission did not exist .
However , Mr Günter Verheugen lied to the Bulgarian Parliament and said that there was such a requirement .
A few days ago Bulgaria was facing an extremely serious energy crisis .
Under Article 36 of our Accession Treaty we have the right to start reactivating this nuclear power station .
That is our right , and because of that my colleagues in the Bulgarian Parliament introduced a bill for the reactivation of units 1 to 4 of the Kozloduy nuclear power station , which are currently closed .
With my colleagues in the European Parliament , Dimitar Stoyanov and Slavi Binev , I have submitted written declaration 0005 / 2009 asking for these reactors to be reactivated , with the aim of gaining Bulgaria 's energy independence .
In conclusion , I want to say to you that Europe will be strong when every separate Member State is strong and has its own energy independence .
This is the only way , if we want to work for our electors and for our citizens .
Mr President , when we are discussing the Strategic Energy Review , I think it is important to stress some of the risks we are running - not only the risk of an insecure energy supply , with all the problems that brings , but also the fact that we are exposed to political pressure from regimes which use energy supplies as a lever to influence other governments .
As a result , there is also a risk of fragmentation of the European Union , with Member States divided according to their different interests , thereby undermining the common foreign and security policy .
I think it is a good thing to see that the policies we need to tackle climate change are very much the same as the policies we need in order to strengthen our energy security .
Decreasing the use of fossil fuels means less dependence on unreliable suppliers .
Increased supply from other energy sources means a decreasing demand for fossil fuels , lower prices for European citizens and - not least - a reduced cash flow to the oil regimes of the world .
This has huge security implications which we need to consider when we discuss the European Union 's future energy strategy .
I think some of the pieces will easily fall into place when we have this perspective .
We need more of an internal market in the European Union because , in reality , that is the only guarantee for solidarity between the Member States .
This means that we need to do more about cross-border connections and have a better grid , binding Member States together and thereby binding the market together .
We need to develop more biofuels .
I do not agree with those who say that there is a risk ; it is possible for us - in Europe as well as in other parts of the world - to increase the area we are using .
Even small contributions from biofuels result in less dependence on fossil fuels and a change in prices .
I must also emphasise the issue of nuclear power .
Sometimes I feel it is the elephant in the room , because it is one of the greatest potential contributors to the European Union 's ability to reduce carbon dioxide emissions today and in the future .
I would like to conclude on that note .
If we try to bring all these elements together , we will have the opportunity not only for a stronger energy policy , but also for a stronger security policy .
( RO ) Energy policy is and will continue to be a priority for the EU .
The gas crisis this winter , when extremely low temperatures were recorded , has highlighted again the dependency of the European Union and its Member States on its traditional gas suppliers .
United in diversity is the motto of the European Union .
I hope that this gas crisis will bring us together to devise a common energy policy .
The development of the Nabucco project and construction of an LPG terminal in Constanţa , a major Black Sea port , along with the interconnection of national electrical energy infrastructures are all measures which can help increase the security of the energy supply and enhance the EU 's ability to offer solidarity to Member States affected by an energy crisis .
I call on the Commission and Member States to invest in modernising the European energy network , boosting energy efficiency and generating power from renewable sources .
I also urge the Commission and Member States to provide financing for the measures aimed at cutting the pollution produced by coal-powered installations .
The current crisis situation is making Member States focus greater attention on setting their priorities and strategic guidelines for development .
With regard to energy efficiency , the EU can achieve rapid results at an affordable cost in the battle against climate change .
Boosting existing buildings ' energy performance and promoting passive buildings , as well as using information and communication technologies to reduce energy consumption and increasing energy efficiency through the large-scale implementation of intelligent meters and automated systems are strategic guidelines for development in which Europe must invest .
I also urge the Commission and Member States to provide financing for the measures aimed at cutting the pollution produced by coal-powered installations .
The current economic crisis is making Member States focus greater attention on setting their priorities and strategic guidelines for development .
By 2020 , the EU must increase its energy efficiency by 35 % and reduce its consumption of primary energy by 20 % .
I call on the Commission and Member States to promote and finance research projects aimed at improving energy efficiency .
Commissioner , I urge the European Commission , the European Investment Bank and Member States to set up a European fund for energy efficiency and renewable energies to ensure that the necessary public and private capital is raised to implement the energy efficiency projects currently being worked on across the European Union .
Last but not least , I want to mention the transport sector , which is the main sector that uses oil .
I think that we now need to adopt at European level some highly ambitious medium- and even long-term objectives by 2020 concerning the energy efficiency of vehicles .
I also encourage Member States to devise , in an intelligent manner , transport policies for goods and for the movement of persons , especially in urban areas .
Last but not least , intelligent transport is one of the strategic guidelines for developing transport .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that the European energy market has problems .
We currently import almost 50 % and in 10 years ' time , if we do nothing , it will be 70 % .
The energy we produce is often generated in a way that damages our environment and creates the greenhouse effect , which will damage our health , economy and stability , not only in our part of the world , but also in many other parts of the world .
The energy that we have in Europe has to be distributed via a distribution network that is out of date and has not been renovated or well-maintained .
We also have close neighbours and conflicts concerning energy issues that are extremely worrying .
We have talked about our relations with Russia in this House on several occasions over the last year and it is totally unacceptable to make the energy crisis into a New Year 's tradition and put ordinary people in a situation where old people freeze to death , hospitals have to be closed and industries close down .
This is totally unacceptable .
Something else that is totally unacceptable is what Russia and Gazprom are trying to do with Nord Stream , namely to ride roughshod over Swedish environmental legislation and European legislation relating to the safety of the Baltic Sea , despite the fact that this inland sea already has incredibly large areas of dead bottoms .
This is totally unacceptable .
We are going to need all the energy sources , all the new technologies , all the innovations , all the research and all the computer power we have to cope with all of these different problems .
The regulations tabled by the Commission , including the financing package , are very good , but our citizens are still waiting for the governments to dare to take a decision on energy solidarity and on breaking up the large state monopolies .
These monopolies are not only concerned with the production of energy , but also the distribution of energy , and citizens and undertakings , both small businesses and large industries , are therefore locked into an unacceptable situation .
I think that the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , has produced an extremely good report .
I also think that the Commission 's proposal in these areas is very good and I hope that we can reach a decision on this matter as quickly as possible . Thank you .
( LT ) The main lesson of the gas crisis is the great vulnerability of Europe 's energy system and the very significant risk to supply delivery .
This risk remains as the agreement between Ukraine and Russia is a one-time agreement and the situation will undoubtedly be repeated .
Bilateral energy questions remain fundamentally unresolved , not just between Russia and Ukraine , but between Ukraine and the European Union and between the European Union and Russia , all the more so because there is no common EU-Ukraine-Russia energy operating system .
There have so far been neither safeguards nor guarantees and these have yet to appear .
I would like to stress that dependence on the supply of gas and on the use of gas is increasing dramatically and will grow even more once the power stations in Lithuania , Bulgaria and Slovakia have been closed .
This shows that the risk remains and is perhaps increasing .
We have a very clear long-term energy strategy for the whole of the European Union .
We have had very heated debates about it .
There is talk of long-term measures .
In my view , the weakest link is our short- to medium-term energy policy .
It has not passed the reality test and this was demonstrated by the gas crisis .
I would invite the Commission to investigate such a scenario which , unfortunately , was not investigated for various other legal and political reasons .
What would be the cost , benefit and consequences of temporarily prolonging nuclear power operations in Bulgaria , Slovakia and Lithuania , thereby fundamentally strengthening the energy security of both these countries and the whole of Europe in this situation ?
In addition , faced with the conditions of a long-term and undefined economic crisis , this would allow resources to be used more efficiently and would greatly reduce the burden of the crisis on our residents and the business sector .
( DE ) Mr President , on the subject of the energy security strategy and Mrs Laperrouze 's report , one thing that I believe the Commission 's proposal and the Laperrouze report have in common is that they do not set any priorities .
They are a hotchpotch of everything for which pressure groups all over the place have been lobbying the Commission or Parliament .
As long as we do not set priorities , we shall never allocate money wisely .
In point of fact , the priority is plain for all to see .
We must begin with the efficiency of buildings , vehicles , fridges and so on .
There is nothing cheaper and nothing that will create more jobs .
Secondly , there is renewable energy .
When we say that 60 % of the whole energy mix should come from renewable sources by 2050 , this means at least 90 % of our electricity being generated from renewables .
This figure of 90 % electricity generation from renewable energy sources will surely be reached long before 2050 , because we have already adopted a directive that sets a target of 35 % for 2020 .
If we can achieve 35 % green electricity by 2020 from today 's starting point of 15 % , we shall be able to reach 60 % or more as early as 2030 .
Thirdly , there is gas to tide us over .
How is that supposed to happen ?
We invest billions in gas pipelines now , and then gas consumption in Europe is meant to be reduced .
That is what you write in your document , Mr Piebalgs , and it can also be read between the lines in Mrs Laperrouze 's report .
So we have efficiency , renewables and gas , and then you want to invest EUR 1.3 billion in carbon capture and storage ( CCS ) .
Where is there room in all of this for blind loyalty to nuclear power ?
I have to say , Commissioner , that you cannot even get your sums right .
If we go for efficiency and renewables and pursue even a half-decent gas policy and , if we really have to , invest a little more in CCS , we shall have no need of nuclear energy , and we do not need to run that risk .
Just look at the facts !
As far as the Economic Recovery Plan is concerned , I must say that I am really annoyed with the Commission .
Not a penny for energy efficiency !
Not a penny for town-twinning !
On 10 February , Commissioner , representatives of 300 local authorities in Europe will be gathering in Brussels at your invitation .

What are we going to tell them : that Mr Barroso 's cabinet cut EUR 500 million from the town-twinning budget between Monday and Wednesday of last week ?
I find that so contradictory and so utterly wrong .
The fact is that we need towns and cities as partners in a new energy policy .
Not a penny for solar energy , and not a penny for biomass !
In other words , we are devising an Economic Recovery Plan in which we give three and a half billion to the oligarchy of energy giants and not a single euro to the partners whose help we need to enlist for the change to green energy .
( CS ) Thank you , I shall be brief .
I should like to look at two aspects which I believe have not yet been discussed , namely the fact that we need an integrated energy system in Europe , which will interconnect the different types of energy and which will interconnect the different grids in such a way that it would be possible to make up for any outages .
The recent gas crisis has shown that this is an extremely important task .
The second thing is that we need to link these energy networks to similar networks in other fields , such as transport and communications networks , in order to achieve between them a certain degree of symmetry .
As yet this is not the case and I think that a closer look will show that there are linkages here .
I should like to say that the position of networks in the future structures of Europe is very important and that these networks are far more important for a cohesive Europe than the ever-growing bureaucracy both in Brussels and in the Member States .
I believe that the European Union will in the future become a kind of necklace threaded on these networks .
( SK ) The current financial crisis is being projected into an economic crisis .
Furthermore , in view of the shortage of available credit , there is a threat of energy and food crises .
In order to maintain at least the current level of energy production , there will be a need by 2030 for worldwide investment of about USD 26 billion in reconstruction and the development of new oil and gas fields and also in the production and distribution of all types of energy .
At the same time it will be necessary to integrate the flows of oil , gas and electricity so as to create an efficient and highly diversified system .
This system must help to overcome consequences of local political disputes and also consequences of any natural disasters and to provide for a functioning energy supply in a Europe-wide context .
The Slovak Republic itself has had the opportunity in recent weeks to experience the complexity of such a situation when , as a result of the conflict between Ukraine and Russia , not a single cubic metre of gas reached Slovakia for several days .
The experience of Slovakia and also of other European countries has shown that vigorous support is needed for the European Union 's priority of interconnecting and integrating the separate energy markets in Europe .
However , I must mention that the enforced and premature decommissioning of two reactors at the Jaslovské Bohunice nuclear power plant has been found to be an imprudent mistake in the current situation .
The reactors met all the criteria for safe operation .
Their decommissioning was required by the European Commission in the Accession Treaty as the price for Slovakia 's accession to the European Union .
This decision undoubtedly weakened the energy self-sufficiency not only of Slovakia , but also of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the battle against climate change and the need for energy security and to strengthen the competitiveness of our economy are taking us down the road of the third industrial revolution , towards an era in which we wean ourselves off mineral fuels .
It is a real revolution which will bring about huge structural changes to the model of production and consumption and , ultimately , to our very way of life .
I trust that , as the European Union , we shall maintain global leadership in this revolution .
In order for that to happen , we shall need to make every possible effort to limit the energy intensity of the economy in all sectors .
One of the tools for improving energy efficiency is to make use of the potential of information and communication technologies ( ICT ) .
Considerable incentives are needed in order for us to make use of these technologies , so that we increase the energy efficiency of the European Union by 20 % by 2020 , within the framework of the 20-20-20 target .
The motion which we are being called on to adopt in a couple of days ' time and which relates to the strengthening of energy efficiency through ICT places particular emphasis on research and development of pioneering technologies , such as nano-technologies and photonic technology , which have high potential to improve energy efficiency , and on designing policies to strengthen the take-up of these technologies .
Similarly , it also gives considerable impetus to more green innovation and entrepreneurship , with a series of measures and actions .
I would refer in particular to green public procurements , which will allow public sector agencies to play a leading role in saving energy by making use of the new technological applications of ICT .
Finally , the motion provides for incentives for smart and integrated energy management systems in our cities and for smart traffic management systems with more rational road behaviour and transport systems .
It is clear from what I have said that , although it is not legislative , this motion which we shall vote on in a couple of days ' time is highly important , because it essentially makes ICT one of the main indicators of sustainable development in the European Union .
I therefore call on you to support it in the vote in a couple of days ' time .
( DE ) Mr President , we are , I hope , all clear on what the priorities are here : energy efficiency , energy saving and renewable energy .
Nevertheless , we cannot get round the fact that we will need to worry about our gas supplies for many more years yet .
So , what lessons can we learn from the dispute between Ukraine and Russia , and from the crisis that arose from that dispute ?
In my view - and I am sorry to have to say this , Commissioner - it seems to me that we will be no better , or at least not much better , prepared the next time this happens .
Neither can it be said that the crisis is over , and I have seen little sign that a strategy is really being developed , or that any conclusions have been drawn from this dispute between Ukraine and Russia .
Certain Members of this House believe that we should conclude bilateral agreements with Ukraine , but it should be pointed out that Ukraine has to bear at least some of the blame for the situation that arose recently , and I would really rather not make myself dependent on arguments between Mr Yushchenko and Mrs Tymoshenko , or Mr Yanukovych , or whoever .
Ukraine would , quite naturally , clearly much rather buy the gas from Russia and then sell it on to us , naturally for an additional charge , as would Turkey in relation to Nabucco , but I will return to that later .
If , then , we want our gas to be just as insecure , but more expensive , we should make a bilateral agreement but , if we want to find a real solution , we need to make a trilateral agreement encompassing Russia as the supplier , Ukraine as the transit country and ourselves , and come to an agreement in this connection , particularly with regard to transit and infrastructure .
I have heard nothing from the Commission on this or on what alternative suggestions it has .
With regard to investments in infrastructure , if we look to the east , there are basically three pipelines up for discussion : Nord Stream , South Stream and Nabucco .
Nord Stream is a supply pipeline in the north ; it solves the transit problem , but will not reduce our dependency on Russia .
South Stream may also solve a transit problem , but again will not reduce our dependency on Russia .
On top of that , if one looks at the costs involved , South Stream is actually somewhat more expensive than Nabucco , at least according to a number of studies , which suggests that we need to invest massively in Nabucco .
When I consider - and I have mentioned this on a few previous occasions as well , Commissioner - how quickly the United States constructed the PTCP oil pipeline and how long we are taking over the Nabucco gas pipeline , I really do think it is scandalous how little Europe has achieved : it is a sign of our weakness .
We need to act quickly , not just with regard to Azerbaijan or Turkmenistan - which we will be discussing shortly - but also in relation to Iraq .
The fact that gas there is simply being released into the air as exhaust , with no consideration being given to how it could be transported to the Nabucco pipeline , really is a big mistake .
I would ask you , Commissioner , to negotiate quickly and clearly with Turkey , in order to ensure that we also get their agreement to this .
We will , of course , also need to convince Cyprus to stop blocking the energy chapter : their insistence that we cannot even negotiate on this chapter shows a lack of solidarity , because it quite naturally causes difficulties with Turkey .
You are nodding , Commissioner ; I see that we are in full agreement here .
Turning finally to nuclear energy , there are some very different opinions on this subject in this House .
Unfortunately , I too cannot vote in favour of the Laperrouze report , for example because it is too one-sided in this respect .
The thing that disturbs me about this whole debate is that we now have a new development in France , namely a reduction in atomic waste , but , when you look more closely , you find that this atomic waste is more radioactive .
That is not the way to solve the problem , particularly with regard to waste .
We will need to apply a lot more energy and brainpower to solving the problem of waste and disposal .
( PL ) Mr President , the energy crisis has revealed a weakness in the European Union .
We are still having problems correctly reading the political challenges resulting from this situation .
A glaring illustration of this mistake is the proposal of Angela Merkel who , after a third energy crisis , is proposing to us today still stronger ties with Russian energy resources by building the northern and southern gas pipelines .
In fact the opposite is true .
This crisis shows that we should stake everything on the building of an independent infrastructure which will take us to independent sources of the raw materials for energy in Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan .
The crisis shows that we should strike the northern gas pipeline off the list of European Commission priorities in order to avoid a Russian monopoly in Europe .
Solving the energy problem will be a critical moment in the entire integration process .
The EU has the chance to show its effectiveness and to gain new strength .
It may also show its passivity and risk marginalisation .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to talk about the need to fuse the information technology revolution of the information society with the energy revolution , which has been the subject of an excellent resolution of the House .
We need smart electricity grids ; currently these are wasteful and anachronistic .
We need consumption that is managed in accordance with production .
We must have smart grids and smart houses .
This smart consumption can only be provided by the Internet and only by the fusion of all electrical networks with the information coming from houses , factories , buildings and so on .
In this way we could be much more autonomous , much more independent , and Europe could take a leading role in this essential global issue so that there would not have to be dozens of unnecessary power stations as is the case today .
The majority of countries produce three times more energy than is consumed because production is oriented to peak consumption .
This would not be the case with smart grids . Smart grids would allow us to adjust consumption to sustainable production and to existing production levels .
In this way we could also cooperate with neighbouring countries in the Mediterranean .
An extensive , clean , smart grid is needed to connect to our neighbours in the south who have the potential to generate solar energy using high technology and large-scale plants .
This would be an excellent opportunity for cooperation on technology transparency .
We could promote a clean future for us all .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for her work .
Let me make a few points on the Strategic Energy Review and the last energy crisis problem , which are closely linked .
My first point : in our report , which calls on the Member States to speak with a single European voice on energy issues , we have explicitly stated what all Europeans have seen in the past weeks to be the reality , namely that damaging energy supply in the Member States afflicts the European Union as a whole .
It is very important .
This is the basis of European solidarity and a basis for developing emergency response measures .
My second point is that the report mentions CCS technology as having the potential to meet our environmental targets while exploiting a source of energy - coal - that is largely available in Europe .
By developing CCS , Europe can become a world leader in advanced technologies , which will contribute to our global competitiveness and strengthen our economies .
The same is true for coal gasification technology , which is very important as an additional source of gas supply - it means diversification of gas supply .
My third point is that this strategic document specifically underlines the need for investment in the energy supply infrastructure .
Infrastructure projects that receive support at EU level should first and foremost contribute to the real diversification of sources and routes of supplies to the Member States and to the EU as a whole .
Investment in Ukraine seems to be of special importance for us .
Together with our Ukrainian partners , we could , in the future , take the joint responsibility for gas deliveries on the Russian-Ukrainian border .
The reason for such a step on our part is very simple .
In terms of energy relations , Ukraine identifies with international standards .
It has ratified the Energy Charter Treaty and , therefore , plays by transparent rules .
My fourth point is that our strategic document greatly complements our efforts towards implementing the Third Energy Package .
What does it mean ?
It means a working internal market in energy for the European Union ; it means solidarity and support on many sides .
Let us finish the legislative procedure during the next three months .
It is very important for us .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , we have history behind us .
After all , our energy networks were built to meet the needs of the Cold War and for those political circumstances .
Now they have improved and have been patched up here and there , but this has caused us a problem that we will have to return to again later on .
As the need for energy has grown dramatically while the economy has developed at a huge rate , so the price , supply and environmental problems have also changed .
They have become the greatest challenge for us .
As the problems are global , obviously global solutions are what are needed .
It is therefore important that we involve the United States and the developing countries in a common energy process .
We will show the way , but the United States has to follow Europe 's example and must work alongside us .
As energy solutions are global , we need European energy diplomacy , and I understand that the Commissioner for Energy has done quite a lot of work in that regard and in connection with this latest energy crisis .
We need energy diplomacy for the simple reason that these are such big issues that there have been wars over them before and there will be again in the future .
This is thus a very serious issue .
It is also quite obvious that we need an energy mix comprising various energy sources that is as broadly based as possible , because that will stabilise the energy situation and as a result each nation 's diversity , and Europe 's too , will come into its own .
Of course , saving energy is an important solution to the problem : it is the cheapest and the most effective method .
For this we need something that I regard today as the most important single thing that should be done : making energy intelligent .
If we do not greatly increase the use of intelligent technology we will not achieve our targets .
Luckily , smart technology has developed at just the same time .
People and companies do not know about the energy they are consuming without smart technology .
Consequently , information and communication technologies ( ITC ) are the solution that will help us reach targets and keep us in order .
They are a reminder of our extravagance .
They are therefore like a good teacher , but also a good hired hand because intelligence is not just needed for the network , but also for equipment , homes and cars .
Everywhere there is human activity , intelligence is needed to control energy consumption .
In this connection , I would stress in particular the importance of the small and medium-sized enterprise sector and the innovations that come from this , as it can be truly inventive .
Then there is the social dimension : energy poverty and , simultaneously , employment are linked to what has just been said .
We find it odd that Ukraine is a transit country .
Obviously , as Mr Swoboda said , the pipeline should be under alternative management , for example under tripartite management that would include the EU , and that way the problem would go away .
Madam President , in all the discussions on the energy crisis , there is one aspect which my colleague , Anne Laperrouze , does mention , but which generally receives insufficient attention .
We talk about energy efficiency in the context of climate change and of fuel poverty , but energy efficiency is also of huge strategic importance .
Controlling demand takes pressure off the supply side and is crucial to reaching energy independence in Europe .
I want to make two specific points in the context of the oral question on the use of information and communication technologies .
First , I am concerned that the roll-out of smart meters is not going ahead with the degree of commitment required by the Energy End-Use Efficiency and Energy Services Directive and called for in the Morgan report .
In some countries , digital displays are available to show consumers how much energy they are using - which is helpful - but a proper smart meter does much more than that .
It allows two-way communication , detailed analysis of consumer demand and proper measurement and payment of electricity supplied by micro-renewables .
We need smart meters now .
They are crucial to the task of transforming buildings from being energy consumers into being net energy producers .
Secondly , with regard to lighting , I trust we are about to go ahead with taking the most inefficient domestic lighting off the market , and the same needs to happen for office and street lighting .
We should , however , already be looking forward to the next technological steps , such as wider use of smart lighting systems using sensors , which measure movement and the degree of natural light so that lighting can be reduced - or indeed switched off when necessary .
There is a lot more to energy-efficient lighting than compact fluorescents , and it is time for the public sector - and that includes the European institutions - to take the lead on using ICT for energy efficiency .
( LV ) Madam President , Commissioners , I would firstly like to thank Mrs Laperrouze for her extremely comprehensive report .
Crises always provide the opportunity to take important decisions that may crucially change our values and policies .
I have reason to believe that the recent gas crisis has opened the eyes of politicians in relation to the vulnerability of many parts of Europe with regard to energy supply .
Not only the recovery plan and the Second Strategic Energy Review prepared by the Commission but also this report all give us hope that there will be a unified European energy policy , and that includes the hope that the isolated energy islands of Europe will at last be eliminated , including that of the Baltic States .
Another aspect relates to the development of liquefied natural gas terminals .
These could indeed become an alternative to supplies of Russian gas in many locations , but only on condition that national governments are able to withstand the pressure , and not create them as extra capacity for the export of Russian gas , but solely as import terminals . Thank you .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Piebalgs , Mrs Reding , ladies and gentlemen , we need investment now .
We are on the verge of an energy crisis and a financial crisis .
We need to make an effort to invest as quickly and as well as possible , and therefore we cannot but say ' yes ' to the construction not only of pipelines but also of LNG ships .
We should build them as quickly as possible , as this would create jobs and thus contribute to full employment in Europe .
The pipelines should not compete with each other ; rather , the construction of each new pipeline is a win-win situation , as is the construction of LNG terminals .
This is an important issue for the future .
Above all , we need to invest in energy efficiency , not via state funding , but rather by means of tax breaks .
If we could give every citizen an allowance of EUR 10 000 a year that they could offset against tax , we could make an immediate start on investing in energy efficiency and renewable energy ; with regard to the latter , progressive depreciation , in other words the immediate inclusion of costs on the balance sheet , would be a particularly valuable tool .
If we could set a three-year limit for this , it would be a great success for all of us .
We could get a better handle on employment and energy .
In this connection , it is up to Commissioner Kovács to launch an initiative .
One point which particularly exercises us in this programme is , quite naturally , the nuclear industry : it is vital to ensure the safety and security of nuclear power stations , and to do so to the very best of our ability .
It is not possible to set the bar too high here : quite simply , we need people to trust in the European Union that the appropriate steps will be taken , that further security research will be conducted and that there will be legally binding requirements allowing dangerous nuclear power stations to be removed from the grid immediately following a ruling by a court or regulator .
The people of Europe have a right to safety in this field , so that we can go forward into a future in which energy generation does not put us in danger and we can sleep soundly .
The Commission can make a significant contribution to this .
Ultimately , however , it will also be up to the Council , in the group responsible for nuclear safety , to live up to their responsibilities and not to go down a path that the citizens will not appreciate , by blocking proposals from the European Parliament and the Commission .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioners , the recent situation concerning Russia and Ukraine and the gas supply has clearly shown that more than ever before we need to diversify our supply and improve connections between Member States and with producer countries .
The Commission 's proposals are heading in this direction , but in the interests of greater efficacy these proposals should also include , and I was glad to hear the Commissioner mention it today , the potential in the south of our continent and in particular in my country , Spain .
Spain is the Member State with the greatest diversification of supply , both in terms of the number of countries - our gas is imported from 10 different countries - as well as in the range of formats .
For this reason , my country is an excellent supply platform for the European Union .
The supply is achieved both through the gas pipeline from Algeria as well as by liquefied natural gas in similar volumes to that of Nabucco , but at a lower cost and with better delivery times .
However this platform cannot currently be used by the European Union due to the lack of a connection to France .
Medgas , Mr Piebalgs , must be a priority for the European Union , as must the specific problems of our island territories .
If the Iberian peninsular clearly suffers from isolation in energy terms , islands such as the Balearic Islands , where I am from , suffer a double isolation .
This is very unfair for the inhabitants of these islands because we , as Europeans , have equal rights .
I sincerely request , Mr Piebalgs , that you consider the particular situation of island territories when taking decisions and establishing priorities .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , the EU has had to learn the hard way what it means to be far too dependent on a single energy supplier .
The citizens of several Member States have been affected by Russia 's capriciousness in a totally unacceptable way .
We know that Russia is ruthless when dealing with its neighbours , but when freezing Slovakians and Bulgarians were taken hostage in the quarrel between Russia and Ukraine it was , hopefully , a wake-up call for all of us , including us here in this Parliament .
Ukraine needs the support of the EU , and the construction of Nabucco with gas from Azerbaijan , among others , must now get underway .
The EU must now demonstrate an ability to take action , precisely as called for by Mr Swoboda .
We know that Russia is pressing for Nord Stream , the gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea .
These proposals should be rejected .
The Baltic Sea is one of our most sensitive inland seas .
Out of consideration for the environment and the economy , this pipeline should not be laid in the Baltic Sea , added to which are the security policy aspects .
A land-based alternative must be thoroughly investigated instead .
The European Parliament has also expressed its doubts about this on a previous occasion .
I am pleased to see that the report maintains that nuclear energy needs to be an important part of Europe 's future energy mix .
If we are to meet the emissions reduction requirements of the energy package we need modern European nuclear energy .
It is good that we are able to discuss this in the European Parliament over the next few days .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioners , it is time to speak plainly .
Firstly , the European Union does not have an energy strategy .
This fact encourages Russia , for example , which treats energy resources as a political weapon , to make attempts at pressure and blackmail , which makes the EU 's situation worse .
Secondly , the EU has succumbed to collective manipulation in the form of intimidation with global climate warming due to CO2 emissions .
Increasing numbers of experts and facts confirm that this is not true .
With regard to those who are spreading this theory and intimidating us with global warming , it would be worth investigating in whose interests they are acting .
Thirdly , the EU requires an energy strategy based on the principle of the weakest link , in other words help in the form of financial aid and investment in those countries which are most dependent on one supplier , like the Baltic States and Poland .
Fourthly , the EU needs to apologise and restore hard coal and brown coal to favour , because it has plentiful supplies of these and they are cheap .
Fifthly , the EU needs a tax and credit policy to support new technologies and savings in energy emissions , and this it does not have .

( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would very much like to thank Mrs Laperrouze and Mr Piebalgs for all the documents they have presented .
I do not agree with all of the details , but the proposals go in the right strategic direction : it is right and necessary to focus once again on the fact that security of supply is one of the central issues .
We have perhaps devoted too much of our attention to other energy policy issues over the last year , and I am grateful that security of supply has now returned more to centre stage .
Secondly , I am also grateful that the proposed position is so nuanced .
As has been said , one might not agree with every single point , but the report is generally correct , contrary to what Mr Turmes just suggested .
Mr Turmes , it is wrong to believe that there is a simple answer , a single answer to this enormous , complicated problem .
Politicians always try to give a quick , simple answer that satisfies everybody , but that is just not possible .
It is , unfortunately , damned hard , which is why the answer is so varied .
We cannot make people promises and act as if we have a solution and everything is magically going to be fine ; quite apart from anything else , the people would one day be bitterly disappointed when they realised that it does not work that way .
This nuance means that there is not just a single energy source , but rather that we will continue for a long time to work with several sources .
It is immoral to just discard a source of energy : in my view , it is irresponsible to simply dismiss nuclear energy .
It is part of the solution : not the whole solution , of course , but it should be realised that it has a contribution to make .
I would also caution against staking too much on gas : we have just heard a great deal about the dependency that entails .
I also think that we need to realise that we cannot just carelessly give up on coal - an energy source that we have in our country and in many other places in Europe - and say ' coal produces CO2 , so it is not an option ' .
That would be irresponsible .
We also need a nuanced response to the issue of the various routes and paths .
As Mr Rübig just said , there is not one single answer for a pipeline : it would be a mistake to just opt for one ; instead , we need to open up a variety of routes and options .
Nobody today can predict with certainty what will happen in 10 , 20 or 30 years ' time .
In that respect , the path we need to take is to say ' yes ' to intelligent solutions .
By intelligent , I mean varied , and being open to new things and not standing still .
The answer is technology .
The answer is investing in research and being open to solutions that we currently cannot see at all , and not casually ruling out one option or another .
It is also agreeing to investment .
It would be a fatal mistake - and it is one made in some energy policy decisions - to give those who actually have to invest the money , namely companies , too little room for manoeuvre and too little support .
Does anybody really believe that we , the Member States , the State or the Community will be able to solve the problem of investment ?
No , it is the private sector that will have to do that .
( BG ) Madam President , Commissioners , first of all I would like to highlight the constructive debate in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the report by Mrs Laperrouze , and especially point out her role in preparing an objective and all-encompassing report .
I want to especially concentrate on the proposals included in the report which have been made with the aim of reflecting the problems faced by those countries which are most deeply affected by external energy source suppliers , in particular gas .
First of all , the importance of the European Parliament actively participating in allocating projects for new energy links , in particular between Member States ' gas and energy supply networks , has been noted .
However , it is with regret that I point out that only EUR 20 million has been set aside for the Commission 's project for the Republic of Bulgaria and its links with Greece , despite Bulgaria being one of the most seriously affected countries .
The gas field in Chiren , for example , which will solve the problems of the crisis with minimum supplies , has not been mentioned at all .
Secondly , all possibilities for constructing the southern gas corridor have been included , in other words , in addition to the Nabucco project , the South Stream and TGI projects are also noted .
Also noted is the long-term plan for the possibility of gas being supplied by other countries in the region such as Uzbekistan and Iran .
Thirdly , the importance of liquefied gas terminals being constructed in the European Union is emphasised , and also that they should be accessible to all Member States on the basis of the principle of solidarity .
This is once again particularly important for the joint use of such terminals by Bulgaria and Greece .
Fourthly , I call upon the Commission to look into expanding the energy community in South East Europe and other neighbouring countries with the aim of forming a single market for the whole region .
As rapporteur on the regulations and conditions for access to gas supply networks , I want to once again underline the significance of the Third Energy Package for the formation of a single European energy market and to urge its quickest possible implementation .
Finally , I want to point out that the report objectively expresses the role of nuclear energy too .
I consider that the current framework directive for nuclear safety will become a good basis for analysing the state of all reactors in the European Union , and not just of newly-constructed ones , and will be an objective base for the evaluation of their safety .
It is clear that politically based decisions like those taken in relation to Kozloduy cannot be long-term ones in the current development of energy diversity in the European Union .
I hope that Member States will be in the position , based on objective criteria , to reconsider the issue about the closed reactors .
- ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Laperrouze 's report on energy policy concerns a subject of huge importance for all the countries of the Union .
I greatly respect her for the work she has done , but the situation remains very serious .
The excruciating and disastrous experience of our countries in the South in January , like the forecasts that threaten us with a significant energy shortage over the next two decades , all point towards the need for energy policy to be a key part of our foreign policy .
However , the future is gloomy , Commissioner , because we lack unanimity , solidarity and resources .
In terms of solidarity , this does not perhaps apply to the Commission , but rather to certain large European countries .
We are not speaking with one voice .
I entirely agree with Mr Swoboda that Nabucco is a big embarrassment for the European Union .
For example , the Russian South Stream pipeline supported by the State and by certain EU countries is in danger of ousting Nabucco , which is twice as cheap and which , for its part , acts in accordance with the rules of the market .
Its sources of supply in Azerbaijan risk being seized by its rival , which makes it a precarious and dubious investment .
In this way the Union is probably going to lose the unique opportunity of diversity and greater security ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Madam President , the Second Strategic Energy Review could not be more timely .
The security of supply to the eastern half of the European Union has certainly been challenged by the events of the beginning of the year .
After a three-week crisis , since 20 January natural gas has once again been flowing to Europe , but the question is , for how long ?
In order to be able truly to guarantee security of supply , we need to learn the lessons of the gas dispute .
By this I mean first of all the diversification of the energy types used , the sources of supply and delivery routes .
According to calculations , Europe uses 500 billion m ³ of gas per year , and this demand may grow , according to certain analyses , by as much as 30 % in the next 20 years .
Ideas have already emerged regarding potential alternatives .
The Nord Stream pipeline transporting Russian gas to Europe is already under construction , and the Blue Stream in Turkey is ready ; agreement has been reached by the interested parties on the building of South Stream , Ukraine has undertaken the creation of White Stream , and then there is the much talked-about Nabucco , albeit with uncertain sources or financial backing .
In any case , dependency on Russia will for the most part remain .
Although Nabucco would transport Asian gas , so far - unlike Gazprom - Europe has not even made an offer to Baku .
What can be done now ?
Many may say that , for the moment , we can trust that the negotiations of the European Commissioners and the Russian delegation at the Moscow summit will bring substantive results and lead to significant progress as regards the gas pipelines , and that in future it will not be the Russian gas monopoly alone that dictates prices .
This is possible , but for my part , in addition to all this - and indeed before all else - I believe that the way forward is to use less and cleaner energy .
This is precisely why I maintain that there is a need for a European green ' New Deal ' , in other words , one that aims at sustainable growth while stimulating and utilising innovation in environmental industry .
As a result of the current global financial crisis , more and more people are waking up to the fact that a new logic of economic organisation is necessary .
Increasing numbers of people are recognising that , in order to emerge from the global crisis , a fresh driving force is necessary , with an engine running on new organisational principles .
More and more people are recognising the need for a paradigm shift .
The green ' New Deal ' , in other words a new logic for economic organisation based on innovations in environmental technology and supported by international capital markets , will become the cornerstone of increasing numbers of economic rescue and stimulus programmes , including among the European Union Member States .
We need this stimulus because last year the number of the unemployed in Europe grew by 1.7 million .
The European green ' New Deal ' , should it receive the green light , will have a fundamental effect on Europe 's future energy policy . Thank you very much .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union at present imports 50 % of the energy it consumes and this proportion is constantly growing .
The Union 's dependence on imports of conventional sources of energy and on a limited number of suppliers represents a serious threat to our security , stability and prosperity .
This strategic review of the European Union 's energy policy has therefore , in my opinion , come at the right time .
I am of the view that the ' three times 20 ' objective for 2020 is correct from the security , economic and ecological standpoints .
However , attainment of this objective requires a common approach throughout the entire European Union , unified both within the Union and towards the outside .
The creation of a common energy policy requires the completion of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and the submission of a proposal for such a common energy policy .
In the internal market there is a need for a clear and stable legal framework and , above all , a need to complete the integration of our energy systems throughout the territory of the European Union .
The clause on mutual solidarity will remain just an empty phrase if we do not connect these energy systems .
There is also a need to strengthen the use of all domestic energy sources , from conservation by increasing the proportion of renewable sources to greater use of safe nuclear energy .
There is no need to emphasise that financial investment in our domestic energy industry will also provide a return in the form of a resumption of economic growth .
As far as external relations in the field of energy are concerned , this aspect too requires far greater diversification than before .
There is a need for a more intensive dialogue with producer countries , transit countries and other consumer countries .
Cooperation should be increased with the countries of the Middle East , the Mediterranean region and North Africa .
This should be done within the framework of the Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean .
The dialogue should also include the candidate country Turkey and , in my view , it is also essential to look for a far more effective approach to countries like Iran .
In conclusion I should like to congratulate our rapporteur Mrs Laperrouze on , I believe , a first-rate and balanced report .
( LT ) Although we started talking about the need for a common energy policy as far back as 2006 , each individual EU State is responsible for ensuring a secure energy supply .
However , solidarity among the Member States is essential for the survival of the EU itself .
The EU must immediately adopt effective legislation to help overcome energy supply crises or avoid them altogether .
The Commission proposes an EU Energy Security and Solidarity Action Plan , the most important aspects of which are the creation of infrastructure and the diversification of energy sources .
I am delighted that among the infrastructure projects set to become EU energy security priorities is an interconnection plan for the countries around the Baltic Sea , which would eliminate the insecure energy islands still existing in the EU .
I would like to ask the Commission for all kinds of support in the construction of the energy link between Lithuania and Sweden and the Lithuanian-Polish energy bridge .
Here , unfortunately , we also need political will .
Meanwhile , returning to the European Union 's fundamental principle - solidarity - and its application in the field of energy , many doubts arise as to the future of this principle .
We are debating the Third Energy Package , involving the creation of an EU internal electricity and gas market with an Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators .
At the same time , Germany and Russia are establishing a Russian-German energy agency .
How is this consistent with EU Member State solidarity , the common energy policy and energy security ?
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioners , in this debate I would like to draw attention to three questions .
Firstly , Russia is increasingly clearly using supplies of energy resources , and mainly gas , to exert a strong political influence .
Not only did the last gas conflict between Russia and Ukraine cause huge economic losses in many EU countries , but with a kind of permission from the EU it once again pushed Ukraine into a clear economic dependence on Russia .
For it is difficult to imagine that the Ukrainian economy will be able to function if the price of gas is over USD 400 per 1 000 cubic metres .
Secondly , a new partnership agreement between the EU and Russia needs to be negotiated , which will contain details of the energy question but will also contain a clear stipulation that Russia will not use the supply of energy resources to exert political influence , and that Russian suppliers will be liable for damages arising from a break in supply .
Thirdly and finally , the European Union , by using its own financial means and also the European Investment Bank , should support first and foremost gas investments which really diversify the supply of gas to the EU , and so which create a real capability to import gas from countries other than Russia , such as the Nabucco gas pipeline .
Madam President , we will never achieve either energy security or the 80 % reduction in our carbon dioxide emissions by 2050 if we continue to effectively ignore both the issue of energy security and the critical importance of pan-European high-voltage direct current ( HVDC ) interconnection .
That includes an HVDC line to North Africa : smart electrical networks over Europe and North Africa .
Having had the opportunity last week to experience first hand the exciting solar thermal operations in Grenada and Seville , and having read over the weekend Harvard professor Michael McElroy 's views on freeing the United States from its USD 750 billion annual bill for importing oil , winning the energy security battle in the US and at the same time saving the planet , I ask myself : what are we still debating ?
We know the answers .
The smart grid will allow solar , wind and hydro-generated electricity to level the security graph .
If the wind is not blowing off the Irish west coast , the sun will be shining in Spain , or the wind will be blowing off the west coast of North Africa as well as the sun shining there .
In short , what the sun is to Spain , wind is to the west coast of Ireland .
Our national regulators will breathe easy as their only job as of now if to keep the lights on and our homes and offices heated at peak demand .
We can no longer allow our citizens to be hostage to either energy politics or volatile oil prices .
Wind energy is competitive with coal , oil and gas , and the fuel is free .
Yes , our challenge is to build a new energy economy - an energy economy built on renewable electricity .
I conclude : the glib expression ' to cost the earth ' which we - English-language speakers anyway - use figuratively with gay abandon now needs to be taken literally .
If we do not rapidly change from our almost total dependence on fossil fuels , it will , as our peer review climate scientists repeatedly and with increasing urgency point out , do just that : cost the earth through global warming .
( BG ) Madam President , as shadow rapporteur for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I would like to congratulate Mrs Laperrouze on this report , which gives a wide perspective on the European Union 's problems in the field of energy , including the need for a common energy policy .
The report also very clearly indicates the actions which need to be implemented so that we can face the challenges of energy security .
I also welcome the fact that nuclear energy has found the place it deserves in such a report , and is presented as a necessary energy source .
In particular now , following the gas crisis , it is also clear and well pointed out that we have a need to diversify energy sources .
On the other hand , for the future we need to continue working towards more alternative corridors , energy corridors , and not just one corridor at the expense of another .
We all would then gain from competition .
I want to draw attention to two issues .
In October last year I noticed here , in this House , that the Nabucco energy project was still ' smoke without fire ' .
I called upon the European Commission then to take firm action .
We can now say that noticeable action is being taken by the Commission in this direction .
An understanding of its importance is evident , particularly now following the gas crisis .
However it needs to be clear that , despite the actions and measures taken on the road to achieving ever greater energy security , much more effort is needed , including serious political activity , so that we can see the light at the end of the tunnel .
The second issue is the capacity for energy storage .
I would like to tell you that Bulgaria would have been doomed had it not had capacity for at least 20 days ' reserve supplies at the gas storage facility in Chiren , which last year , as if the government knew what was coming , was expanded by one-third of its capacity .
Therefore , for the second time today , I would stress my utter lack of understanding why the Commission has completely ignored the project proposed by Bulgaria for further expansion of this storage facility .
This was our only saviour and I think that we need to support similar projects in all other countries .

( PL ) Madam President , the gas crisis and the financial crisis are forcing us to take rapid and pragmatic action which is above individual interests and ideas that are economically unjustified , such as the Nord Stream pipeline .
The Second Strategic Energy Review does not give the desired added value .
A series of issues mentioned in the review face significant difficulties in their realisation .
The citizens and the economy of the EU require rapid and specific decisions and action which will ensure relatively low and stable energy costs over the next 15 years : decisions which will lead to the most significant savings possible in industry , transport and homes ; decisions which will in large measure reduce the dependence of the EU economy on the import of hydrocarbons and ensure their correct supply ; decisions which will lead as quickly as possible to the development of a programme and plan of specific research-based measures and how to finance and implement them .
As a result of these economic measures CO2 emissions will be reduced , and the bureaucratic trading of emissions - so good for the traders , but not for the economy - will not be necessary .
Madam President , I am touched by the words ' smart ' and ' intelligent ' , which are very much part of this debate , because the solutions we try and use in our house to reduce energy consumption are certainly not working and they are neither smart nor very intelligent .
Telling children to turn things off is just not the solution .
I wish it were , as it would mean that I was in control .
So we do need all of the things that others have spoken about : sensors and other technological advancements that will make everybody 's life easier in terms of achieving our energy efficiency objectives .
Tonight 's debate is a massive one : it is about our climate change agenda , security of supply , solidarity between Member States and also economic growth - and that is an issue for us at the moment - and how we can achieve a better use of our energy resources .
The country I come from , Ireland , relies on oil for almost 60 % of our energy needs and it is all imported .
So , clearly , we have a particular problem .
We need to reduce that dependency , we need to develop our indigenous resources and , as I have already mentioned , improve our efficiency .
Clearly , the issue of interconnection between Member States is crucial particularly for countries on the periphery .
Ireland 's dependency is extremely high : 91 % of our needs are imported .
That is quite a staggering percentage , and while we have not experienced the gas problems that other colleagues have spoken about , or the cold and the horror that caused for other Member States , we did learn , from watching that , how critical it is that we do something about our energy mix and our energy insecurity .
So , all of the issues that are part of this report and the oral question are extremely important for us .
In particular the issue of land use needs to be addressed .
The Swedish experience of forestries is interesting from the perspective of Ireland , where we have not developed our forestry sector .
But this is a key issue : getting the balance right between food production and fuel production .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , developing a coherent and all-encompassing Community policy in the energy field is a logical step and a necessary intervention .
The Commission 's proposal and Mrs Laperrouze 's report point in this direction .
The European Union will give added value to the initiatives developed by the Member States .
Oil is finite and the production of the European Union and Norway in 2007 contributed a mere 30 % to internal demand .
The European Union 's dependence on oil imports indirectly increases our dependence on politically unstable countries or those which as possible energy partners generate major geostrategic tensions , as we have seen recently with Russia .
For these reasons , it is strategically important to redirect the demand for alternative energy sources to oil , but it is also geographically important to look more carefully at the South American and African markets , which are currently expanding and to which the development of the European Union-Brazil and European Union-Africa partnerships could contribute greatly .
This should be done through the use of the Iberian region - Spain and Portugal , where I come from - as a fundamental platform in terms of logistics and distribution in the European area .
As for the basic need to enhance energy efficiency , it is important to guarantee appropriate synergies among sectors able to contribute to greater energy efficiency .
Only through the adoption of a global and coordinated approach between Community policies and national policies , namely in the areas of cohesion , agriculture and transport , will we be able to outline a strategy that conveys a long-term vision .
The link between energy and territorial cohesion is indisputable in that it affects possible long-term solutions for all the regions of the European Union , including the most isolated and outermost regions .
( BG ) Mrs Laperrouze , I would like to congratulate you in particular for the good work you have done with your topical and timely report .
We are hardly in a position yet to say how much European countries and citizens lost from the gas crisis .
The direct losses to the Bulgarian economy alone , which was most severely affected by the dispute between Ukraine and Russia , amount to over EUR 230 million , without any compensation .
The ensuing emergency raised many questions .
Unfortunately , the big issue of energy dependence comes to a head whenever a political crisis and political antagonism between Russia and Ukraine occur .
Many people remember the situation three years ago , when the two countries again disagreed on prices .
Then we had a pledge of a common European energy policy , but three years on it seems like nothing has changed .
Now we ask ourselves : are we ready for a single energy market or will individual interests prevail in bilateral agreements ?
Have we done enough to interconnect the European gas supply networks among Member States or are we becoming less and less inclined to set aside reserves for crisis situations ?
How are we working on Nord and South Stream , and on Nabucco ?
I am pleased to hear that nuclear energy is being treated on the same level as other energy sources .
Without compromising on safety , it is time to reconsider our attitude towards nuclear facilities in Europe , and without any further politically motivated decisions .
We need nuclear energy and it would act as a serious barrier to other crises that may arise .
It is not coincidental that at the height of the crisis the Bulgarian Parliament asked its European partners to revive the debate on reactivating the closed reactors at Kozloduy , which have been proved safe by the competent authorities .
We hope for your understanding .
The decisions are difficult , but let us not prejudge them or write them off prematurely .
I would like to address the following words to you , Mr Commissioner .
Only a few days ago , when the European Commission allocated resources from the European Development Plan , the country which was worst affected received the least amount of resources .
This evening I have not heard any mention from you about Bulgaria being in the list of 100 % -dependent countries in need of special assistance .
What are the criteria and mechanisms for allocating these resources ?
I would find them difficult to explain to Bulgarian and to European citizens .
Evidently we also need to put more effort into the Third Energy Package and speed it up .
As a member of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I have worked a great deal on protecting energy supplies for consumers , but please understand , it is more important to secure the energy in the first place .
( RO ) I want to stress the European Union 's need for an external energy policy so that the 27 Member States can speak with a single voice during negotiations with major producers .
This is the only way in which the European Union can obtain affordable prices for importing gas and oil , along with guaranteeing energy security .
Diversification of energy supply sources must be one of the European Union 's major goals .
However , I wish to draw your attention to the fact that the Russian gas pipeline project , South Stream , is not making any contribution at all to this diversification as the supply source remains exactly the same , Russia .
Furthermore , the huge costs involved in building this gas pipeline would end up increasing the price of gas , a price which European consumers would be obliged to pay .
This is why , in my view , the European Union needs to urgently take action to include in future agreements with Russia and Ukraine some comprehensive clauses on energy interdependency , which will set out clear obligations and effective mechanisms for rapidly resolving any problems .
The strategic partnership between the European Union and Russia and the new Eastern Partnership should aim to implement ...
Madam President , energy policy and foreign policy are inextricably interlinked now more than ever .
We see the need for a common EU energy policy in the light of the recent developments regarding gas supplies in central and eastern Europe but , whilst it is one of the key innovations of the Lisbon Treaty , I regret to point out that this point was not highlighted sufficiently in the debates surrounding the Treaty 's ratification .
In Ireland we have 12 days of gas supply at any one time .
Sixty per cent of our electricity is generated from imported gas , whereas the EU average is around 40 % .
On 28 January last , the Commission published a proposal to accelerate work on addressing deficits in the EU energy infrastructure while contributing to economic recovery as part of a EUR 5 billion package .
The inclusion by the Commission of the electricity interconnection between Ireland and the UK as a priority area for funding under the European economic recovery package is a very welcome development in this regard .
It further emphasises that when all 27 Member States work together we can bring about the change that is required to ensure security of energy supply .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Madam President , the two important documents we are discussing today - the Commission 's plan of action and the report on it - are separated in time by the recent interruption of gas due to the usual winter quarrel between Russia and Ukraine .
Consequently , the report is more attuned to reality , trying to increase our internal solidarity and expedite the implementation of the plan in front of us , thus capitalising on the lessons of the last crisis .
Personally , apart from support for the diversification of transport routes for the import of gas , I consider the appeal to expedite the achievement of internal market energy in the current legislature and the necessity to revisit the entire problem of gas storage as major contributions of the report .
However , the recommendation to fully open the Nabucco project to Russia is questionable since everyone knows that Nabucco was conceived as an alternative to Russian gas and that , consequently , Russia is already doing everything possible to kill it .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , the recent gas crisis has shown the importance of a common EU energy policy .
In addition , Slovakia has found out what 100 % dependence on Russian gas means .
Hundreds of companies had to cease production and pay their employees just 60 % of their wages .
I appreciate that solidarity plays a leading role in relations between EU Member States .
If we had not received an emergency transfer of gas from Germany through the Czech Republic to Slovakia , households would also have been at risk .
I am convinced that the need to ensure a constant supply of energy is a fundamental universal priority .
Meeting the need predominantly from non-renewable sources of energy is beginning to outweigh environmental acceptability .
We must build safe nuclear power plants and at the same time , using structural funds , encourage rural communities to focus strategically on the link between energy , water and biotechnology , thus strengthening the diversification of the energy base .
( PL ) Madam President , the last but of course not the only gas supply crisis means that we keep coming back to the matter of security of supply of this very important resource .
In Europe we are not in a bad situation as far as location is concerned .
We are almost surrounded by sources of gas : North Africa , the Near East , Central Asia and Russia .
The problem is that Europe does not have a unified market for gas .
In connection with this Europe does not have a more or less unified price .
I would like to point out that in the United States they do have a unified market , and the price there for 1 000 cubic metres of gas is below USD 200 .
In Europe we pay around USD 400 .
This is a result of the fact that we do not have an infrastructure which would enable the transfer of gas from one country to another .
Finally there is the matter of the Nabucco pipeline .
It is high time that we gave this the right priority and engaged our financial means so that it finally materialises .
Madam President , I have three questions to Commissioner Piebalgs .
Firstly , Nabucco may become a hostage to the Turkey 's accession negotiations , as we have learned from Prime Minister Erdoğan .
Are we also considering , within the southern corridor , the White Stream ( Caspian-Georgia-Black Sea-Ukraine-Romania ) project ?
Secondly , in the revised Gas Directive , would you consider a mandatory 90 days of reserves for gas storage for all the Member States ?
Thirdly , you have presented an impressive package of EUR 3.5 billion for energy infrastructure .
Do you foresee any obstacles to that in the Council ?
Because it has still to be accepted in the Council : I have heard about four Member States objecting .
And how can the European Parliament , which has also to accept it , help to pass it as quickly as possible ?
( RO ) The gas crisis which we recently faced was between Ukraine and Russia , but unfortunately it affected some of the European Union Member States .
This crisis has highlighted once again that the European Union is dependent to a large extent on a single gas supply source .
As a result , I feel that developing partnerships with Russia is beneficial to the whole of the European Union , but at the same time , I believe that the European Union must immediately initiate projects which can allow alternative solutions to be found , with the precise aim of averting the consequences of crises which could occur either in the near or more distant future .
In the same train of thought , I believe that the two projects , Nabucco and South Stream , must be taken into consideration , along with other solutions .
In this case , I am referring to the fields in the North Sea and those which are supposed to be on the Black Sea continental shelf .
Given that , over time , all kinds of deposits are going to run out , I believe that we need to invest in scientific projects capable of discovering alternative sources of energy , thereby also guaranteeing the development of future generations .
( RO ) The recent gas crisis refocuses attention even more sharply on the importance of developing alternative routes and sources of energy by developing transport infrastructures and establishing interconnections .
In the current climate , the Nabucco project needs to be speeded up as it has the potential to help achieve the European Union 's objectives of diversifying not only routes , but especially supply sources from third countries .
Transit routes through neighbouring countries must be encouraged by completing the projects which involve connecting the network in Romania with those in Hungary and Bulgaria .
At the same time , I feel that the South Stream project cannot be regarded as being of any benefit to Europe , precisely due to the fact that it does not use an alternative source , as requested in the report 's strategic review .
We do , however , also have our own energy sources .
One micro-hydroelectric plant is not viable or effective , but hundreds of thousands of hydroelectric plants from the Alps right to the Carpathians or from the Balkans right to the Tatras or Pyrenees mean energy independence .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this has been a really fascinating debate and has reflected all the diversity of views on energy and the importance that this issue deserves .
But I believe that the debate definitely shows that the rapporteur has struck the right balance .
It is true that each of us sees the detail differently .
There are no simple solutions , no silver bullets to solve this .
Again I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for really going through the process of ensuring that all opinions are reflected in the report , while at the same time clearly supporting the Commission 's second strategic energy review .
A lot of you spoke about the supergrid . Supergrid is the tool that was seen as a magical solution .
Well , it is true that it has a lot of potential , but with a grid we have a challenge .
Somebody needs to pay for the grid , and , as you know , we are looking for a balance between affordability , security of supply and sustainability .
So , if we really want to move towards this supergrid , the recovery plan is the first small step in the right direction .
The recovery plan can lead to a vicious circle where we say : ' Well , we need this , we need that , but it should be done by industry ' .
Yes , we do also encourage industry with different types of incentives , but if the public funds and European funds will not follow in accordance with our political priorities , then the plan will not be successful .
Then there are other issues that I would also emphasise , echoing what Mr Paparizov said .
On the third internal market package , I would just say what it does for Europe .
First of all there is the agency for cooperation of European regulators .
That will solve a lot of issues .
Second , a European body for transmission system operators .
These two issues are crucially related to security of supply , while at the same time not taking away national sovereignty over energy .
So if this package is adopted now , we will achieve a lot of momentum .
If it is postponed , we will lose a lot of momentum for security of supply .
So , in my opinion , the recovery plan and the third energy package is something that needs to be done .
The last questions are usually the ones I remember the best , so I will briefly respond to them , because they relate very clearly to the issues that we discussed .
What is the Council discussing ?
I think there are basically two issues .
One is whether we should give public funds to energy at all .
Well , a minority of countries still believes that it is good that the funding should come from industry , but this brings the problem that it is hard for industry to move on very costly projects where returns are uncertain .
The second issue is ' a fair return for my country ' .
Well , I could point out that my country is not specifically covered by this recovery plan , so it is good that there were a lot of questions on this .
I explained that any interconnection with the Baltic as a whole helps my country as well .
So this issue is still looked at very much from a national perspective : ' my fair return ' .
I believe we are here taking the first step towards European public funds supporting this type of development .
This could be the biggest difficulty , but I believe the Council will work hard really to approve of our proposal because I believe it is balanced , if not ideal for every Member State .
On Nabucco , our preferred option is definitely transit via Turkey .
We are working now , we have started the intergovernmental conference with a view to concluding it in March with an intergovernmental agreement and a project support agreement .
That should give enough legal and regulatory clarity for investing in the Nabucco pipeline .
If it fails , we will look for alternatives .
So there are alternatives , but Turkey is our priority route and I think it is beneficial for Turkey as well .
As for gas storage , we are considering this , but 90 days should not be necessary for everyone , because it very much depends on imports .
If a country produces gas it does not need the same level of storage , so there should be a more fine-tuned proportion that gives enough security of supply and is realistic enough in case of crisis .
So we are still looking at what the fine-tuning of the gas storage proposal could look like .
Again I would like to thank you for this debate .
It was a very tough debate , but I believe that all elements are there and we just need to continue to work very vigorously to implement the ones that we have agreed on and the proposals that have been agreed in this House .
Again I would like to thank Parliament for its strong support for developing a European energy policy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we have had a very fascinating debate .
I agree that much , if not the majority , of the responsibility falls to our colleague who is responsible for energy .
However , everything that you have been calling for - energy security , more efficiency , intelligent networks , decentralised networks , the supergrid , the micro grid , the virtual power plants - needs ICT to be run .
So it is essential that we make every effort to get this intelligent means , in order to put into practice the policy proposed by the committee on energy efficiency .
We are economically and technologically on the right path and it is also - and I must stress this - a unique business opportunity .
If we get the ICT to allow energy efficiency to go in the right direction , then we are creating many industries , a lot of growth and many jobs .
That is also the reason why we have to go ahead with smart building , smart lighting and smart transport .
Only if we apply , in practical terms , the possibilities shown to us by research , will we not only be less dependent because we will be more efficient , but we will also build a new industrial capacity .
I will just give you one example in order to show you how this could work .
As you know , we will be adopting the high-efficiency light-emitting diodes - the famous LEDs - which , already today , will cut 30 % of energy consumption in lighting and up to 50 % by 2025 .
We have already , thanks to European research , gone one step forward .
In 2007 , due to our European Framework Programme on Research , we delivered the OLEDs - the organic LEDs - with a supplementary efficiency of 50 % on the LEDs .
European research has brought about results and it is now both national and regional policy to put these results into practice .
I have heard some criticism that the euro recovery plan is not about efficiency .
Well , if I am reading this plan correctly , I see that EUR 1 billion is allocated to energy efficiency in buildings .
You have all pledged in this House that this is the right way to proceed .
EUR 5 billion goes to clean cars , so that cars will no longer be dependent on petrol as they are today , and there is EUR 1 billion for smart manufacturing in order to use less time and less energy in our industries .
We are on the right path and I think that , with the help of Parliament and with a lot of pushing in the national Member States , we will manage not only to secure these means but also to apply them in practice .
Then energy efficiency will not only be about speeches but also about facts .

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Reding , Mr Piebalgs , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your exceptionally valuable contributions ; they show how vast this energy field is and that energy really is a basic need .
In our debate and in the report , which moreover reflect the discussions that we have had among ourselves in the various political groups , I have noted a broad consensus on the need to strengthen the networks and the interconnections , to use information and communication technologies to make the networks intelligent - as Mrs Reding just explained - to strengthen relations with producer countries and transit countries - that was in particular the aim of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , with our rapporteur , Mr Dimitrakopoulos - and also to reach an agreement on energy efficiency , energy savings , and the development of renewable energies .
In conclusion , improving energy efficiency , developing renewable energies , diversifying our sources and lines of supply , consolidating the dialogue with producer countries , but also ensuring that the 27 Member States speak with one voice and , above all , that we effect a change in our lives is the consensus that we have achieved .
All these dimensions are vital ways to guarantee this common energy security that we all want .
The differences of course relate to the composition of the energy mix .
What are the energy sources ?
I should like to respond to my fellow Members from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and then also to other Members who have spoken out against nuclear energy .
I wish to say that we do need to be careful .
There has been a great deal of exaggeration in what has been said .
I believe that we have set some very ambitious targets for 2050 .
Mention has been made of an 80 % reduction in CO2 emissions and of a 60 % share of renewable energies .
It is quite clear that a large share has been allocated to all renewable energy sources .
In terms of nuclear energy , it is acknowledged in this report that it is part of the energy mix .
In this regard , I should like to conclude by simply reminding you of the objectives : a CO2 concentration of 450 ppm , which has been set in order to guarantee this limit of a 2 ° C rise . I should like to remind you that , in these efforts that have been announced , we are talking about a 9 % share of nuclear energy , 54 % energy efficiency , 35 % renewables and 14 % geological carbon capture and storage .
All that is for 2030 .
Thus , nuclear energy is part of the mix , and coal too .
I for my part am not a fan of coal , I am not a fan of nuclear , but we need to have the broadest possible range of energy sources .
I would not like to have to choose between coal and nuclear for 2050 .
- Thank you , Mrs Laperrouze .
Rest assured , in any case , that your energy is precious to Parliament .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote on Mrs Laperrouze 's report will take place tomorrow .
In accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received one motion for a resolution at the end of the debate on the oral question by Mr Remek .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Solidarity between the European Union 's Member States in the energy sector must become a primary objective at European , regional and bilateral level .
Indeed , the strategies adopted by each Member State at national level must not affect the energy interests of other Member States and must be in the European Union 's general interest in terms of energy security .
In this context , the task of improving the Community legislative framework aimed at energy interdependency within the EU and drafting a new generation of regulatory acts intended to govern the European Union 's relations both with energy suppliers outside the EU and the transit states must act as an effective instrument in the process of drawing up a European security policy .
The new laws will have to provide for legal constraint mechanisms intended to consolidate cooperation in the energy sector and develop viable competition on the European energy markets .
It is essential to encourage the efforts aimed at increasing EU investments with regard to diversification of cross-border structures , incentives for generating alternative , non-conventional forms of energy at local level and improvements in the infrastructure 's ability to facilitate connection to new energy sources .
The European Union must also seriously factor in the need to stimulate the private energy sector in Member States , which is already feeling the consequences of the global economic crisis .
It could be said that the January energy crisis is slowly starting to turn into an annual ritual .
The more severe the winter the greater the certainty that the Russian Federation will turn off the gas supply to European countries .
It is therefore all the more surprising , in the face of another gas conflict whose victims were citizens of European Union countries , that Chancellor Angela Merkel is still pushing the proposal of building the Nord Stream gas pipeline with Community funds .
What the European Commission should be doing now is preparing a plan for diversification of energy sources .
Investment should be made in building new transmission networks which would bypass unreliable exporters of energy resources such as the Russian Federation .
In one of the amendments which I tabled to the Laperrouze report we stress the significance of supporting ' the Nabucco gas pipeline , which is the only existing undertaking which will diversify energy sources and transit routes for gas ' without the involvement of Russia .
It should also be a priority to create gas interconnectors enabling connections between systems and rapid transmission of gas reserves in the event of further crises .
However , our trade agreements should be based on the special ' energy security clause ' , which would be the business ethics of the sector .
For Europe and the rest of the world , which conduct business in a civilised manner , it is important that the Russian Federation ratifies the Energy Charter Treaty .
I think that only the cohesive and uncompromising position of a united Europe will be able to persuade the Kremlin to make such a decision .
Energy matters are the greatest challenge of our times .
The gas crisis which the EU was confronted with in January is not the first in the history of the EU .
In Europe there are countries which are 100 % dependent on gas from Russia and these include Lithuania , which in December 2009 will shut down its nuclear power station .
The EU must take additional steps so that the crisis is not repeated .
The missing energy link must be created , and we must also strengthen the Directive on the security of gas supply and establish an EU coordinating mechanism designed to react to similar crises .
It is essential that there are sufficient reserves of energy supplies in those Member States which are most dependent on energy supplies .
The crisis between Russia and Ukraine is not just a crisis of mutual trust , but a geopolitical crisis too .
Both countries must take responsibility for the fact that Member States did not receive gas .
Europe , for its part , must diversify energy sources and improve supply security .
Europe must act decisively , as the solution of this energy crisis over the supply of gas from Russia is only temporary .
I would like to thank Mrs Laperrouze for this report and say that I support the majority of its conclusions .
The EU must be ambitious in the battle against climate change , which means that the role of nuclear power and renewable energy sources cannot be discounted .
The process of creating a single market for electricity and natural gas must be accelerated .
This requires interconnections .
I therefore welcome the European Commission 's proposal to allocate EUR 1.5 billion to interconnection projects .
In addition , the criteria established in Barcelona for interconnection must be met by all Member States .
It is also necessary to improve energy efficiency , especially in the new Member States .
In Romania , for example , there is huge potential for making savings and I would like this opportunity to be utilised .
The Russia-Ukraine crisis has highlighted once again the need for a common EU approach .
I support the report 's conclusion , including the point about signing an agreement between the EU , Russia and Ukraine .
However , I do not agree with the statement about the South Stream project being a vital project for the EU 's energy security to the same degree as Nabucco .
South Stream is a rival project to Nabucco and does not meet at all the needs to diversify energy supply sources in order to guarantee the EU 's energy security .
This is why I am suggesting that in the future we need to pay more attention to the position given to this project in the various EP documents .
In the first few weeks of 2009 , EU Member States were treated as hostages by Ukraine , whose leaders initiated a supply settlement dispute with Moscow over the price of gas deliveries .
Kiev based its action on the hope that , as a result of the traditional anti-Russian sentiment in Western and Eastern Europe , it would be able to gain the support of most EU Member States .
Obviously this was a political shot in the foot .
The EU needs to break out of its own vicious circle at last .
Just one part of this is the energy phobia according to which we need to put up with the Russians , or they will turn off the gas tap .
This mistaken standpoint can only lead to erroneous consequences !
This issue involves more than just energy !
If the European Union 's long-term goal is partnership with a Russia built on democracy , providing an enormous market which is developing and capable of further development , then it also has to anticipate that the economic and political centres of gravity could legitimately shift to Russia .
The EU must actively and credibly convey the message that it is interested in seeing a modern Russia come into existence .
The EU 's behaviour , consisting of encouraging words but stifling , reticent and condemnatory actions is doomed to failure .
The lack of a common energy and foreign policy , squeezing the diversification of energy use into the background and prioritising certain historical injuries and commercial advantages renders our Union vulnerable .
A united EU would give Moscow pause for thought , for it has never before seen such a thing .
In the face of countries engaging in capricious politics , however , an enormous country like Russia can easily assert its will .
This is about much , much more than energy !
The Strategic Energy Review provides a good summary of all the steps that are indispensable for the European Union to reduce its dependence on external energy sources .
The disruptions in gas supply in recent weeks have made certain points of the proposal particularly timely .
We can only agree with the need to place the Community regulation of gas reserves on new foundations .
In addition to imposing obligatory minimum stocks , it is important , in our view , to strengthen the mechanisms of solidarity with Community regulations , in harmony with the Lisbon Treaty .
It is commendable that the energy review carried out by the Commission names the infrastructures whose creation would be in the common interest of all Member States .
It is a welcome development that the proposal considers the interconnections of the Central and South-East European gas pipelines an important goal in addition to the Southern Gas Corridor .
The significance of the initiative that was initially linked to MOL lies in the fact that the states involved will find it easier to assist one another rapidly in the event of disruptions to supply .
Linking the networks will also stimulate competition in the region .
We consider the European Commission 's decision to redirect a portion of unused EU funds to energy infrastructures a good one .
What is less positive , however , is that the most vulnerable Member States are to receive a smaller portion of the financing for their infrastructure than they had wished .
However , the emphatic commitments can only be honoured by a more spectacular financial contribution and solidarity on the part of Community .
' A Pole is wise after the event ! '
This old saying , none too complimentary to my compatriots , can be extended to cover the entire European Union .
The unpleasant experience of the Russo-Ukrainian gas conflict in January 2009 was necessary for the question of energy security to become a matter of primary importance for the entire European Community .
We cannot hide behind the fact that the Treaty of Lisbon , which does include statements about energy solidarity , has not been ratified .
All that is needed is the political will , supported by a cold analysis of the last crisis , in order to describe future scenarios and to deliver the European Union from problems similar to those which were caused by the gas supply blockade via Ukraine .
Both the Commission communication and the Laperrouze report draw attention to ways of coping with emergency situations , such as increasing reserves and creating a transmission network which will ensure technical availability .
These are matters about which there is no disagreement .
It will be more difficult to agree a long-term strategy , which will have to include a realistic position on Russia , because it is - currently - the main supplier of crude oil and gas to Europe .
Mutual dependence , as we have learned , does not guarantee continuity of supply and relations based on rational economic premises .
The interference of political motives is too visible to overcome naivety .
The most difficult thing in relations with our eastern neighbours will be to root out the tendency to make bilateral agreements , and that is the real measure of success or failure of Community energy security and energy solidarity policy !
Mrs Laperrouze 's report refers to an issue that is particularly important to every European citizen , especially during the gas crisis which we faced recently .
We all need to make our contribution to successfully attaining the ambitious objectives which this Second Strategic Energy Review is proposing , namely energy supply sustainability , competitiveness and security .
I want to emphasise the importance of improving the security of our energy resources .
We must take measures to diversify our energy sources and supply routes .
We need to support investments in infrastructure and in new technologies with reduced energy consumption , so that we can successfully achieve the ' 20-20-20 ' objectives .
Now more than ever , Member States must demonstrate their solidarity and cooperate in order to ensure the security of their energy reserves .
At the same time , this new strategy needs to lay the foundations for economic growth in the EU .
I would like to remind you of the geopolitical importance of Romania and the Black Sea region for energy security and diversification of energy supply resources .
Development impact of Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) ( short presentation )
- The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Schröder , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the development impact of Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about the impact of economic partnership agreements on development .
' Economic partnership agreements ' really is quite a mouthful , particularly in German .
It is a horrible phrase , and no doubt very few people in Germany will concern themselves with this topic , despite the fact that it will be one of the most important topics in coming years .
What is it all about ?
The Cotonou Agreement states that economic partnership agreements should be concluded between the European Union and the ACP ( African , Caribbean Pacific ) States by the end of 2007 .
The background to this was that developing countries that were not , and are not , in the ACP Group of States complained to the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) that the European Union was according the ACP States special privileges .
We have now managed to set up , at least in part of the Caribbean , an economic partnership agreement of this type , which we hope will be a success .
My report states that this agreement will form a new basis for development cooperation : we are helping them to help themselves .
We are trying to link together trade and development , by which I mean trade policy and development policy .
There has , of course , been a certain amount of friction , in particular here in Parliament between our committee , the Committee on Regional Development , and the Committee on International Trade , relating primarily to the compatibility of this agreement with the rules of the WTO and especially the issue of parliamentary scrutiny .
My report originally included two paragraphs - numbers 5 and 17 - relating to parliamentary scrutiny .
At the request and on the advice of the chairman of the Committee on International Trade , I deleted both of those paragraphs completely and submitted an alternative draft report with these paragraphs deleted , on which we will be voting on Thursday .
Apart from the two deletions , my draft report is identical to the first draft .
It sets out both the opportunities and the risks of the economic partnership agreements , but it particularly emphasises the potential positive effects of these agreements on the people in those countries .
Before I finish , Mr President , I would just like to say one more thing : some of our fellow Members have repeatedly claimed that people in the ACP States had too little time to conclude these agreements .
That is not true : they had from 2000 to 2007 ; then they had another year until 2008 ; and we still have time .
We are not , however , saying to people in these countries that they can do it whenever they like : time is running out .
It is in the interests of the people in the ACP States , and I therefore call on all Members of this House to vote in favour of my report on Thursday , including those who originally intended to vote against it .
This is not an argument between the left and the right ; it is about helping people in the ACP States to become more self-confident and , in the foreseeable future , to become equal partners in international trade .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the report by Mr Schroeder , which represents a balanced overview of the diversity of opinions surrounding the development impact of the Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
The dossier continues to evolve .
We have signed a full Economic Partnership Agreement with the Caribbean region , whilst we have negotiated interim agreements with countries and regions in Africa and the Pacific .
These interim EPAs provide for a trade regime compatible with WTO rules and preserve important trade preferences for these countries .
The interim agreements are only transitory in nature , as they will be replaced by full regional EPAs .
The pace of these negotiations will be set by the regions concerned to ensure those objectives and coverage match their own integration processes , capacity , needs and political priorities .
In parallel , the programming of the 10th European Development Fund has moved on .
Most of the regional and national programmes are signed .
In anticipation of the EPAs , these programmes include considerable support to help our African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) partners make the most of the agreements : direct support for the implementation of the agreements and indirect support to build up infrastructure and productive capacity .
The Commission recognises the essential role of development finance .
At the same time we welcome the fact that the report acknowledges that the development objectives and outcomes of the agreements are a much wider issue than just financial support .
We also recognise the essential role of reform in the ACP regions in reaching the development objectives , as set out in paragraph 14 of the report .
This includes fiscal reform and changes to revenue systems .
The reforms offset shifts in the tax base due to liberalisation and are in themselves valuable steps to ensuring sustainable public financing in the ACP .
Another essential objective is to support regional economic integration in the ACP .
The interim agreements do not yet include all ACP countries .
This is exactly why these agreements are only temporary pending full agreement .
The full agreements will be flexible and comprehensive .
Building up supply-side capacity to trade and engage in goods and service sectors underpins the economic value of a trade agreement .
The Commission 's view is that protectionism is never a valid policy option .
However , we do acknowledge that protection - the legitimate use of measures to protect sensitive sectors and emerging industry - is a valid and essential policy tool .
This is why the EPAs contain all sorts of flexibilities , and in particular exclusions and asymmetrical commitments for the ACP side , as called for in the report .
On the EU side , our markets are completely open for ACP products , with increased cooperation to meet technical and health standards and facilitate trade .
ACP countries will only open their markets gradually , with the possibility to maintain exceptions .
The Commission does not see our commitment to the EPA process ending on signature .
This is the start of a process of enhanced dialogue , careful implementation , monitoring , and evaluation of the effect , especially as regards the development impact .
All of this will use the institutions established to implement the agreement to ensure transparency and the participation of parliamentarians and civil society .
The Commission therefore welcomes the report by Mr Schröder and will provide a detailed reaction to the points raised in due course .
- The item is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) On Thursday Parliament will give its verdict on Mr Schröder 's report on Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
I would be extremely disappointed if our institution 's first vote on this both very technical and highly political subject ( since the whole future of our relations with the ACP States is at stake ) were to result in the adoption of Mr Schröder 's report .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament will not vote in favour of this text , since it in no way reflects the concerns both of Europeans and of our ACP partners about the EPAs and the way in which they are negotiated .
In contrast to the rapporteur 's position , the PSE Group has tabled and will vote in favour of a motion for a resolution which puts development back at the heart of the EPAs ' priorities , which rejects the liberalisation of public services and any negotiation on the Singapore issues or on services against the ACP States ' wishes , which promotes regional integration , which calls for huge financial support to bring the ACP States ' economies up to standard , and which takes account of the specific characteristics and fragilities of these countries , be they least developed countries or otherwise .
These are the conditions that would make the EPAs acceptable agreements .
Unfortunately we are still a long way away from them .
Wilderness in Europe ( short presentation )
- The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Hegyi , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on wilderness in Europe .
Around 46 % of the world 's land mass can be considered a natural environment , a wilderness untouched by human civilisation .
In Europe , however , wilderness makes up only 1 % of the entire territory .
We must do everything we can to ensure that at least the remaining wilderness , this 1 % , is preserved for the sake of future generations .
This is the aim of my report , and I hope that increased protection of wilderness zones will sooner or later be integrated into EU legislation .
There is a dual perception of wilderness in European culture .
On the one hand , it is viewed as a place to fear and avoid , where monsters and unknown dangers lie in wait for us , as is evoked in many folk tales .
On the other hand , it is seen as an attractive , pleasant place that gives us temporary refuge from the stress of urban and industrial civilisation .
English-language literature on the topic makes a distinction between the concept of conservation , that is , the proper use of nature , and of preservation , in other words the protection of nature from all human use .
These philosophical debates lie beyond the scope of my report , but for the record I would like to point out that I consider sustainable development to be the ideal solution .
The wilderness cannot be locked up in a bank safety deposit box , like a necklace or a package of share certificates .
We have a right to discover its values .
Thus we must protect nature , but by means of human use .
The territory of Europe is too small to have zones that are off-limits to its citizens .
Discovering nature and encountering conditions experienced by humanity before civilisation teaches respect for nature and can serve as the basis for high-quality tourism .
At the same time , these areas are extremely vulnerable to environmental changes caused by human beings - for instance as a result of motorisation , chemicals and climate change - and to the appearance of alien plant and animal species .
We need to be careful that visitors do not endanger the wilderness , and therefore all forms of tourism should be placed under the oversight of conservation experts .
The development of sustainable tourism should be combined with the protection of these areas , and all proceeds should be devoted to wilderness protection .
The wilderness is a refuge for many species , such as the brown bear , the wolf and the lynx , which are unable to survive under even slightly altered conditions .
There are still many species in Europe that are waiting to be discovered and described .
Most of these live in the soil or in rotting timber and are highly sensitive to changes .
These undisturbed areas are well-suited to the study of evolution , of natural changes occurring in nature .
Wilderness zones are generally part of the Natura 2000 network , but they require stricter protection .
My report therefore calls upon the European Commission to work with the Member States to map the remaining wilderness regions in Europe and develop a strategy for their increased protection .
The natural values of the still-untouched areas and the characteristics of the habitats should be determined , and their further protection should be ensured .
Experts have advised me that we should not think in terms of new legislation , but rather introduce more specific and stricter protection for wilderness zones within the Natura 2000 regulations .
Since the financing of Natura 2000 is at any rate contradictory , and the source of much legitimate criticism , we will in any case have to make changes to the relevant regulations in the next parliamentary cycle but at the latest in the new budget .
This could also be a good opportunity for the legal definition and enhanced protection of wilderness .
An area of my own country , the dripstone cave of Aggtelek , is also classified as wilderness .
A part of this site is located within the territory of neighbouring Slovakia .
I would be very happy if Hungarian and Slovak conservationists could successfully collaborate to develop a Protected Area Network ( PAN ) Park , since the network of PAN Parks has developed a successful European-wide system of wilderness protection .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , halting the loss of biodiversity is a priority for the Union and for the Commission .
It is quite literally a question about the future of life on Earth .
But , despite the fundamental importance of preserving biodiversity , progress to date has been limited .
In December 2008 , the Commission adopted the first comprehensive assessment of progress made at both European Community and Member State levels .
Despite the positive developments that have been made in recent years - for instance the Natura 2000 network - the EU 's biodiversity is still under continuous pressure due to habitat destruction , pollution , climate change and the impact of invasive species .
The Commission 's conclusion was that we are highly unlikely to meet our 2010 target of halting biodiversity decline - and that further intensive efforts will be required , both at Member State and EU levels .
Against this background , the Commission welcomes the consistent support that Parliament has given to efforts to protect Europe 's rich and varied natural heritage .
We greatly welcome the initiative of Mr Hegyi for producing this important resolution on wilderness in Europe .
I would like to start by making the general observation that many of the issues highlighted in the report are already being followed up by the Commission .
For example , in December 2008 , the Commission adopted a communication , ' Towards an EU Strategy on Invasive Species ' . We are also launching an overall reflection on the future of EU biodiversity policy and look forward to the input of the European Parliament on these questions .
Issues such as improving implementation and the relationship between biodiversity and climate change must be explicitly considered .
It is also important to add one clarification to the report .
There is an ongoing assessment of the effectiveness of our nature legislation - the so-called Article 17 reports - but there are currently no plans to amend our legislation , and the main focus is on more effective implementation .
Turning to the subject of wilderness , Europe is densely populated and only 1-2 % of the territory has not been affected by human intervention .
But while these wilderness areas are small in area , they are of high value in both scientific and cultural terms .
They can even , as is the case in the common trans-border National Park of the German Bavarian and Czech Bohemian forests , be a symbol for European cooperation and integration .
Most of these areas are already a part of the Natura 2000 network .
However , this report provides the inspiration to look again at the wild and nearly wild areas in the EU and to see if there are instances where additional European actions can help protect these special places .
The Commission has commissioned a number of studies and is cooperating with the Czech EU Presidency .
A conference will take place in Prague in May 2009 .
This Conference will offer a platform to consider the issues related to wilderness areas in Europe and identify measures needed to ensure their conservation .
Let me conclude by confirming that the Commission recognises that Europe 's landscape is the result of a long process of human intervention .
The concept of a living landscape that balances the needs of nature with the needs of man is the basis of the thinking that underpins Natura 2000 .
We certainly do not intend to re-convert our existing landscapes into wild nature , but we need to publicly commit ourselves to preserving the last remaining wild areas of Europe .
For this reason , the Commission considers the European Parliament resolution timely .
It represents a very welcome input into the Prague conference .
Thank you very much to the rapporteur .
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to protest at the overuse and the increasingly liberal use of Rule 45 ( 2 ) under which these most important debates are taken .
I rise at this point because I particularly would have liked to have spoken on the excellent work of Mr Hegyi 's report and indeed I have colleagues coming on on subjects which are not discussed in my main committee and other colleagues ' main committees , and I am being denied the right to contribute toward them in plenary .
In the PPE-DE Group we had a very vexed and heated argument both at working group and group level last week on the number of Rule 45 ( 2 ) items on our agenda this week .
I really do feel we need to urgently revisit this rule .
I know it is a rule that was set by Parliament and the Members themselves signed off on , but our good will , I feel , is being abused by the number of points on our agenda - the most important points on our agenda - that we are being increasingly disallowed to debate .
- Mrs Doyle , we will obviously gladly take note of your statement , but I would remind you that the use of Rule 45 is in the hands of the Conference of Presidents and that , within the latter , votes are weighted , that is to say that the large groups , and your own in particular , have a huge amount of power to decide on what should be allowed in plenary under such-and-such a rule .
I am a bit like you ; I must say that we have perhaps gone from a phase of being too tolerant to one of being too strict and that the truth is definitely somewhere in between .
Do not worry , however , we will have those concerned follow up this matter .
You should also refer to your group chairmen , ladies and gentlemen .
I think that it is in this context that your message will be understood best .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing .
I was shadow rapporteur on this report on ' Wilderness in Europe ' and I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Gyula Hegyi , on his work .
I wish to outline two things here :
First of all , we really need to proceed with the mapping of the last wilderness areas in Europe .
Of course , this cannot be done without defining ' wilderness ' , therefore I urge the European Commission to take action in this field .
Secondly , I wish to speak on the key issue of this report , namely human presence and tourism .
Human presence should not be excluded ; on the contrary , people have to be introduced to the natural beauties of their country in order to preserve them better .
We need to support sustainable tourism in these areas and teach the site managers how to preserve and protect the wilderness .
Therefore I join the request of the main NGOs in the field and ask the European Commission to give some guidelines for wilderness preservation in Europe .
in writing . - Wilderness can mean different things to different people .
I personally perceive wilderness as areas undisturbed by human activities , where natural processes are dominant .
So for me , promoting wilderness tourism is a mere contradiction of the term ' wilderness ' .
On the other hand , I agree that sustainable tourism , if done properly , can provide an economic incentive for local communities to conserve the natural and cultural heritage .
But the increase in demand for wilderness tourism puts pressure on the very same values that the tourists are seeking and can speed up the destruction of fragile ecosystems .
A solution would be to open a limited part of wilderness areas to high-quality sustainable tourism , which does not adversely affect the conservation objectives of the sites .
Tourism activities should be allowed under strict conditions , such as a limited number of tourists per day , and on the basis of a solid sustainable tourism plan that supports conservation initiatives and promotes a responsible experience of wilderness .
The tourism plans and the activities of the operators should be evaluated by means of thorough assessment mechanisms , especially designed for wilderness areas .
The aim is to make tourists and operators aware that wilderness entails not only freedom but also responsibility .
Natural wealth must be preserved for future generations .
In this respect , Romania is one of the countries which possess a significant amount and variety of flora and fauna .
To achieve this goal , however , the Europe Union must extend the use of Community funds earmarked for financing wilderness conservation activities .
Consequently , the Commission should allocate larger sums through the Fund for Rural Development to environmental protection projects in the European agricultural sector , with a clear aim of financing wilderness conservation activities .
On the other hand , the European Commission should introduce a set of clear rules for providing financial support to local community projects in the vicinity of these areas , which allow controlled forms of tourism in the areas intended for conservation and generate economic benefits which can be enjoyed by the relevant local communities .
In addition , the Commission must encourage cross-border cooperation between Member States for conservation projects targeting wilderness areas situated in the territory of two or more countries .
Europe 's biodiversity is the most precious legacy which we can leave future generations .
I welcome and support this report on Europe 's wilderness areas .
I would like to draw attention to the alarming state of the area with the richest biodiversity in Europe , the Danube Delta .
The Delta is being constantly subjected to acts of aggression from poaching , illegal economic interests and , last but not least , uncontrolled tourism .
One of the biggest sources of aggression affecting the Delta is rooted in the lack of awareness of the Delta 's populations and of rural populations living along the Danube 's tributaries flowing through Romania .
I would like to take this opportunity to call on the Commission and the Council , based on this report , to consider as soon as possible specific measures aimed at : setting up a working party to examine the situation of the Danube Delta , devising effective educational programmes about the environment targeted at the populations with a direct impact on the area 's biodiversity , and establishing biodiversity protection standards .
At the same time , wilderness conservation in the European Union , especially in the Danube Delta area , cannot be achieved without applying similar measures in the countries neighbouring the EU .
Therefore , I urge the Commission and the Council to step up their dialogue and the implementation of specific measures as part of their relations with these countries .
Bearing in mind that it will not be possible to meet the commitments made in 2007 by adopting the resolution on halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 , the protection of wilderness areas through promotion , development and financing activities is becoming a priority in the light of climate change and the negative impact of tourism .
The proposal to create a system for mapping Europe 's wilderness would help identify biodiversity and unspoilt areas which will require more attention and a significant effort on the part of Member States in order to protect them .
Information campaigns aimed at raising the general public 's awareness of wilderness areas , the implementation of high-quality sustainable tourism and the enforcement of the Birds and Habitats Directives are just some of the instruments which will help us protect these areas .
There are already eight national parks in Europe , including Retezat National Park in Romania .
These parks are part of the Protected Area Network ( PAN ) .
This network is responsible for administering wilderness areas and brings together all the national authorities and local tourism agencies involved in ensuring the sustainable development of tourism .
The European Commission should support this initiative and cooperate with this network with a view to exchanging information and good practice .
General and business aviation ( short presentation )
- The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Queiró , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on an agenda for sustainable future in general and business aviation .
Mr President , Commissioner , until now the general and business aviation sector has not been addressed specifically at European level .
The political significance of this report therefore derives from the fact that this is the first time that the Commission and Parliament have examined this activity , at a time when it is recording accelerated growth both in volume and in economic importance .
The numbers speak for themselves : in business aviation alone , small and medium-sized enterprises working in this field are multiplying , the number of aircraft is expected to double to 3 500 in the next decade and annual turnover amounts to more than EUR 25 billion .
Directly or indirectly , it generates 154 000 jobs across Europe .
Together with general aviation , where it is calculated that there are between 30 000 and 50 000 aircraft , the sector represents around 9 % of all recorded air traffic and boasts the fastest growth in Europe , twice as high as that of all other traffic .
The business aviation segment offers important social and economic benefits : by providing flexible point-to-point transportation it increases citizens ' mobility , companies ' productivity and regional cohesion .
The general aviation sector provides essential services in very diverse areas , from search-and-rescue aviation to firefighting , traffic regulation , cartography and leisure and sports aviation .
It is also an important source of professional skills for the entire aviation sector .
I must also mention European industry in this sector , which has been showing continuous growth in its world market share , which currently hovers around 16 % and which it is therefore necessary to support .
Looking at the report itself , I agree , as rapporteur , with the need emphasised by the Commission in its communication to examine the specific needs of the sector and identify its central themes .
The former relate to data collection and are based on the necessity of providing political decision-makers with sufficient data and statistical information to give them a better understanding of the sector so that they can regulate it adequately .
The second point relates to the application of the principle of proportionality in regulating the sector .
The key question is whether the rules designed to govern the operation of commercial aircraft will be adequate for operating simpler and smaller , often single-engine aircraft .
We support the Commission in its intention to apply the principle of proportionality both in drafting the rules and in their implementation , always bearing in mind the necessity of not compromising safety in general .
This is the case , for example , with the adaptation of certain airworthiness rules , already adopted by the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) , to operations with non-commercial aircraft , or the possible application of specific rules with regard to simplified security and passenger screening procedures in business aviation .
The third point concerns the problem of access to airports and airspace .
The diagnosis has been made : these aircraft generally have difficulty in accessing large airports and are starting to have the same problems in regional and secondary airports .
The solutions range from optimising the use of existing capacity to perhaps revising the regulations on slots .
It is also necessary to stimulate investment in small and medium-sized airports to provide increasing interconnections between the different European regions and cities .
As regards the question of airspace capacity , we stress the importance of reforms within the framework of the Single European Sky and the SESAR ( Single European Sky ATM Research ) Joint Undertaking and , once again , we come back to the need not to impose disproportionate demands on small aircraft in terms of navigation equipment , while always complying with safety limits .
The fourth and last point refers to the environmental sustainability of this area of activity .
Although the CO2 emissions of small aircraft are lower , it is still necessary to promote research , development and innovation , not only within the framework of the Clean Sky and CESAR ( Cost Effective Small Aircraft ) initiatives , but also in the use of less polluting engines and cleaner fuels .
I would like to end , Mr President and Commissioner , by expressing the hope that this report represents a real framework for future legislative and regulatory measures which may be drawn up for the sector .
That is the wish of the Committee on Transport and Tourism when it calls on the Commission to report by the end of 2009 on the progress achieved on the issues raised in the report .
With tomorrow 's vote , my expectation is that this wish will be shared by a large majority of the Members of this House .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the report and thanks the rapporteur and the committee for their excellent work .
In January 2008 the Commission for the first time published a communication on general and business aviation .
This was followed by a very positive Council conclusion in April 2008 , and now by this important report of Parliament .
General and business aviation is an important sector of the EU aeronautical industry , worth about EUR 2.3 billion annually .
It invests substantially in research and development , and is growing fast .
Over two thirds of all aircraft certified in the EU are in this sector .
General and business aviation mainly comprises small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is also a very diversified sector .
The regulations need to be adapted to this specific nature , without , however , compromising safety or security .
We are happy to see that this notion of proportionality is encouraged by Parliament in its report .
There are three main areas on which we will have to focus our efforts in the nearest future : development of common EU safety standards for general aviation ; integration of non-commercial aviation into the next generation of air traffic management ( ATM ) systems for Europe ; and reducing the negative environmental footprint of the sector .
The Commission intends in the coming year to propose a number of EU implementing rules ensuring a uniform level of safety of non-commercial aviation .
As highlighted in your report , we have to make sure that they are not only providing for an adequate level of safety , but are also proportionate and do not impose unnecessary burden on operators .
We will also continue the development of the future ATM system for Europe with a clear understanding that airspace is a common good that should be accessible for all its users in a safe way .
From the perspective of general aviation , the Single European Sky and SESAR will be of the utmost importance for enhancing , in a safe way , access to airspace and aerodromes .
These technologies will open the way to new services , as yet unseen in Europe .
Last but not least , general and business aviation , despite the ongoing technological advances , are also impacting on the environment and , like the wider airline industry , they need to contribute to reducing these impacts .
Here as well , proportionality will be an important principle to follow .
The Commission is looking forward to working with Parliament along the lines of the report , and will report back on the progress made .
- The item is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
At the outset I would like to thank Luís Queiró for his report on a subject so important to the future of transport in Europe .
I would like to emphasise the significance of the issue of developing general and business aviation and the aircraft manufacturing industry in this sector .
Although the solutions proposed by the Commission do not bring any radical legislative changes and may seem of little significance today , their influence on the future of aviation in the light of deregulation of the market and development of the air carriage sector in Poland cannot be overestimated .
The Commission 's objective is to facilitate development of this aviation sector by simplifying existing regulatory procedures , adapting provisions to new forms of air traffic management and revising them to ensure proportionality .
It is obvious that this initiative is worthy of full support .
However , care should be taken that , in the processes of formulating and implementing policy , the needs of all categories of users of airspace and aviation infrastructure are given consideration in the planning and optimisation of capacity .
In order to facilitate further reform a basic European data collection system should , however , be created for general and business aviation .
Ultimately it will also be necessary to facilitate the access of this sector to foreign markets , supporting the development of new , competitive technologies , but at the same time taking care that respect is maintained for the principles of natural environment protection .
in writing . - I welcome this report for it seeks to harmonize and bring more clarity to the rules on General and Business Aviation on a community level .
This is the fastest growing segment of civil aviation in Europe and it provides numerous social and economic benefits to Member States .
However , to make the most of it , we need to establish the proper regulation .
For example , currently there is a lack of reliable data on this sector and this deficiency must be quickly addressed for management , safety and security reasons .
The Commission should make a clear distinction between large-scale commercial aircraft operations and privately owned airplanes .
The legislation should be proportional to the risks incurred by the different types of aviation and mindful in terms of the cost burden it places on them .
The future regulation should be stimulating and enhancing the industry instead of limiting it .
A cause for concern may be that most of the General and Business Aviation falls outside of the scope of the Commission Directive to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading .
Considering the fast growth rate of the sector , I think there is a need to offset its environmental impact in one form or another .
in writing . - ( PL ) At a time when we keep hearing the word ' crisis ' , it is not easy to talk about the stable future of general and business aviation .
I therefore thank Luís Queiró for taking the trouble to prepare the report on this subject . Congratulations .
I am certain that it is air transport which can be a driving force , setting the world and European economy in motion .
We remember that barely 106 years ago the Wright brothers made the world 's first powered , controlled flight ( although it was for barely 40 metres ) in an aircraft .
It was the beginning of true aviation .
Today aviation is a highly-developed industry , making ' flying machines ' which are increasingly better equipped with an array of instruments .
Aviation also includes the whole complicated field of navigation and flight control , building a ground-based airport infrastructure , a system of security , and so on .
We should be aware that in Europe about 50 000 aircraft are in use in general and business aviation , and almost four times as many small aircraft and gliders are used for sport and recreation .
These numbers speak for themselves .
In this context , ensuring proper capacity for the European airspace and for airports themselves is an extremely important issue .
I would like here to draw attention to the significance of regional airports for ensuring cohesion of communication in the EU .
Naturally , when speaking of the development of air transport , we must not forget problems related to the natural environment .
Mr President , the debate on the aviation industry is frequently distorted : there is a biased focus on the problems of emissions from air traffic but people are not prepared to see its potential .
Obviously , aviation and air traffic cause emissions , but it is just as obvious that they represent the future .
This is true of commercial air transport and business and general aviation .
Although EU internal market legislation has mainly addressed commercial air transport , it is worth noting that issues to do with general and business aviation are tending to crop up more and more in areas such as climate policy , protection of the environment and aviation safety .
When we take into account the growing importance of business aviation in particular , we definitely need to pay attention to these sectors and guarantee their competitiveness .
I wish to express a concern I have with regard to business conditions for aviation .
Small and medium-sized airports are crucial for both general and business aviation .
Their establishment and modernisation should be promoted and Member States encouraged to invest .
The continuing growth in business aviation , however , is clogging up the airports in use more and more .
From the perspective of climate protection , we can say that , although smaller aircraft are not included in the future Emission Trading System , a voluntary carbon-offset mechanism is being developed by the sector .
This is a sign of the development potential of air traffic as a whole .
The Community should do all it can to encourage research into more innovative and more energy-efficient and environmentally friendly aircraft .
The aim must be nothing less than emission-free air traffic .
Non-discrimination based on gender and inter-generational solidarity ( short presentation )
- The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Záborská , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on non-discrimination based on gender and inter-generational solidarity .
May I first of all sincerely thank all fellow Members for their help with my own-initiative report .
The voting in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality was the result of much wide-ranging discussion and accommodation .
The men and women who are today involved in establishing inter-generational solidarity networks deserve recognition .
Their determination is an important contribution to national and European wealth and to the common good .
Unfortunately , this contribution is not included in national statistics and accounts .
This is the reason why men and women are being exposed to hidden forms of discrimination .
Women and men are entitled to a free choice of suitable and comfortable activities .
The obligation on society is to guarantee this freedom of choice and not to discriminate against any activity simply because it does not fall within the usual scope of the formal labour market .
This is a brief summary of my own-initiative report on non-discrimination based on gender and inter-generational solidarity .
The subject of this report is at the heart of discussions on the future of Europe and employment in its Member States .
Although it is a rather technical report , it also has a human dimension .
There is something in it for all of us as each of us lives within networks of broader or narrower family and social relationships , in which we are personally involved .
Restricting the concept of inter-generational solidarity to just childcare is a mistaken interpretation .
Inter-generational solidarity also involves responsibility with respect to our parents and elders and care for dependents .
Inter-generational solidarity also involves education of citizens with regard to respect for life , human dignity and environmental protection .
It is predominantly a question of social justice . It is the basis for the future of Europe and the common good of its inhabitants .
Human resources managers agree that human capabilities are comparable to university degrees .
It is therefore necessary to assess this value in an explicit and positive manner .
The European Union must create a political framework in order to achieve this target .
Women are the first to contribute to inter-generational solidarity , thus participating in the creation of social relations .
This is why this report is devoted mainly to them .
Economists use mathematical models to highlight the value of housework .
Longstanding research by economists and demographers suggests that women 's contribution to gross domestic product could be even higher if their unpaid work were factored in .
Ignoring this fact means maintaining the ideas of the past .
We must look forward in order to create the conditions for all women and men to become involved in inter-generational solidarity regardless of their social standing .
The European Union must act if it is serious about non-discrimination and equality of opportunity .
My political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , is proud of its support for a policy of non-discrimination which pursues the general good and respects the distinct characteristics and complementary nature of men and women .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to point out that this report is the result of extensive consultations with numerous women 's non-governmental organisations .
In my report , I have also taken account of the opinions of three of our Parliament 's Intergroups : ATD Quart Monde , the Intergroup on Family and Protection of Childhood and the Intergroup on Carers .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has adopted this report unanimously .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to invite you to allow us to continue with this cooperation and to vote tomorrow for the FEMM Committee 's motion for a resolution .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think Ms Záborská 's work is very important because the subject she is tackling is one which is of the utmost importance in our society .
The question of dependence will become more and more important in the future because of demographic ageing , but also because of equality between men and women as the care of children and dependants is still carried out mostly by women .
Therefore , we have to put into practice measures that help women enter or stay in the labour market by improving family life conditions , especially those that facilitate a balance between professional and private life .
As specifically concerns the situation regarding the care of dependants , the Commission has already put the following actions on the table .
Filial leave to care for dependent family members was included in the consultation of the European social partners on the reconciliation of work , private and family life .
The Commission is also studying the quality of services for elderly dependent people and protection against ill treatment , as well as measures which could be taken at European level in cooperation with the Member States to speed up the development and modernisation of infrastructure and services .
The EU cohesion policy , through the European Social Fund , will continue to cofinance initiatives at national and local level .
The open method of coordination in the field of social protection and social inclusion pays particular attention to the modernisation of pension schemes to take greater account of new forms of work , career breaks and long-term care for dependent people .
We are working on this , and really look forward to collaborating very closely with parliamentarians .
We would like to congratulate Parliament on the very important work done .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to comment that , in this report which was adopted with an absolute majority in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , there is also an alternative motion tabled by certain Members .
We shall be called on tomorrow to vote by choosing between this motion and the motion tabled by a parliamentary committee .
One demolishes the other .
We cannot talk about this alternative motion in plenary , nor can we hear the Members who tabled it and nor can we express an opinion on it .
It is a defect in the new rules which you need to bear in mind .
- Yes , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , what I said earlier to Mrs Doyle also applies here .
We are applying Rule 45 which , in fact , provides a very strict framework for our speaking time , since only the rapporteur can take the floor .
We take our lead from the Conference of Presidents , which decided that this subject came under that particular Rule .
Our Rules of Procedure certainly ought to be developed to allow for greater flexibility and richer debates , but , as you will understand , it is not up to me to amend these Rules of Procedure this evening .
That being said , your comment is obviously noted .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Discrimination based on gender is still a reality , unfortunately , even in the European Union Member States .
This fact is not only valid in the private sector , where men account for nine-tenths of the members of boards of directors in large companies , but also in the public sector where women are also underrepresented .
However , the Lisbon Strategy aims to ensure that 60 % of women able to work are in employment .
Apart from this , we must not forget that one of the biggest challenges in Europe in the medium- and long-term is the demographic situation .
The European Union is facing a bigger rise in the average age of its population than other regions of the world , along with a population growth of just 0.4 % , which means that the European Union will need , at the same time , to face up to a fall in the population able to work and an ageing population .
Consequently , the choice between having a career and raising a family must not be definitive or mandatory and it must be possible to balance these two aspects of life .
One of the European Union 's key values is to eliminate any form of discrimination .
Apart from eliminating discrimination , which also means between men and women , we have the responsibility to implement proactive measures to encourage professional careers for women .
One of the fields in which women are hugely underrepresented is scientific research .
In addition , they are not only underrepresented in numerical terms , but also within the management hierarchy : the higher the level in the hierarchy , the lower the proportion of women .
In this way , society is depriving itself of the creative potential of an important section of the population .
The highly competitive nature of research , the inherent geographical mobility associated with scientific work , along with establishing a career at a relatively late age all make this activity difficult to combine with family life .
I am taking advantage of the discussion of this topic to highlight the need to introduce specific policies aimed at achieving equality between men and women in the academic profession .
These policies must take into account a set of good practices at European level , such as facilitating dual careers , encouraging universities and research institutes to invest in childcare centres , as well as fast-track access to academic posts for women .
The Member States of the European Union must support demographic renewal , incorporating their action into the renewed Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs , in line with the policy of equality between men and women .
A balance in European societies depends on the sum total of solidarity relations between the generations , which are more complex than ever before : young people continue to live in their parents ' home for longer periods , while it is increasingly common for those parents to have to look after their aging relatives as well .
The burden that this represents rests primarily on the young and middle-aged generation , and especially on women .
For this reason , equality between women and men , that is to say , equal opportunities in the broader sense , would seem to be a fundamental condition for bringing about new forms of inter-generational solidarity .
With regard to family obligations , that is , the reconciliation of family life and work , the question of equality between men and women is clearly very important if European families are to gain new impetus .
It is also of critical importance to guarantee the opportunity for childcare of appropriate quality and quantity for those who would like to take up paid employment alongside childrearing .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament is doing everything it can to ensure that the goals of Barcelona Process are met , and notes with disappointment that this objective is visibly absent from the Czech Presidency 's programme .
Today 's Europe is faced with unprecedented demographic changes .
If Europe wishes to change the trend towards population reduction , we must , through the policy of the EU and the Member States , support families in all possible ways , and permit women and men to combine family life and work , but such that obligations connected with home and family are equally divided between men and women .
I wholeheartedly support the alternative motion for a European Parliament resolution on non-discrimination based on gender and inter-generational solidarity , which is more realistic than the preceding report .
I must particularly emphasise the objective of creating a care policy that is balanced between the genders .
Inequality in the performance of caring is often caused by the absence of affordable , available and high-quality services in Member States , and women are faced with the inevitability of sacrificing their opportunities to participate in social , economic and political life .
All of this preserves the inequality in the distribution of obligations connected with home and family between men and women , which generally forces women to choose a more flexible organisation of labour or give up working , which in turn influences their career , the continuing disparity between the wages earned by women and men , and pension rights .
I am cautious of the recommendation of the Czech Presidency to make childcare ' a fully valid alternative to a professional career ' .
I am convinced that the implementation of this recommendation would perpetuate the traditional division of labour between men and women .
The measures planned in the framework of the Lisbon Strategy play an important role in establishing equality in the division of labour between women and men ; their objective , in addition to increasing employment , promoting innovation and raising productivity , must also be to eliminate in the EU the gender discrimination that has developed over time .
Caring has been the domain of women for centuries .
Ideal mothers who spent their youth caring for their children represent today the majority of the elderly female population and it is this childcare and homecare that is not reflected in their pensions .
Many of them do not receive an appropriate pension for this socially valuable work during their active life and this exposes them to a greater risk of poverty .
This is also a reason why young women are postponing motherhood and giving priority to a professional career .
During my many speeches in the House , I have constantly emphasised that mothers and fathers who freely choose to bring up their children or to care for elderly or dependent family members must not suffer discrimination .
I know many families who have disabled relatives and carry out this demanding work with great courage despite the obstacles they constantly have to overcome .
In this speech , I should like to praise the proposals made by the rapporteur Mrs Anna Záborská , which recommend recognition not only of traditional forms of gainful employment but also of the manifold forms of non-gainful employment carried out in families as part of inter-generational solidarity .
This work is reflected in the GDP if a family employs someone .
However , it is not the case if one of the parents carries out this work .
I believe that the report will inspire Member States to adopt measures to improve family policy within the EU .
At a time when Europe is facing a deep economic crisis whose final magnitude may be difficult to estimate , it is only to be expected that the birth rate will feel the negative repercussions of the turmoil on the labour market , as many women will tend not to have children because they are terrified of the possibility of losing their job and of the reduction in the material resources required to care for and bring up their children .
Against this background , it is the duty of every Member State to promote multigenerational activities , such as ' bridge-between-generation ' centres , where older adults are paid to take care of and bring up children .
These ' bridge-between-generation ' centres , which operate successfully in some Member States , would allow women who have had a child to return to work quite soon , while also making it easier for elderly retired people to return to employment .
In the last few decades the population in the Member States of the European Union has increasingly aged .
Successfully balancing professional and personal life is starting to become a strenuous task for women .
It is therefore now even more important for Member States to promote the birth rate and to pay proper attention to families .
In this area the EU could indirectly contribute and help Member States to modernise their policies .
I consider that recognition of ' unseen labour ' is one of the important steps which could be taken in this field .
We also cannot ignore the fact that ever more people of active age are looking after children and close elderly relatives at the same time , leaving them in a precarious position .
This is why it is particularly important for the Commission to introduce practical initiatives for the official recognition of skills gained from activities connected with looking after children and dependent people , and household management , so that these skills are taken into account when rejoining the labour market .
Today we need to think about the future of all these mothers who look after children , who are the future of Europe , and protect them from the risk of one day receiving small pensions and being in an unequal position compared with other members of society .
Pre-commercial Procurement : Driving innovation to ensure sustainable high quality public services in Europe ( short presentation )
- The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Harbour , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on pre-commercial procurement : driving innovation to ensure sustainable high quality public services in Europe .
rapporteur . - Mr President , it is particularly appropriate that Mrs Reding is responding for the Commission tonight because my report is focused on a proposal that has been developed over a number of years with her services .
It is an extremely important proposal , which has wide-ranging possibilities for the whole of the European economy .
My first message to the Commissioner tonight is to thank her services for their leadership on this , but to say that I think this initiative needs to be much better known .
It needs to spread out widely from DG Information Society - as I think it is now starting to do - because it is of such importance , particularly in the economic times we are in at the moment .
So , what am I talking about ?
Well , the core of the issue is that public authorities in the European Union spend huge amounts of public money on buying products and services .
It is estimated that EUR 1 800 billion is spent on public procurement every year .
How much of that procurement is actually spent on investigating , researching and encouraging the development of new solutions to the big challenges that public authorities and indeed society face every day : a better health service , a better transport solution , dealing with climate change , more energy efficient buildings ?
EU procurement spending linked to research and development is less than 1 % of that total procurement budget .
Bearing in mind that we have an explicit objective in the Lisbon Strategy to move our R & D spending up towards the 3 % target , there is huge potential here .
That is where the whole mission of pre-commercial procurement comes in .
Essentially , what we are looking for are intelligent , research-focused public authorities to generate a demand for innovative solutions and then work with innovative companies large and small - but particularly small enterprises who really can benefit from this - to fulfil those requirements .
We want those intelligent customers to really think ahead , to be demanding , to think about the solutions for which no commercial solution yet exists , but where there are basically a range of solutions which can then be developed with the financial contribution from the public authority to do just that - to fund research and development , perhaps through a first competing stage of ideas , and then take those development solutions to a next stage towards the viability of a product or service that can then be launched .
The benefits of having that backing , for a small enterprise in particular , and giving that commercial support will be really important to that business .
Indeed , where this has been already rolled out , we see the experience where businesses , even if they do not produce the winning solution , have had an element of their research and development funded that they can then go on and use to develop other revenue-generating products .
This also ties in with the second initiative from the Commission covered in my report , the ' lead market initiative ' , where we are looking for public authorities to lead in a number of key technology areas around health and climate change in transport .
There are signs of an integrated policy emerging , but my report says that we need more training , we need more best practice , and we need more dispersion and dissemination of this proposal .
I hope that the Commissioner , and indeed the College , will pick up on this and that this Parliament will show it is right behind this solution .
In conclusion - and if you will allow me a short amount of extra time because this is , in a sense a point of order - I want to point out first of all to this empty House that I had two opinions for my report from Mr Sakalas from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Mrs Podimata from the Committee on Industry .
They are of course not allowed to present those opinions here , which seems rather a shame since they made valuable contributions which I have added to my amendments .
I also want to thank my shadow , Mr Hasse Ferreira , for working with me , and he has also contributed extensively .
Just to wind up , this is a solution where everyone will be winners : society , citizens , public authorities , business , innovators and the European economy .
That is why it is so important and why , when we are looking to public authorities to continue investment in this time of economic crisis , this proposal is even more important than it was when I started this report a few month ago .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I could not agree more , because pre-commercial procurement serves a twofold goal .
It improves the quality of public services , but most of all it opens up opportunities for industry to take the lead in international markets .
So it is money very well spent , above all in a time of crisis when we need to help our industry to put into practice the results of research and to make the best use of technological solutions and innovations .
I am very glad that the rapporteur , Mr Harbour , together with the Commission , has supported what has been in the pipeline for quite a long time .
But there is a difference between being in the pipeline and being put into practice .
I really hope that Parliament 's report will become a trigger and an important element to add to our research and innovation policy .
Indeed , triggering a strong public-sector demand for the development of new innovative products and services in Europe can make a difference , especially for our SMEs , and that is why I welcome the initiative .
I congratulate Mr Harbour on his work .
What are the next concrete steps we will have to take ?
As an immediate response to the concrete recommendations in the report , I can confirm that the Commission will support actions to promote the sharing of experience and awareness-raising , and will explore the means to provide incentives for procurers across a number of Member States in order to implement pre-commercial procurement projects jointly .
The Commission has already opened calls for proposals - in the INTERREG , CIP and FP7 programmes - to support the establishment of networks of public authorities on pre-commercial procurement .
In the medium to long term , I believe that governments in Europe should incorporate pre-commercial procurement in their strategic planning for public investments .
I think that the recovery packages would be a good place to start .
On the Commission side , I will emphasise this in a communication planned for early March this year , in which I will propose a strengthened strategy for ICT Research , Development and Innovation for Europe , so pre-commercial procurement will be included in this report .
As you know , some Member States have already started experimenting with pre-commercial procurement pilot projects .
In the coming months we hope to see more of those , and I invite the members of the committee , and also the Members of this House , to go back to their countries and to talk to the ministers and the municipalities about pre-commercial procurement . We can only make a difference if we work together .
Thank you very much for giving a helping hand here .
- The item is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Driving innovation and developing the knowledge economy are key in ensuring sustainable high quality public services .
The US public sector spends USD 50 billion per year on research and development procurement , which is twenty times higher than in the EU , and therefore Member States must honour their commitment to invest 3 % of GDP in research and development .
Public procurement is a strategic instrument to achieve this goal .
There are today numerous European research programmes , the results of which have not yet been exploited by public authorities through public procurement .
The current practice in the EU is based on exclusive development , which means that each company retains the ownership rights in respect of the new ideas it generates .
Despite the fact that pre-commercial procurement provides some simplification , the whole process is very exacting .
Public authorities may be considerably assisted by the participation of universities and research institutes .
Member States should be inspired by the experiences of the European innovation agencies taking part in research and development .
I believe that , on the basis of the suggestions in Malcolm Harbour 's report , the Commission will produce a comprehensive , easy-to-understand handbook to provide in particular small and medium-sized enterprises and appropriate authorities in the field of public procurement with assistance in implementation .
It is only through close cooperation between EU Member States in the field of public procurement that we shall be able to drive innovation and ensure sustainable high quality public services .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography ( debate )
The next item is report by Mrs Angelilli , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking my fellow Members for their excellent collaboration , which has enabled us , in my opinion , to draft a highly satisfactory text .
I am also grateful to all the NGOs and institutions that have followed our work closely .
Their valuable suggestions have enhanced the report .
We set out with two key objectives , the first being to check carefully to what extent the 2003 framework decision is being implemented within the 27 Member States , and the second being to propose improvements as necessary .
The fact is that the framework decision must be updated to increase the level of protection for minors , in light of the rise in new and disturbing cases of exploitation linked to new technologies .
The first of the priorities identified is the fight against sex tourism , which worryingly is on the rise , partly because of lower travel costs .
From this point of view , extra-territorial cooperation should be improved and Member States should be asked to rule out the principle of double criminality for crimes concerning the exploitation and abuse of children .
Secondly , grooming , that is to say online psychological manipulation with the aim of soliciting children for sexual purposes , should be considered a criminal offence in all Member States .
Thirdly , Member States should be bound to exchange the information contained in criminal records relating to sexual abuse convictions .
The aim of this is to categorically eliminate the possibility that perpetrators of sexual abuse could hold jobs that involve contact with children .
Among the proposals to be implemented as soon as possible is the launch of the missing child rapid alert system .
This system has already been trialled and implemented , although by only a small number of Member States and so only at trial level , but has given excellent results .
We therefore need to roll it out across all 27 Member States .
It is worth remembering , in fact , that every year in Europe , thousands and thousands of children disappear without trace .
I would like to highlight one further aspect : in general , national legislative authorities must commit to improving protection for child victims during investigations and before and after any court case in which children are involved .
This will prevent children from becoming victims twice over , firstly victims of violation , and then victims of media or legal violation .
Finally , we have highlighted the need for urgency in criminalising forced marriages , the majority of which concern children .
To conclude , Mr President , I believe it is important to ask all Member States to ratify as soon as possible the most recent Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse .
This is the convention of October 2007 , the benchmark representing the most innovative and up-to-date act on child protection .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank Mrs Angelilli warmly for her remarkable report .
I would also like to thank her for the way she has worked with the Commission on a very delicate , sensitive subject about which we feel so strongly .
Children are vulnerable and they are entitled to protection in order to ensure their harmonious development .
Sexual abuse and the various types of exploitation , especially child pornography , are despicable crimes with deep-seated , long-lasting effects on its young victims .
It is a terrible phenomenon whose scale is unknown .
Some sources say that between 10 and 20 % of children in Europe have suffered one form of sexual attack or another during their childhood .
The European Union has armed itself with legislation on the issue .
The framework decision of 2004 establishes a minimum level of harmonisation for national legislations in respect of criminalisation and jurisdiction .
Despite the incompleteness of the information , the Commission considered , in a 2007 report , that the framework decision had , in general , been satisfactorily implemented .
That , however , is not enough .
The development of the Internet is contributing to the proliferation of new threats for our children .
Child pornography is one of these and others exist , such as child solicitation , to which Mrs Angelilli has alluded .
Sex tourism to third countries for the purposes of abusing children is a reality , whilst it is not unknown for abuse to be committed by individuals who have been convicted in other Member States .
The Member States are not satisfied .
At the end of 2007 , they negotiated a convention with the Council of Europe to introduce a very high standard of protection .
In its first year , 20 of the 27 Member States have signed this convention .
That said , Parliament is still not satisfied , and Mrs Angelilli 's report is evidence of this .
Parliament demands better implementation and especially a substantial improvement in the European framework , with a set of features to reinforce the fight against these crimes .
I must say that I am not satisfied either .
I have announced a review of the existing European legislation on the issue and will submit a proposal for adoption by the Commissioners in March .
I want to put an ambitious text on the table that will deal not only with enforcement but also protection for victims and prevention .
The suggestions contained in the report will help us to implement this proposal .
Most of the report 's contents should find a place in the new framework decision , but if this proves not to be possible , for technical or legal reasons , we will try to identify the most suitable tools to implement any proposals left out of this framework decision .
We will see if there is a possibility for political initiatives , particularly to use dialogue with third countries , or even to provide ourselves with financial instruments , as is the case for the existing programmes .
There you have it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to note Parliament 's desire to move forward with the adoption of ' kidnap warning ' mechanisms in each Member State .
I have to say , at the last meeting of the interior and justice ministers , I argued with much determination that it was necessary to provide each of the Member States with a ' kidnap warning ' system .
To be fully effective , these systems would , of course , have to be interconnected .
Once again , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its determined commitment .
I also thank Mrs Angelilli , who has unquestionably given us a high quality report .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the new proposal submitted by the Commission is urgently needed .
The members of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality have specific questions and suggestions relating to the proposal .
It is essential that we go beyond the confines of the Daphne Programme and introduce legislative initiatives in the area of child pornography .
Of course , this is also the responsibility of the users , but the states must take action .
For example , I believe that Europol is an important tool which , combined with an effective network of experts and a special unit whose members have had training on very specific issues , can be used to combat child pornography and prostitution .
We must also resolve the question of extraterritoriality by taking a joint European approach .
We need more background information in the form of concrete studies on the social situation of the victims , because family members themselves are often responsible for abusing children and putting them on the net .
It is important for us to make definite progress in this area .
I hope that the Commission is prepared to work closely with the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality so that we can resolve these questions together .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , Europol 's organised crime report of 2006 stated that the advantages the Internet offers in terms of information and communication technology are extremely beneficial to organised crime .
There is no doubt , in this regard , that children are the most vulnerable group .
According to experts , around 90 % of 12 to 17 year-olds chat on the Internet .
Besides classmates and games , they use ' unknown user ' networks via chat rooms on websites , which are perfect contact points for paedophiles using false identities to lure potential victims .
According to Internet Watch Foundation , which processed more than 30 000 reports in 2006 , 91 % of victims were under 12 years old .
Eighty per cent were female , and child abuse domains totalled more than 3 000 .
Moreover , 55 % of all child abuse domains were hosted in the United States , 28 % in Russia and only 8 % in Europe .
It would be appropriate to put cooperation in the field of disabling websites abusing children on the agenda of an EU-US meeting .
We are witnessing a well-organised international network of paedophiles and organised crimes connected with the sex industry , as stated by Mrs Angelilli .
On the other side , the international cooperation of law enforcement authorities is limited .
It is almost incredible that eight ratifications are still missing in the case of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children , child prostitution and child pornography ; four in the case of the Palermo Protocol , which is the basic document for international cooperation in combating trafficking in human beings .
Slightly less than half of the Member States have still not ratified the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime .
In this field there is a lot to do .
Therefore , it is time to send a strong and clear message to the Council to revise the Council framework decision combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
Mr President , Commissioner Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Angelilli and everyone else for their very constructive cooperation .
You will surely remember how little was done at the beginning of this parliamentary term , but with the children 's strategy a year ago , the issue of children 's rights turned a corner .
The decision we are to make here now concerns a child 's right not to be sexually abused and the combating of child pornography .
I am , of course , particularly happy with the three proposals that I managed to get accepted in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and which I hope will be retained through the vote today .
The first proposal is that a child should be classed as such until he or she is 18 years old .
It is very important to be able to protect both young girls and young boys against sexual crimes , sexual abuse and sexual exploitation throughout the EU .
The second proposal is to protect children against child sex tourism by all Member States criminalising sexual crimes both within and outside the EU .
This means that those who commit crimes will never be able to be sex tourists and exploit the poorest and youngest children and young people in other countries because prosecution and punishment will await them when they arrive home , wherever that is in the EU .
The third proposal is that we should now seriously tackle the Internet and , together with the largest credit companies , develop the technical means , with the help of banks and exchange bureaux , Internet service providers and search engine providers and , of course , the travel industry , to close down payment systems when payment is made for sex crimes and violations or the sexual exploitation of children and young people .
The same opinions are found everywhere where people are striving to get websites closed down and that is that children come before confidentiality and that the abuse of children and young people must be reported .
With this report we can now sit back and be satisfied that , here in Parliament , we have taken the first step in respect of the rights of children , and when we get a new Treaty of Lisbon , children 's rights will also be a legal basis and a goal within the EU , and this is not before time . Thank you .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her efforts and her initiative on this report .
Protecting children while they are using the Internet and combating child pornography are two of the most urgent issues which we have to deal with .
For me , it is very important to ensure that this Framework Decision on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography offers a higher level of protection .
The abuse of children over the Internet can only be handled as a joint initiative at a European level , because the Internet is not subject to national boundaries .
There are three points in this report which I believe are in need of improvement .
Firstly , a balance must be maintained between children 's security and data protection .
We must take into consideration not only children 's personal data , but also the personal data of people and content which is relevant for the purpose of providing this protection for children .
As well as creating criminal offences for Internet users and suppliers of child pornography , we must first identify the people behind these dreadful activities and arrest them .
We can only combat this abuse successfully by attacking it at the roots .
We must also target those people who make these services , these appalling criminal activities , available to others and who profit from them .
As well as criminalising the offenders , as described in Mrs Angelilli 's report , we must also raise awareness among people who look after children and explain the risks involved in Internet use .
We must focus on developing new technological methods and establishing the principle of privacy by design .
In addition , we must promote the exchange of information and experiences between the individual authorities in the Member States .
The data protection authorities in the Member States can act as important intermediaries in this respect .
Only an all-embracing approach will be successful .
However , I do not approve of making Internet service providers into an extension of the law enforcement agencies .
A much better solution is the implementation of agreements which allow Internet service providers to collaborate with the law enforcement agencies on a voluntary basis , as is already the case .
Child pornography in all its manifestations is no more and no less than a crime against humanity .
We must put every effort into combating it .
We must ensure that the Member States cooperate with us and that we in Parliament are all moving in the same direction .
On this basis , the members of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe will support Mrs Angelilli 's report .
Mr President , although the legal systems of Member States make provision for sanctions against the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography , it is still necessary to raise the level of protection of our children .
It should be emphasised that children who use new technologies , and especially the Internet , are at risk of contact with potential perpetrators of sexual offences .
In connection with the danger which exists , Member States should be called upon to block access to Internet sites which contain child pornography .
This must be a legally binding obligation .
There is also an urgent need to carry out a Europe-wide campaign to make parents and teenagers aware of the dangers of child pornography on the Internet .
Supporting the victims of this reprehensible business , and of their families , is also an important matter .
They are often left without help .
It is our obligation to give the best possible protection to our children .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank Ms Angelilli for this report .
I would echo what has been said by our colleague , Ms Bauer , in terms of our own Member States taking action to sign and ratify some of the conventions and protocols which are missing at the moment .
If we are looking for a common framework and a common approach , these are very key reference points which also help to send a signal from Member States that they , too , are concerned about these issues .
I think this is one of the key things they should be doing , and it would be interesting to know why certain Member States have not yet actually signed up to the relevant conventions and protocols .
We welcome much of the report in terms of the rights-based approach , which I would like to see leading on and away from the view that it is only about criminal justice .
This is actually about the rights and the protection of children and young people .
We need those clear measures to support children who have been victims - whether through court proceedings , where obviously the key issue is to find the truth but not in a way that leaves children more traumatised than they were at the beginning of the process , or through the collective work on identifying children .
However , the protection also has to involve the children themselves .
We should encourage Internet literacy among children as well their own understanding of what the dangers are and what they should be looking for so that they , too , can play an active part in helping to combat these crimes .
We intend to support certain of the amendments this morning , particularly where we think there are certain principles which we tamper with at our peril - such as on double criminality and confidentiality in certain professions - and one or two others where we think the concept perhaps needs further definition .
We are , however , generally very much in favour of this report and look forward to its further progress .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) This report has the support of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
The sexual exploitation of children and child pornography are abhorrent crimes , the prevention of which requires international cooperation .
Children are violated by being forced to pose in sexual contexts , photographed or filmed and posted on the Internet .
These films and images can be seen all over the world and increased international cooperation is therefore needed to stop these violations .
We know that there are definite connections between the sex slave trade and the sexual exploitation of children .
The United Nations estimates that 85 % of the victims of the sex slave trade are children under the age of 18 .
We do not know how many children are bought and sold as commodities to be sexually exploited , but we do know that it is a lot , and we know that every child that is affected is one child too many .
The adult world must take responsibility for protecting our children from this , one of the worst crimes that a child can be subjected to .
In this debate , we must not forget that many of the crimes against children are committed within the family or within the family 's circle of friends and it is therefore important for society to ensure that children have other adult contacts so that they have someone they can turn to for help .
All kinds of sexual abuse of children are criminal and must be seen as the crimes that they are in all Member States .
All citizens who commit sexual crimes against children must be punished , regardless of whether the crime is committed within or outside the EU .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Angelilli on this lucid report .
It is patently obvious that the sexual exploitation of children should be brought to an end .
The explosive increase in criminal activities via the Internet requires a coordinated approach .
We should , however , exercise caution when it comes to prescribing detailed sentences for this abuse at European level .
The Member States themselves will need to make every effort to penalise the abuse of modern media .
Internet child porn will need to be regulated in the Member States ' criminal law .
The Council should , in line with the prohibition against pursuing one 's profession , commit to closing the loopholes in the legal network , so that exploitation and transmission via the Internet do not move to countries where there is no adequate legislation .
I would have liked to hear from the Commission whether it would also be possible to discuss this with non-EU countries , but the Council is absent , unfortunately .
Moreover , I would like to argue in favour of strengthening cooperation with Europol and Eurojust .
The fight against international child pornography networks must be given priority in their organisations , as indeed , this enhances the scope for taking appropriate action outside of the European Union .
If we are agreed on the undesirability of the sexual exploitation of children , I suggest we also discuss the exploitation of adults .
The initiatives to reduce prostitution at large-scale events , such as football championships and Olympic Games , deserve more support in this Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , paedophile organisations are a threat to citizens and , as such , should be treated like mafia or terrorist organisations , with special , severe laws .
It is an outrage that there are thousands of people who have been charged with child pornography offences and have spent not so much as a single day in prison .
I would also like to remind the rapporteur , Mrs Angelilli , the quality of whose work we have all admired , that in her city last year , there was a case known as ' Lotus flower ' , involving 200 Roma children .
Once the case was over , these Roma children virtually disappeared ; no one knows whether they in fact went back to the same camps where the abuse took place .
All Member States must therefore be vigilant , special legislation must be introduced , and this outrage , this horrible threat to society , must be addressed with special and extremely severe laws .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this House is debating a topic today which rightfully outrages all people of good will .
We condemn the phenomenon , and then believe that such trauma can only happen to other people 's children .
Yet all our children are in danger , as the victims of the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography multiply .
We must therefore fight to prevent such acts using all available means .
We must ensure that the sanctions laid down in national legal systems are effectively applied , and that daily practice reflects this struggle .
Member States must do everything possible to eliminate demand entirely .
We must be particularly vigilant regarding the constant challenge posed by the use of new online technologies - web cams , mobile phones and , in particular , the use of the Internet - in this regard .
The introduction of technologies that block access can be one way of doing this , besides making families and children aware of the dangers .
In any case , we must emphasise that these are serious crimes , and that in order to detect them , it is essential to remove any obstacles in the way of the smooth exchange of law enforcement records among Member States , to allow the creation of centralised databases for information on offenders .
I consider it very important and absolutely essential that the existing international documents be ratified by the Member States , and that their contents be effectively implemented .
We must make sure that child safety becomes a central issue in all EU Member States .
Mrs Angelilli 's excellent report contributes to this effort , and we support it with our vote as well . Thank you very much .
( ES ) Mr President , sexual exploitation is a reality endured by boys and girls all over the world , since there is a supply of child sexual exploitation , particularly in poor countries , and a demand for Internet pornography and sex tourism on the part of rich countries .
With this recommendation , we advocate that real steps be taken : we request European harmonisation of differences in the age of consent ; tougher punishments for sexual abuse ; and stronger , increased national intervention programmes and systems .
To achieve this , we must focus attention on Member States so that - as Spain has done , beyond transposing the Council 's framework decision on this matter , - we can develop and implement action plans in which interest groups are involved , including public awareness and social mobilisation programmes , without neglecting to work on international cooperation .
Finally , I would like to add my voice to calls urging Member States to sign , ratify and apply all the relevant international conventions so that we may guarantee that the rights of minors are respected .
( ET ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Mrs Angelilli , ladies and gentlemen , the rapid development of information and communication technology has created a new channel for criminals to perpetrate or present their crimes .
The crimes that are the subject of the report have been discussed in various global and European forums .
In 2003 , the Council of the European Union passed a binding framework resolution on the sexual exploitation of children and the struggle against child pornography , and the contents of that resolution have today largely been integrated into Member States ' legal systems .
However , in connection with the rapid development of IT , it needs to be brought up to date and , of course , we cannot drag our feet on this .
I am glad that the commission will soon have completed a new updated framework resolution .
All Member States must define the concept of ' child pornography ' and declare the sexual solicitation of children through the Internet to be a crime .
Harassers operating on the Internet are difficult to catch , but it is not impossible .
At the same time , several national laws constrain surveillance .
Thus , surveillance cannot be used in the case of second-degree crimes , and data protection is also often an obstruction .
In my home country , there have been cases , even recently , where a minor committed suicide due to the activities of an Internet harasser .
There have also been such cases in other Member States .
We must be able to protect our children before they become victims .
There must be zero tolerance for paedophilia and child pornography in the European Union .
We must achieve this .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sexual exploitation of children is a terrible problem .
It is a disgrace of today 's world and a grave sign of our decline .
A sharp increase has been observed in recent times , due to the vertiginous spread of the Internet and of new and sophisticated technologies to which children are exposed and to which they have access , without any limits , rules , controls or penalties .
These are now more urgently required than ever , and must be applied in an increasingly efficient and exemplary fashion .
Mrs Angelilli 's excellent report , on which I warmly congratulate her , and the specific recommendations that Parliament will make to the Commission , indicate and suggest measures that can genuinely curb the spread of child pornography , online grooming of children , sex tourism and all forms of child abuse .
Recent disturbing data , including a UN study on violence against children , indicate that sexual exploitation of children is rapidly increasing and that , together with people trafficking , it is becoming one of the major sources of profit and one of the fastest growing crimes at transnational level , with a yearly turnover of approximately USD 10 billion .

According to an estimate by the International Labour Organisation , more than 12 million people are victims of forced labour , of whom more than 1 million are involved in sexual exploitation and between 45 % and 50 % are children .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography in general is prompted by the clear development of new telecommunication technologies .
Forms of online grooming of children have certainly increased , but I would like to take this opportunity to denounce the exploitation of images of women also .
In the majority of EU countries , an often disgusting view of womanhood is propagated , where the commercial aim is pursued not only with vulgarity but with a real contempt for women 's dignity , not to mention the use of subliminal advertising and also television programming - above all in my country , I have to say .
I agree with the rapporteur that Council Framework Decision 2004 / 68 should be updated to increase the level of protection for children and to better combat sexual exploitation in general .
The ratification of the Council of Europe Convention is just as important , but we must not stop there : we also need to criminalise the online grooming of children and press for cross-border cooperation in this field .
In my opinion , Member States should be obliged to exchange the information contained in criminal records relating to sexual abuse convictions - and I believe that the ECRIS system is certainly a step forward on this front - in order to prevent those who have committed certain crimes from having contact with children and therefore to improve protection for victims , not just during investigations , but also after trials have been concluded .
I would like to close by emphasising that forms of child exploitation unfortunately encompass more than just sexual abuse , and I would like to see a greater commitment from our institutions on those other areas .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mrs Angelilli on her exceptional work on such a sensitive issue which concerns us all .
The sexual exploitation of children is a phenomenon which continues to shock society in the Member States of the European Union and elsewhere .
Child pornography on the Internet is a worsening problem if you think that , between 1997 and 2007 , the number of websites showing the sexual exploitation of children increased one thousand per cent .
Reinforced cooperation with the private sector could make an effective contribution towards limiting the number of websites hosting child pornography .
For example , cooperation could be promoted with credit card companies to fight child pornography on the Internet at European level by using their systems for payments to commercial sites selling photographs of children .
In addition , the new Community programme to protect children using the Internet will help to promote a safer online environment .
The Council of Europe Convention signed by 20 Member States of the European Union is the first international legal act qualifying the various forms of sexual exploitation of children as a criminal offence .
In order to deal effectively with this phenomenon , Member States need to criminalise every form of coercion of children to take part in sexual activities .
Finally , I consider it very important to take account of paedophile registers and to prohibit them from accessing jobs or voluntary work which brings them into direct contact with minors .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , around the world , some 40 million children under the age of 12 are the victims of some form of violent act .
Given that the new technologies and , in particular , the constant development of the Internet and the new online methods used by paedophiles , it is of paramount importance that the level of child protection be increased .
According to Eurobarometer , 74 % of underage children use the Internet on a daily basis , and hence many of them are exposed to violent or pornographic elements .
In the interests of effective protection , I would like to recommend the introduction of the so-called free family information packages in Europe .
These are already widely used by certain European Internet service providers , and I believe that others can also become partners in this effort .
The packages address four basic safety topics - safety and communication , entertainment , downloading , and virtual violence , and , in a playful manner , offer families help with the safe use of the Internet .
I further recommend that these packages contain a free , child-friendly Internet browser which could serve as a web filter , to keep children away from undesirable content on the World Wide Web .
We must be sure that our children are safe , not only on the Internet , but in public and private institutions as well .
Therefore , it is of paramount importance that everyone whose work involves regular contact with children be required to report any situation in which sexual abuse has occurred . Thank you .
( RO ) Sexual exploitation of children and child pornography are very serious crimes .
Although legislation in many European Union countries is sufficiently stringent , there are still many measures which need to be taken to guarantee children adequate protection .
All Member States should ratify the Council of Europe Convention and implement in full the framework decision in order to establish a united approach at European Union level .
Illegal material involving child abuse should be removed from the Internet at source and websites should be blocked by providers .
Indeed , the telecom legislation review which we are debating at the moment in the European Parliament , along with the Council and Commission , offers a good opportunity to improve the legislation .
Perpetrators of sexual abuse should be denied the opportunity to pursue professional activities which involve contact with children .
In fact , special orphan homes should be supervised much more closely by the local authorities .
Finally , I believe that the European Commission and Member States should provide financial and logistical support for the campaigns aimed at parents and children .
( PL ) Mr President , I am very pleased that Parliament has taken up the question of combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography seriously .
I am especially pleased because , until now , many left-wing groups in Europe have been fighting openly for the greatest possible sexual freedom , while not giving attention to the consequences of this course of action in relation to children .
There have even been attempts to form paedophile political parties .
This must fill every decent citizen of the European Union with horror .
The scale of this phenomenon is huge , as can be seen just by looking through the daily papers .
Taking the opportunity of this discussion , attention should be drawn to the violation of children 's rights and the sexual exploitation of children of immigrants from outside Europe .
The fact that it is permissible in their home countries is one thing , but when they are living in the countries of the European Union , they must rigorously comply with the prevailing law or leave Europe .
There cannot be some laws for the traditional peoples of Europe and others for immigrants .
This concerns every aspect of life .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is undoubtedly an important issue requiring effective cooperation by all Member States .
I would like to point out that the protection of children from abuse in a modern society has weakened in many respects .
The reasons range from increasing family breakdown and the growing number of children brought up in single-parent families , to greater mobility of citizens and the spread of modern information technologies .
That is why I am strongly in favour of the report .
I believe that frank sex education for children is relevant to the prevention of sexual abuse of children , but it should also be addressed at parents , educators and social and health professionals .
It is important that everyone gains a proper awareness of such crimes while acknowledging first of all that they do exist , so that they can detect potential abusers and prevent the abuse .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that child sex offenders have a high repeat offence rate .
To some extent , the adage of our German friends , einmal ist keinmal , applies here .
However , if somebody commits such an offence two or more times , then we should be able to prevent them from committing further crimes .
In such cases , both therapeutic and various preventive measures should be used , particularly bans on working with children and adolescents .
Since extended periods of time can lapse between offences being repeated , information on tendencies to commit such crimes should be kept on record over the long term .
I would also recommend the compulsory vetting of persons applying to work as teachers , coaches and youth supervisors for past sex offences .
In my experience , child sex offenders often try to circumvent bans on working with children by using various ruses , including false identities , to try to regain access to their targets .
The free movement of people in the European Union gives them greater scope for doing so .
Mr President , I should like to thank Roberta Angelilli for this excellent report .
Sex exploitation of children is a crime against the most vulnerable in our society and I am , therefore , shocked that seven of our Member States in the European Union have still not signed the Council of Europe Convention ; nor , indeed , have eight of these states ratified the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children , child prostitution and child pornography .
The fact is that the Internet now provides new routes for these crimes , and I therefore think it is incumbent on us to urge that the acts of using the Internet for child pornography and for grooming children be made a criminal offence .
It is not enough for states to plead that this is difficult to do .
We have to cooperate and coordinate our efforts in order to ensure we can do it .
Indeed , in all Member States , it should be possible for any citizen or person living in the European Union who committed a crime outside the European Union to be brought before the courts .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mrs Angelilli for her very fine report .
I think we will all support such a report .
As has been said , it is a crime , and anybody who would attack or in any way undermine children should be treated as criminals .
Unfortunately , this is what is going on on the Internet .
The Internet is a wonderful tool , a wonderful source of information for all of us and something that will be part of our lives into the future .
However , there are those who prey on children and they will use the Internet as much as they possibly can to try to undermine children .
About 8 out of 10 children in the European Union use the Internet and I think we must take particular care to protect the most vulnerable children from bullying , grooming and harassment .
We need to promote public awareness and online safety , especially among children , but also among parents so that they know exactly what is going on and what can be done on the Internet .
I think Member States should work together to introduce a network of contact points for the public to reach in order to report illegal and harmful content and conduct .
It is important that both parents and children feel secure using the Internet and have a point of contact to report any wrongdoing .
In order to make those who are responsible for online grooming and pornography accountable , we should see this for what it is .
It is a crime and should be treated as such .

( PT ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen : the 2003 framework decision aimed to narrow the legislative gap between Member States in combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
To this end , it adopted a common framework of provisions to regulate , amongst other things , criminalisation , the applicable sanctions and protection of and assistance to victims .
I consider it regrettable that some Member States have yet to adopt the measures necessary for the implementation of this framework decision , even though the deadline for them to do so has already passed .
It is essential that all Member States criminalise all types of sexual abuse of children and that all European citizens who commit a sex crime against children in any country within or outside the European Union be subject to uniform extraterritorial criminal legislation applicable throughout the Union .
It is important to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes cannot slip through the law 's fingers .
I also support the revision of the framework decision so that it guarantees at least the same level of protection as the 2007 Council of Europe Convention .
It is regrettable that some Member States have yet to sign this Convention .
It is also important to strengthen this framework decision in response to the most recent technological developments in the field of communication .
Children make ever greater use of the Internet , which has become one of the preferred tools of potential and actual offenders , in particular through the grooming and fraudulent solicitation of children for unlawful purposes to which Mrs Angelilli has already referred .
I take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work and on the report which she has submitted to us .
I am aware of the complexity and difficulty of this struggle , but I believe that it is possible to confront the sexual exploitation of children with unified action and a joint effort .
The emphasis should be given to prevention , by promoting campaigns to make parents and children aware of the risks of child pornography , specifically on the Internet and , in particular , the risk of sexual exploitation in online chat rooms and forums .
( PL ) Mr President , it was the poet Zbigniew Herbert who said , ' We must learn to say ' no ' ( ... ) ' no ' is a very significant part of speech .
It is disagreement with evil . '
Today we must say ' no ' to the violation of fundamental children 's rights , ' no ' to violence and the sexual exploitation of children , ' no ' to depravity and pornography on the Internet and ' no ' to sex tourism .
I therefore thank Mrs Angelilli for her report .
I have raised this subject many times myself .
Prophylactic and preventative measures are needed in this area .
It is essential to raise awareness of the dangers , both among children and also among their parents and carers .
Rapid crime detection and strict enforcement of penalties are imperative .
Cooperation is needed from the media .
These measures must include the whole world , because in some countries there are organisations which question the penalising of sexual contact with children .
Indeed , there are even specious notions about so-called ' good paedophilia . '
We should not be indifferent to the degradation of our children , or to their pain and humiliation .
This is a reproach of our times .
( EL ) Mr Vice-President , the recommendation presented so perfectly today by Mrs Angelilli and supported by my fellow members is directed mainly at the Council .
However , as you said that you would be tabling your own proposal in March , I should like to ask for this proposal to be in keeping with numerous policies of the European Union and not move in just one direction .
This proposal will need to make provision for criminalisation , strict measures and cooperation with Europol , whose convention is the first to mention trafficking in human beings .
Let us not forget that , apart from the threats , violence , deception and abuse of dependents , especially within the family , we also have exploitation from deliberate promotion , mainly of people at an age at which they cannot react .
I refer to the phenomenon of trafficking in abandoned infants which we have seen emerging on the Internet and , when I say Internet , I mean not just the World Wide Web and the chatrooms which children enter from their bedrooms , but also the numerous other means , including mobiles , which children can use , which is why we need to make provision for all the parameters .
When we talk about a criminal offence , we also need to think about the situation in correctional facilities and prisons .
If we cut down on the number of people in these institutions , we have an increased risk of such phenomena .
Provision also needs to be made for improving the living conditions of victims .
We need to protect victims and their families , given that violence by abusers is spreading and the means which they use are stronger than the means of defence available to victims , because they are mainly economic .
I trust therefore that your new proposal will feature a stronger level of protection for minors and high-specification means .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Angelilli 's report will help all parents to protect their children from paedophiles who prowl the Internet .
We should remember that all the support we receive in the form of filters and monitoring service suppliers on the Internet does not relieve us , as parents , from our obligation to protect and warn our children .
I live in a small village , where people know each other and are interested in what is happening around them .
A stranger arouses interest .
In a small village in the south of Poland it would be difficult for someone to make contact with the children unnoticed , but I venture to say that in just such peaceful and safe places all over Europe , when the parents are quietly reading the newspaper or watching television , an unwanted stranger is in their children 's bedroom , and has made contact with them over the Internet .
Are we , as parents , helpless ?
No , we are not .
Perhaps our children are more proficient in using the new technologies .
Perhaps it is difficult to get them away from their computers .
Dear parents , do something today to protect your children .
Remind them of something we were taught , namely : ' do not talk to strangers . '
It is such a simple message .
Today , those strangers are not lurking outside the school with a bag of sweets , they enter Internet chat rooms and seek their victims there .
They are more dangerous , because we do not see when they slip without difficulty from one child 's bedroom to another .
We should teach our children that they must not talk to strangers , and likewise on the Internet , shut the door in their face .
Madam President , there is such political agreement on this issue that it seems strange that so little is happening in Member States .
Our focus on the Internet is obviously very important , but it suggests that this problem is a new one , when we clearly know that it is a very old problem and was very well hidden .
It happened not just outside schools with bags of sweets , but it happened in homes , in all of our Member States , in churches and in hospitals .
The Internet has perhaps shone a light on this very dark part of society which we are still grappling with , and grappling very badly with .
It is very urgent that Member States take seriously their many fine words about protecting children , just as we in this House have spoken very much about how we value and protect children , whereas in fact , our actions are often much weaker than the strong words we speak .
I mentioned that the home is sometimes the most dangerous place for children .
We had a recent case in Ireland which highlighted this .
I would also add that those who believe that small towns , where everyone knows one another , are a safe place for children , need to think again .
In small towns , people very often close their eyes because they do not want to speak about ' soft information ' that they have , and are perhaps afraid to pass it on to the authorities .
This is something that we all need to look at and be prepared to speak about , because silence causes abuse to grow , and causes awful damage to the children who are caught in that situation .
I call on the Irish Government to bring forward legislation on a wide range of measures to protect children against sexual abuse .
I think we also need to look at our Constitution , which puts the family before the rights of the child .
They should not be in conflict : both deserve protection from our Constitution .
Madam President , I welcome this debate and , in line with the accompanying motion for a resolution , I encourage all EU Member States to sign and ratify the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse .
I also urge all EU Member States to sign up to the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children , Child Prostitution and Child Pornography .
The Council of Europe Convention is the first international legal instrument to categorise the various forms of sexual abuse of children as criminal offences , including such abuse perpetrated with the use of force , coercion or threats , even within the family .
However , seven EU Member States have still not signed this Convention , and eight Member States have still to ratify the UN Optional Protocol .
The Internet is increasingly being used by potential and actual sex offenders as a medium for the sexual abuse of children , in particular , through grooming and child pornography .
While I accept that Irish criminal law protecting children against sexual abuse and exploitation is quite comprehensive , I would , nevertheless , urge the Irish Government to bring forward up-to-date legislation as soon as possible to deal with the proliferation of new ways by which children can be subject to sexual abuse .
( BG ) Mrs Angelilli 's report is very timely and important .
We live in a world where the risks for children and adolescents are continuously growing .
Child exploitation , including the sexual exploitation of children , is among society 's biggest ills .
The battle against this phenomenon requires much common effort and an integration of measures , methods and resources .
Judicial and punitive measures are very important , such as the criminalisation of sexual exploitation , especially legislation on Internet technology used against children 's best interests .



We cannot allow to otherwise ignore the fact that prevention of this phenomenon is part of the battle against it : to educate children and parents how to avoid coming into contact with this phenomenon and with the people involved in it ; to limit all types of advertising which provoke open and aggressive sexuality ; that there is more concern for children in various institutions , who often become victims of sexual violence ; integrating efforts for averting child trafficking - one of the main reasons for trafficking is namely sexual exploitation ; and to form networks consisting of non-government and government structures as a countermeasure .

Madam President , it is truly inconceivable and shameful that , in the 21st century , with respect to sexual offences against children , the level of cooperation between different services within a state - but also of cooperation between Member States themselves - is not what it should be .
I congratulate both the Commissioner and the rapporteur for speaking so clearly and for stressing the need for actual improvement .
I further ask them to name publicly those Member States that have deficient legislation in this respect .
One measure I suggest should be considered is the establishment of a pan-European - or even better , international - public list of offenders convicted of sexual offences against children .
I propose that such a listing should be permanent , with no possibility of anyone 's name being erased from it unless there has been a court decision reversing the original conviction .
A sexual offence against a child causes permanent damage to the victim and should also result in permanent labelling of the perpetrator .
This will be an additional measure of punishment , but will also act as a prevention measure .
( PL ) Madam President , 20 Member States have signed the Council of Europe Convention , the first international legal document which classifies the sexual exploitation of children as a crime .
Developments in science and technology and in new methods of communication , and especially the Internet and mobile telephony , have also revealed a new way of luring children into sexual exploitation , as well as a new way of distributing child pornography .
The introduction of penalties for this kind of activity under the criminal law of all Member States is essential .
However , the introduction of criminal responsibility for such acts is not sufficient .
Another imperative is the establishment of systems which will prevent situations in which the danger of sexual exploitation of a child would be possible , such as by the education of parents and children , and also by tracking down paedophile organisations which are active on the Internet .
I thank Mrs Angelilli for a very important and well prepared report .
( SK ) I agree with this draft recommendation of the European Parliament to the Council .
Child protection must always be a priority issue in all countries of the European Union as children are the most vulnerable group of society .
Harmonisation of laws would be a great contribution to preventing crimes of this kind and it would help in the more effective prosecution of offenders in all Member States .
Subsequently harmonised legislation can prevent child sex tourism , which persists in the European Union because of varying levels of legislation .
Child protection is also needed in respect of children 's access to the web , where they are exposed to all kinds of content , including possible abuse by paedophiles , and to Internet grooming .
Sexual abuse of children and child pornography is contrary to the world code of children 's rights adopted by the UN and , at the same time , it contravenes fundamental human rights .
( RO ) Sexual exploitation of children and child pornography are very serious crimes which are on the increase , but which can be combated through legislation , including awareness campaigns .
As a mother myself and an MEP from a country which is among the main locations for hosting websites featuring pornographic content , I feel that EU Member States need clear laws which ensure that child pornography is banned from the Internet , while making Internet service providers block public access to websites which post such images .
Given that access to , and the distribution of , pornographic material are not controlled by time and place , I welcome the timely suggestion to set up , at European level , a separate unit for combating child pornography and prostitution and I suggest that Member States and the Commission provide financial support for information and awareness campaigns .
( CS ) Madam President , I welcome this report with just two reservations .
Firstly , I do not believe that prosecuting parents who coerce their children into forced marriages is effective .
Realistically , it is impossible to prove this within a family where there is also an exceptional right to remain silent .
Secondly , the provision on overriding professional confidentiality would need to be worked out in more detail .
Regardless of these two reservations , I appeal to the Member States , the Council and the Commission , including the Czech Presidency , to urgently update the relevant European and national legislation and to ratify international agreements for effectively combating paedophilia .
A Europe-wide database of paedophiles must be set up as soon as possible to prevent these people from being employed in education or child services in other Member States .
The age limit for sexually motivated crime should also be harmonised .
I would also like to point out that Member States need to finance the development and expansion of programmes which will help parents to protect their children from Internet grooming .
Madam President , I believe this debate has shown the European Parliament 's unanimous commitment to the protection of children .
I am trying to be as clear as I can : I would point out that we are going to review the framework decision dealing with child protection .
We wish to improve its contents to bring child protection in the European Union up to the level of the highest international standards , particularly the new 2007 Council of Europe Convention , and best national practices .
In terms of criminal investigations , the legislative proposal will include new criminal offences to deal with the new forms of abuse which are being facilitated by new technologies .
It will be easier to carry out investigations and bring charges .
I will say no more on this .
As for helping victims , we will make it easier for them to gain access to justice .
Furthermore , and especially , we will organise prevention by managing offenders on the basis of an individual diagnosis and a risk assessment for each offender .
In addition , we will try to prevent and minimise the risks of repeat offending and introduce measures to ensure the optimum effectiveness of safety mechanisms in the entire Union .
In this respect , the ECRIS system , which will allow the networking of criminal records , will be very valuable .
I have also had questions on extraterritoriality .
We will also take the opportunity to propose more restrictive measures at this level to prosecute crimes of sexual exploitation committed in third countries by citizens of EU countries , even if the third country in which the crime is committed is unable to do so .
That is the current thinking .
Obviously , Mrs Angelilli , we will follow all the recommendations in your report most carefully as we develop this framework directive .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to say to Parliament that it is not enough to have a good legal framework .
There is also a need for tools .
This is why , at European level , around Europol , we are trying to build a platform which can be used to bring together information gathered in the Member States and distribute reports and statistics from the national platforms .
Several EU countries have such platforms , but now there is a need at Community level to ensure that everyone can be familiar with all this information .
In this matter , the European Union can offer added value , provided that we can succeed in creating this platform around Europol .
I would also say that we have a further tool in which I have a lot of faith , in other words , the informal public-private group created by the Commission , which has introduced a European financial coalition against commercial child pornography images .
In the face of a quadrupling in the number of sites between 2003 and 2007 , we have to involve the private sector , as it controls a large part of the IT infrastructures .
In particular , the access providers have to be mobilised .
This is fundamental .
The coalition will bring together all of the stakeholders : non-governmental organisations , banks , companies that issue credit cards , online payment organisations , Internet service providers and other private operators with an Internet presence .
It will set about locating and confiscating the profits made from criminal activities .
This is a major factor in bringing an end to a number of commercial practices which are exploiting such child pornography .
That , in brief , is my answer , Madam President , but we will have occasion to return to this major issue .
I would add that , last week , we had a very nice data protection day .
It saw youngsters sending out remarkable warnings to other young people to be careful when they use the Internet .
You are aware that there are now an increasing number of monitoring mechanisms that families can use to make the Internet safer for children to use .
I am not saying that things are perfect , but a major effort is being made and , of course , we need to mobilise the entire Internet community .
I wish to stress the concept of ' kidnap warnings ' , because they have not been the subject of many speeches .
It really is important for Parliament to encourage the Member States , as it did in its declaration of 2 September 2008 , to arm themselves with warning systems and to conclude cooperation agreements to achieve cross-border trigger mechanisms .
In addition , you have also very generously created a budget line to encourage Member States to create these mechanisms , or at least to create links between themselves to deal with ' kidnap alerts ' .
We know that a ' kidnap alert ' can be very effective if it is triggered quickly .
Now , before the European Parliament , I would lay particular stress on the horror that is child kidnapping , often carried out for the purposes of pornography .
I would again like to thank the European Parliament for its support in the struggle to protect children .
I would also add that I have noted the speeches on data protection during legal procedures involving children .
I cannot go on any longer , but I would stress that in March , we will attempt to give the European Union an exemplary legal framework in accordance with the most stringent standards of child protection .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank my fellow Members once again for their thoughts and the support shown during the debate and , in conclusion , I would like to extend a special thank you to the European Commission for its active collaboration .
To Mr Barrot I owe a particular debt of gratitude , since even this morning he demonstrated extremely strong political and legislative will in terms of child protection .
He really has provided much food for thought and , above all , practical commitment .
I would like to take this opportunity to make a few additional points .
Firstly , there is a lack of data .
Too often we lack sufficient data , statistics , which are indispensable as a basis for our work in better monitoring , better understanding and , of course , better combating child abuse .
This lack of data is - how can I put it - a recurring issue , but I think it important to emphasise since it is a shortcoming that we must overcome .
As far as data protection is concerned , some Members raised this topic and the Commissioner has already given them a very specific response .
I would like to stress that I am very aware of data protection and I do not believe that there is a conflict between privacy and children 's rights , if , of course , the institutions play their part and if everyone , from the providers to the police , respects the rules .
Moreover , I would point out that children are , in fact , those with the greatest need for privacy and data protection .
Mr Barrot mentioned this too : often during legal proceedings , when a scandal breaks in which the victim is sadly a child , it is precisely the exploited child that is fed to the media without any form of protection , and I would say without any compassion either for their image or for their privacy , and all simply to boost television ratings and sell a few more newspapers .
I would also like to add that no child is exempt from these dangers , and unaccompanied children and Roma children are often even more vulnerable .
I will conclude , Madam President , by saying that clearly a significant effort is needed at a cultural and political level , and this effort must be made by families , schools and the media .
Much can be done in terms of self-regulation , but without binding , weighty legislative instruments , clearly , we cannot fight cases of exploitation behind which there are not only individuals but often actual criminal organisations .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
One of the features of sexual abuse of children has been its rapid spread with the help of the Internet , making it all the more difficult to combat .
It must become a legal obligation to block access to websites which spread child pornography .
Indeed , grooming children must be considered an offence .
We need to be much more aware of the risk of new technologies being used by paedophiles at a time when children are becoming increasingly more active in their use of the Internet .
We cannot help but be concerned by the gap that exists between generations in terms of Internet usage and , by extension , in terms of controlling children 's access to websites posing a high level of risk .
It is extremely important to establish communication between the school and family in order to educate children in how to identify risk situations and respond .
This is the reason why special information and education programmes are useful , not to mention a European strategy for combating sexual abuse and more active cooperation between Member States aimed at setting up a transnational police network for tackling child pornography and prostitution , as well as a network for managing a database containing the details of people convicted of such acts .
From the point of view of European cooperation , it is regrettable that the ratification process of the Council of Europe 's 2007 Convention has been so slow .
in writing . - This report recognises that the violation of a child 's dignity is a serious breach of human rights , as well as a despicable act , which , unfortunately , is not tackled uniformly throughout the EU .
It is disturbing that some Member States have not implemented all relevant international conventions for the protection of children .
I urge the Commission to use all tools at its disposal to pressure those states into compliance .
To fight child pornography , the EU should enforce tough legislation , but also undertake educational projects that inform people about this subject .
Existing technical solutions to protect children should be promoted among parents , in particular , software tools that are easy to use and available for free or at a low-cost .
Low barriers of entry and minimal risk are making it very easy for criminal organisations to get into cyberspace .
To face this new threat , we need to harmonise legislation , boost law enforcement and strengthen cooperation in police work .
Moreover , EU legislation would only partially solve the problem since this issue has a global dimension and therefore needs a global framework to enforce the law internationally .
In that regard , I urge the EU to take the lead .
in writing . - Exploiting children in any way is unacceptable .
Being the future of any society , children are , at the same time , the most vulnerable group of it .
Therefore it is the priority duty of politicians to protect children from any abuse , in particular , to free them of the risks of sexual abuse .
I warmly welcome the comprehensive report which calls upon all Member States to address the problem in question with utmost seriousness .
I support the call to the seven Member States which have not yet signed the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse .
Furthermore , I join the call upon all Member States to sign , ratify and implement all relevant international conventions to protect our children .
Nevertheless , signing and ratifying conventions is merely providing a framework for improvement .
Practical actions are needed because of the increasing evidence of sexual exploitation of children .
Children need to grow up in a safe environment for which parents have the primary responsibility .
Urging the Member States to coordinate their actions , I also support the idea to set up the Missing Child Alert System which would improve the cooperation on this issue on the European level .
Children need our care and protection as legislators .
It is very important that seven Member States and neighbouring countries sign the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse . The implementation of the Council 's framework resolution is also important .
Those who have fallen victim to abuse at an early age must be guaranteed full protection during the investigation , before and after judicial proceedings .
Victim protection mechanisms such as the provision of appropriate assistance to families of victims and the treating of victims as particularly defenceless victims must be implemented immediately .
We must raise the level of protection .
What is taking place on the Internet has surpassed all limits .
Children are often unable to understand the seriousness and consequences of a situation .
What often seems to be a game can lead to lifelong psychological damage .
Thus , we must ban paedophiles ' chat rooms and Internet forums , and make solicitation using such methods a criminal offence .
We really must .
It is our duty to protect children from a world that may destroy them .
We must keep sexual criminals away from children , and we must take the necessary steps to ensure that .
Estonia is one of the countries in which the process of strengthening punishments against those who have committed crimes against children is currently underway .
This , however , is a struggle against consequences .
In order to prevent crimes , we must promote ' Internet literacy ' , which must also include teaching people about risks .
The world of computers is , unfortunately , precisely the place in which parents have been unable to act as guides for their children .
In order to prevent crimes , one must increase awareness .
The 2008 Eurobarometer study shows that a large percentage of parents do not pay attention to what their children are doing on the Internet .
I , for instance , represent a country where Internet use is among the highest in the EU , but parents ' disregard is also among the highest in the EU .
Namely , 60 % of them are not concerned that their children might fall victim to harassment ; 47 % are not concerned that their children see pornography or violent material ; 62 % are not concerned that their children may divulge personal data .
It is very important that parents be informed and that awareness programmes for children be launched on the Internet , because only 10 % of ( Estonian ) children claim that they have approached their parents for help in connection with unpleasant incidents they have experienced on the Internet .
Sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals ( debate )
The next item is the report by Claudio Fava on sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , four minutes will be enough to give you a summary of two years ' work - work that has been hard but , I hope , useful - which has involved Parliament alongside both the Commission , with its proposal , and the Council .
The essence of this work has been to prepare a directive which , for the first time , lays down sanctions for employers who benefit from the work of illegal immigrants .
I believe we have succeeded in changing the philosophy behind this directive , which had been confined solely to fighting illegal immigration .
The compromise text agreed with the Council also provides some protection for those immigrants forced to work illegally , who are often held hostage by criminal organisations .
Otherwise , Madam President , there would have been a risk of punishing them twice over , both as exploited workers , often forced to accept indecent working conditions , and as illegal immigrants who have to be repatriated , with the repatriation ban which , in many countries , means years and years .
In this context , in Articles 7 and 14 , we have provided that , in cases involving minors , serious exploitation or people trafficking , the Member States will be obliged to draw up rules for issuing temporary residence permits , the term of which may be extended until any remuneration due has been paid .
We should have liked this possibility to be extended to all illegal immigrants , but that is prevented by the Return Directive adopted last year .
I was not one of those who supported it .
We have , however , succeeded in introducing a rule allowing Member States to apply more favourable measures to immigrants regarding the issuing of residence permits .
Article 10 is , in my view , the key article .
For the first time , it provides for criminal sanctions to be imposed in the worst cases , including those where the regular workers are minors .
I think the additional sanctions laid down in Article 8 are important .
They include withdrawal of licences , closure of establishments in particularly serious cases , and exclusion from state aid derived from European funding .
Otherwise , we would be guilty of extraordinary hypocrisy : we would be punishing employers with one hand yet still giving them generous subsidies with the other .
I believe it is fundamental that we have succeeded in including a definition of remuneration that equates the pay due to an illegal immigrant with the pay of a regular worker , without any discrimination .
We have included temporary work agencies in the scope of the directive .
In certain countries - such as my own - in particular , these are the organisations that most readily recruit illegal workers under the very worst kinds of exploitative conditions .
Just think of the cases where illegal agricultural workers have been hired , which have long filled the crime columns .
We have successfully asked for the trade unions to be able to represent immigrants in administrative and civil cases .
The text previously mentioned third parties in general , but now it mentions trade unions .
We need a running-in period to see how it works , and we have therefore asked the Commission to report to Parliament and the Council after the directive has been in force for three years , specifically about the rules on inspections , residence permits , sanctions and subcontracting .
On the subject of subcontracting - Article 9 , which was the subject of discussion between Parliament and the Council and within the Council itself - your rapporteur would have like to extend liability to the whole contracting chain , as the Commission had originally proposed .
The Council and Parliament , or rather part of Parliament , were for excluding subcontracting entirely , but we have reached a compromise solution that I believe is workable : dual liability , which should not prevent us from legislating again on this issue in future .
That is why tomorrow , for my part and on behalf of the other shadow rapporteurs , whom I thank for the collaboration they have given me during these two years , I shall ask the Council to add a statement to the compromise text on which we are going to vote , to the effect that the provisions of this Article 9 shall not prejudice any future legislative action on subcontracting .
In conclusion , Madam President , I believe this directive lets us envisage a Europe in which immigration has finally become a matter of collective responsibility and recognised rights , and not just of rules against immigrants .
It is hoped that legislating against employers employing illegal migrants from third countries will be an instrument for reducing the ' pool-factor ' of illegal migration .
However , on the other hand , one can also see its possible effect on improving conditions for competition and I also believe that it will help to combat human trafficking .
There is a view that this legislation will not bring added value .
As no such legislative instrument exists yet at Community level , for some Member States , the added value is high , while for others , where such legislation already exists , the added value may not be evident .
In discussions of possible compromises with the Commission and the Council , the discussions concentrated on particular problem areas .
Firstly : the issue of the contractor 's liability for obligations under law on sub-contractors , where the draft proposal limits the liability for the actions of direct sub-contractors .
Secondly : the means of ensuring effective procedures by which illegal migrants can be paid outstanding wages where we have pursued the principle of non-discrimination , and we looked for a way to provide available help to illegal migrants and to provide tools for them to receive wages even after their return to their home country .
Thirdly : the possible effect of postponing the execution of the return of an illegal migrant until that person receives their wages .
Here I would say that postponing the execution of such a decision would greatly undermine and possibly negate the purpose of the proposed legislation .
And finally , the problem of inspections has been left to Member States in the knowledge that labour inspectors play a vital role in making the legislation effective .
No doubt there are various views on how to resolve this and other problems in this draft .
Some of these will be decided when it comes to their implementation .
I would like to finish by thanking Mr Fava , the Commission and the French Presidency for successfully incorporating the compromises .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( NL ) I , too , should like to thank the rapporteur for his work , without overlooking the efforts , though , of the shadow rapporteur of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mr Busuttil , and the social affairs rapporteur , Mrs Edit Bauer .
It is , after all , thanks to their efforts that the compromise reached ultimately does what it is supposed to do , namely take away the prospect of work as an incentive for illegal immigration by actually penalising workers who are staying in the European Union illegally .
Contrary to what some parties in this Parliament tried to achieve in the first instance , this legislation has not become an instrument for subsequently legalising illegal immigrants .
Indeed , the debate on legal migration is being held elsewhere .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I do believe , though , that more thought should be given to gender issues when dealing with this group of people who are staying in the European Union illegally and , as has already been stated , are often the victims of exploitation .
Estimates of how many people from third countries are staying in the European Union illegally are not precise and vary between 4.5 and 8 million .
Moreover , these estimates give no indication as to the proportion of men and women in that total , and neither do they grant an insight into the gender-specific problems which illegal female immigrants face .
I would draw your attention to the fact that female illegal immigrants are very vulnerable and that they are often at the receiving end of forced labour , human trafficking and violence .
This , therefore , requires specific education within the bodies that deal with these issues .
As ever , though , this is about effective monitoring .
I am pleased that the arbitrary 10 % monitoring level that was suggested initially has now been dismissed and that a risk approach has been incorporated in the compromise text .
The reports in the Belgian newspaper De Standaard last summer about house slaves in certain embassies in Brussels , only a stone 's throw from the Berlaymont building , prove that these scenarios are not far-fetched .
I would therefore like to say to the European Commission that the proof of the pudding is in the eating .
Face up to your responsibility to examine critically how countries deal with this legislation and whether they apply it effectively .
This law , Madam President , is probably one of the first that directly tackles the illegal immigration phenomenon using legislative tools , and now it can be said that this law has finally arrived .
It was sorely needed and therefore I am extremely pleased that we have managed to reach an excellent compromise here .
What exactly did we achieve by way of this law ?
What we did was to attack one of the main sources that motivate people to turn to illegal immigration .
We attacked incentive .
What kind of incentive are we referring to ?
The incentive is that a person living , for example , in Africa might have to risk his life in order to journey to another country , thinking that he might find work there , even if illegally .
From now on , we are sending out the clear message that illegal employment will no longer be tolerated and therefore it makes no sense to make the crossing over to Europe , while under the mistaken impression that there are jobs to be had here .
As of now , this will be absolutely impossible .
As the previous speaker said , it is important that this instrument is not used to regularise irregular situations , but should serve as a clear message that illegal employment can no longer be tolerated .
This is being enforced through effective measures and sanctions : financial , administrative and even criminal ones .
These also serve to pass on the unequivocal message to employers that we shall no longer tolerate the recruitment of workers without a permit . Thank you .
Madam President , we have managed here in the European Parliament to radically change the objective of the directive which we are debating today .
Claudio Fava deserves our congratulations on this in particular .
Firstly , we have managed to obtain provision for the mandatory payment of remuneration outstanding to illegal immigrants who are deported .
Secondly , we have helped to ensure that provision is made for strict and binding criminal sanctions for employers of immigrants under unacceptable living conditions .
Thirdly , we have safeguarded the right of trade unions and other bodies to go to court on behalf of immigrants and , fourthly , we have imposed the right to grant residence permits of short or longer duration to illegal immigrants who uncover criminal organisations .
In other words , we are at last treating illegal immigrants as human beings , without at the same time legalising illegal immigration , which is why we support this compromise .
However , there is still a dangerous mismatch between the continuing police approach to illegal immigration and the reality in numerous Member States .
That is why the application of the directive will also require special attention .
It could lead thousands of illegal immigrants into poverty , ghettoisation and crime and , although we demonstrably cannot or will not deport them , these illegal immigrants may remain out of work .
If , in fact , numerous illegal immigrants are currently occupying jobs in Europe which Europeans do not want , we should now be debating in this House , at long last , common rules on legal immigration into Europe and the legalisation of these people , not new rules to deport them .
Finally , the absolutely necessary fight against the black labour market obviously does not only concern illegal immigrants ; it mainly concerns legal immigrants , it concerns millions of European citizens whose employment rights are trampled underfoot by their employers on a daily basis , it concerns the fact that employment laws are being trampled underfoot , without any material control or material sanctions .
Today 's directive should therefore have as its legal basis , in my opinion , the general fight against undeclared work in Europe , not immigration in particular .
This targeting of immigrants every time something goes wrong in Europe is very dangerous for social cohesion in our countries .
Obviously , illegal immigration also needs to be combated , but we cannot demonise people who are fleeing miserable conditions in their own country in the hope of a better life .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) For years , the European Union has had to contend with the presence of millions of illegal immigrants on its territory , and the pressure to find a solution is mounting .
This pressure is considerable , and rightly so , frankly .
Indeed , if we wish to adopt manageable and reliable migration policy , in which refugees are entitled to protection and in which we create transparent opportunities for legal migration , then an approach that takes due account of all discouraging and encouraging factors that lead to illegal immigration is a necessary measure .
Last summer , the Council and Parliament reached agreement on what was known as the Return Directive , which mainly focuses on the illegal immigrants themselves , whereas today , we are looking at the employers who do not hesitate to employ illegal immigrants .
This is not only a significant inducement for illegal immigrants , but also unmistakeably creates cases of abuse and gross exploitation .
The importance of harmonised European policy is , in my view , beyond dispute .
After all , when internal borders are non-existent , Member State A may worry itself silly , but if Member State B barely addresses the employment of illegal immigrants , if at all , then Member State A will remain nothing but a voice in the wilderness .
After a rather slow start , there is now , following intense negotiations with the Council , a compromise before us that is acceptable to me , and I would like to thank the rapporteur for his constructive and pragmatic way of working .
It was like a breath of fresh air which , in fact , cannot be said of a few of his fellow MEPs who now insist , at any price , on this accompanying written declaration , a show for the Bühne , which does not do much for the image of this Parliament .
That too , my group will accept .
Moreover , it should be clear that , once this directive has been adopted , it is up to the Member States to galvanise themselves into action .
It should be clear that neither the European Commission nor the European Parliament have magic wands at their disposal when it comes to decisiveness or enforcement .
The Council was emphatically opposed to a binding percentage of inspections , and this is exactly where the problem often lies - as has been said by many in this Parliament , as well as the Commissioner .
All I can do now is urge you to turn this enforcement into reality so as to ensure that we do not get bogged down with empty words on paper once more as , indeed , nobody benefits from this .
The proposal is again a step in the right direction when it comes to achieving comprehensive migration policy .
We still have a long way to go though , so what we must do now is persevere .
In this connection , I would like to ask the 64 thousand dollar question that has been on everybody 's lips today : why is the Council absent from this debate ?
This is , quite frankly , unacceptable , in my view .
Madam President , the European Union is not coping with illegal immigration .
Many facts prove this , and we also see this in Mr Fava 's explanatory statement , where we read , amongst other things , that ' [ i ] t is estimated that there are between 4.5 and 8 million illegal immigrants in the EU , a figure that is steadily increasing , notably because of easy access to illegal work . '
The very fact that the numbers from 4.5 million to 8 million are used shows that we are not even able to state precisely the scale of this problem and issue .
And yet , economic migration also concerns many EU Member States , especially those which acceded more recently .
Today , millions of Poles and citizens of other countries are moving within the EU to the old Member States .
These citizens are subjected to the same ills and are in the same situation as migrants from third countries .
For illegal employment means the exploitation of workers while denying them the benefit of health insurance or pension rights , the exploitation of juveniles and even human trafficking .
We can overcome this phenomenon only when there are severe legal sanctions and when we consistently make use of them .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , we very much appreciate the work of both Mr Fava in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and Ms Bauer in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I think we in this House will have to get used to the enhanced cooperation procedure on measures which actually link employment and migration .
As has already been said , this is supposed to be part of the common immigration policy of the European Union , dealing with the pull factor of possible work , often within the informal economy and amongst vulnerable and non-organised workers .
However , it can also apply where there are genuine vacancies , which cannot be filled from the national labour pool , and where Member States are not issuing sufficient work permits , or where there is a creaking bureaucracy that cannot respond quickly enough to applications with a labour-market purpose .
There is also a gap that we have yet to fill for people for whom no return to their country of origin is possible - for example , to Zimbabwe - and who are often left legally destitute , as it were , and , therefore , need to find a way to keep themselves alive .
The majority of Member States already have , in theory , measures in place to deal with the situation of irregular migration , and you would think that would signal an apparent commitment to action .
Yet the Commission proposals on inspection in its original document have been really watered down , and Parliament has had to fight to get even what we have currently in Article 15 .
It is to be hoped that those inspections will not just pick off small businesses but will actually look at some of the larger enterprises that rely very heavily , at the bottom end , on vulnerable workers .
That is why the issue of subcontractor liability was extremely important to many of us in this House .
Some of us consider that what we are left with is , again , a watered-down version of the Commission 's original proposal .
People have mentioned the issue of the residence permit , where Member States may choose to make this available for particularly severe cases where complaints have been brought .
That , I suppose , is a step forward - at least from where some Member States were .
One of the issues that has concerned many of us is remuneration - when you cannot determine what the length of an employment contract was - and issues regarding payment of national insurance and tax , which we know for many vulnerable workers are often taken out of their pay packets but not necessarily handed on to the authorities .
For many of us , this issue about payment for work done is a question of principle ; it is also that companies and economies have benefited and that this is not supposed to be a legislative measure to punish the irregular migrant .
It is also - if you are looking at this as part of an overall policy - part of a sustainable return that people will actually go back with what they have earned .
We have no guarantee that Member States will ensure that people are paid .
We have an assurance that mechanisms will be in place so that claims can be made but not that money will be paid out .
There is thus no guarantee that payment will be made .
Some may take the view that individuals take a chance and there is a risk , but if we are looking at questions of human dignity , and where this fits in the overall goals of a common immigration policy , this is a serious issue .
So , for my political group , the balance of this proposal is no longer clear either on inspections or remuneration , and other areas have been watered down .
We do not feel that Member States are showing much commitment and , therefore , we will not be supporting this proposal .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there are between four and a half and eight million non-EU citizens in an irregular situation in Europe - these are the Commission 's figures .
This is an utterly negligible number : just over 1 % of the resident population of the European Union .
It is clearly a problem that has been over-exaggerated .
These are workers who perform useful services , such as personal services and work in the tourist industry and , in the vast majority of cases , they have been absorbed by the job market .
These are workers who are useful to our economy , but they are exploited workers - exploited to reduce labour costs and to enrich unscrupulous employers .
These are workers who often do jobs not performed by EU citizens .
We need these people , but they have entered Europe illegally for a simple reason , which is that there is no legal way for them to come in .
The same thing happened to the great majority of citizens whose situation is now legal but who entered the European Union illegally .
What was needed was another measure : one that regularised the situation of these millions of people .
What was needed was a measure to free them from slavery , blackmail and exploitation .
Instead we have a directive that carries on where the Return Directive left off .
First we decided on the expulsion procedures ; today we are deciding on the potential expulsion catchment area and are even specifying who will pay for the expulsions .
With this directive , the exploited pay more than the exploiters .
Unfortunately , there is no provision for a general regularisation measure , not even for those who report their own status , or who report their exploiters or the crime that is being committed .
They go straight from being exploited in illegal work to being expelled .
We needed something different .
We needed a measure to favour legality , and not the criminalisation of those who are currently here illegally .
We needed a measure to curb xenophobia .
Yesterday , the Italian Minister for Home Affairs said specifically , ' We have to be hard on illegal immigrants ' ; in other words , we have to be hard on the vulnerable .
I believe we are fostering this kind of xenophobic attitude with this directive .
We in the European Union need immigrants - the Commission says so itself : 50 million by 2060 - because we are in the middle of a demographic crisis , but we are doing nothing to help them enter .
Instead , we are harmonising the expulsion system and today we are deciding to expel those who are here illegally even though they may be workers who have been absorbed into the European job market .
I think the effects of this directive will be devastating , because it will make immigrants and the job market go even further underground and increase the exploitative crimes of unscrupulous bosses .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , illegal immigration is a problem , which is made worse by the free movement of peoples .
However , the current wave of unrest that is spreading rapidly through Britain is , of course , being caused by legal migration and by the European Union 's own rules .
For 20 years , British trade unions , having being seduced by Jacques Delors , thought the European Union was in their interests .
Well , now the penny has dropped and they have realised that a British government is unable to put British interests first .
I am afraid it will get quite a lot worse .
As we embark upon a round of massive public spending projects , such as the Olympics and council house building , thousands of European workers are set to benefit .
British jobs for British workers cannot be guaranteed all the while we are inside the EU .
The prospect of British taxpayers funding foreign workers is , frankly , unacceptable .
But the Government is holding firm , saying that the European Union is a wonderful thing .
Well , it is not surprising is it ?
Lord Mandelson is still getting GBP 78 000 a year from the European Commission and , of course , gets a dependent pension on this in just a few years ' time - a conflict of interest if ever I saw one .
The big concern now is whether the xenophobic far right will benefit .
We do not want that either .
We in UKIP will put a non-racist agenda to the British people at the European elections , saying that it is time to put British interests first .
We are not protectionists , but we want good common sense .
We want to control our own borders and decide who lives , works and settles in our country .
( DE ) Madam President , throughout the world the hope of obtaining a well-paid job has a very strong appeal .
In particular , in difficult economic times , the black economy starts to grow which , of course , results in many people risking their lives in the search for the land of plenty .
It is important for us to make it clear that illegal employment will no longer be tolerated .
However , the recent report on fundamental human rights presents a few problems in this respect .
The report indicates that breaches of EU entry requirements will be rewarded , as immigrants will be given greater protection than the people of Europe , whose identity and social harmony are under threat from mass immigration .
Illegal immigration will be trivialised if , in future , every illegal immigrant is seen simply as a person without a valid work permit .
However , we must not forget that migrants without residence permits will ultimately have to be deported .
It is important for us to do away with incentives , such as mass legalisation and the prospect of employment .
In addition , we must negotiate effective agreements on deportation with the countries of origin .
Also , the FRONTEX border security organisation must finally be expanded so that it can be deployed efficiently .
( RO ) The current directive helps consolidate the common policy on illegal immigration and is a first step towards combating illegal employment by imposing financial penalties on employers .
However , I should remind you that all Member States have national legislation governing illegal work and tax and duty evasion .
Applying these laws also helps to identify the employment of illegal immigrants .
This is why I believe that it is important for us to have adequate regulations , but it is even more important for Member States to ensure that these regulations are strictly applied .
I welcome the provisions in the final text on sanctions which are proportional to the number of illegal employees , as well as on imposing smaller fines where the employer is a natural person and the employee provides personal services or domestic help , and the working conditions are not regarded as exploitative .
The negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council have resulted in clarifying the concept of a subcontractor which can be held liable and in establishing the amount of the retrospective payments which need to be made by the employer .
I firmly believe that the application of this directive will improve the situation in terms of observing Community preference when assigning jobs .
I also feel that the application of this directive should be an additional reason for Member States to remove the labour market restrictions imposed on European citizens , in view of the fact that restricting the chance of employing illegal immigrants will create new opportunities for the EU to recruit its own citizens .
( SV ) I would like to begin by thanking Claudio and everyone else who made this report possible .
In previous debates about future asylum , refugee and migration policy , we mainly focussed on those who stay here illegally , on those who are well-educated and who are permitted to come here , or on people who are simply poor and wish to provide for their family and want to be able to come here .
Now we are placing the responsibility on employers who employ people with no documents .
There would not be as many people without documents staying here if we did not always have irresponsible employers who will pay and exploit them .
To me , it seems quite right to impose sanctions and to introduce an information requirement for employers , and if an employer has exploited someone , compensation should be paid even after that person has gone home .
However , there is one proposal that I would have voted against had there not been a vote in the committee , and that is that the majority is introducing less stringent rules for employment in the home .
This , for me , is a question of equality , as it has mostly been women who have been working in the home for low wages .
This group has also found it more difficult than those in workplaces with several employees , but I see this as a first step .
I was sorry to hear in the news today that the Swedish Conservative Government has a negative view of the report , which is intended to support responsible undertakings and criminalise irresponsible undertakings that exploit workers with no documents .
Finally , I am , of course , also concerned about the opinions we received from the trade unions regarding the report .
I hope that we will be able to resolve these issues before a decision is taken .
The same rules must apply to all employers , such as shared responsibility in connection with works contracts , otherwise we will be incorporating loopholes and encouraging cheating .
( ES ) Madam President , the best way to safeguard a controlled form of immigration that is manageable for our society - manageable in both economic and social terms - is to combat illegal employment as well .
This does not mean we should fight against illegal immigrants themselves , since every one of them has his own story to tell , but rather against the phenomenon of illegal immigration as the only way to justify and truly systematise controlled immigration , particularly in today 's world .
Of course , this should be done not only through those seeking work but also through those offering it .
The fight against illegal immigration cannot only be waged in the underground stations in London or Madrid but must also be carried out in the human resources departments of the many companies that employ illegal workers in order to exploit them and deprive them of their rights .
That , therefore , is our reason for wholly welcoming this directive .
It is a directive that gives context to employers ' obligations and , certainly , the sanctions that must be imposed on employers who exploit workers without rights for their own benefit .
This is a well-balanced directive .
The rapporteur should be congratulated on having reached a fair compromise and achieved a good balance on this matter .
I would like to highlight those articles that safeguard the rights of workers who have been exploited .
They protect workers so that they can report the situation in which they find themselves .
They protect them by guaranteeing that they can claim back what they have earned , without , of course , this resulting in a right to remain .
However , any work that was done illegally , without national insurance and without payment will , of course , be remunerated regardless of the employment status of the worker who was working illegally .
The sanctions are certainly suitable and in proportion .
The agreement on subcontracting , to which the rapporteur has already made reference in his speech , is very important .
It is of great importance in practice , and that is what we are talking about .
Just one final mention : I consider the 24-month transposition period for this directive to be excessive .
I realise that this cannot be changed , but 24 months is too long and should be shortened if possible .
( PL ) Madam President , employing third-country nationals who are staying illegally in the European Union makes fair competition impossible and also denies the employees concerned the right protection .
I am thinking first and foremost about safe working conditions and social protection in the case of an accident at work .
The number of illegal immigrants in the EU is estimated at 4.5 - 8 million people , and they are most often found working in the construction , agriculture , tourism , hotel and services sectors .
Cases of slave labour occur , under conditions of exploitation and child labour .
Illegal employment plays a significant role in reducing standards of employment .
This is why the right of trade unions to represent the interests of these workers is so important .
It is the employer who decides to take on a person who is staying illegally , and so it is the employer who should be subject to a penalty for breaking the law .
Coordinated action by all the countries of the EU is needed to tackle every aspect of illegal employment .
Madam President , there is an urgent need to protect workers from exploitation in these times of economic trauma , and the case to ensure the terms and conditions of European workers are not systematically driven down by exploitation of vulnerable migrant workers is unanswerable .
Responsibility for this rests squarely with Member State governments and authorities .
While Member States need to take steps to regulate immigration , I regret very much that the legal base for this proposal is the fight against illegal immigration .
The real fight is against rogue exploitative employers , and what we need at this time is an agenda that is pro-worker , not anti-immigrant .
The political and economic imperative must be to stop the exploitation of irregular migrants , to punish rogue employers , not to scapegoat or criminalise workers , migrant or otherwise .
The use of criminal sanctions in this proposal should not be the competence of the EU and those that argue that the expulsion of migrant workers is the solution to exploitation are misguided .
This directive does not strike the right balance .
( NL ) It is already two years since Commissioner Frattini unveiled the plans to tackle illegal labour that guarantees a steady flow of illegals entering the European Union to work .
This situation is degrading and should be stopped .
Madam President , I beg to differ with the rapporteur , though , about the question whether the European Union should get involved in criminal law .
I am not in favour of including criminal law within Europe 's remit .
Instead , an open method of coordination is what is needed here .
I am , therefore , delighted about the fact that the amended compromise proposal is cautious about applying criminal law .
The financial penalties are enough of an incentive to be careful in the selection of employees .
I hope that the inspections of businesses will encourage Member States to refer to criminal law .
( NL ) It is to be welcomed that a directive will be introduced that will penalise employers of illegal immigrants .
It is stated , with good reason , that the possibility of finding a job in the European Union is an attractive factor for illegal immigration .
We should , however , be consistent and also tackle the other factors that attract immigrants .
The most important of these factors is the impunity with which aliens can come to Europe illegally .
There are , in fact , Member States that reward illegal aliens , the mass regularisations in Spain , Italy and Belgium , among others , being a case in point .
There is also the hypocrisy of the so-called individual regularisations on humanitarian grounds .
Last year alone , there were no fewer than 12 000 in as small a country as Belgium .
Illegal immigrants should be deported , not regularised , for indeed , every regularised illegal immigrant attracts a multitude of new immigrants .
Every Member State that regularises them does so on behalf of the other Member States .
It is therefore not enough to tackle the employers .
We must address illegal immigration in its entire context .

( PT ) Madam President , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , during this plenary sitting , we have adopted several measures aimed at creating a coherent and integrated immigration policy .
This common policy must , firstly , involve legal channels for immigration as well as the integration of these immigrants into the host societies .
To this end , two months ago we adopted the Directive on the Blue Card and the Directive on a single application procedure for a single permit to reside and work in the EU .
At the same time , we must fight illegal immigration effectively , as well as all forms of criminality that are associated with it .
This initiative seeks to fight the pull-factors for illegal immigration into the European area and bring an end to the exploitation of illegal workers .
It is important for those who attempt to enter the European area at any price - sometimes paying with their own lives - to understand that there is only one possible route : legal immigration , with all its inherent rights and opportunities .
It is estimated that there are between 5 and 8 million illegally staying immigrants in the European Union ; a significant number are doing low-skilled , fairly low-paid jobs and , in some cases , being severely exploited .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Fava , and , in particular , my colleague Mrs Bauer , on their work and on the compromise reached .
I therefore agree with combating illegal work across the European Union .
The intention of this directive is to ensure that all Member States are able to introduce similar sanctions for employing illegal immigrants and enforce them effectively .
It will be possible to impose three types of sanction : financial , administrative and criminal , depending on the gravity of the infringement .
There will also be a requirement for employers to take preventative measures and to check the immigration status of these individuals in order to avoid employing workers who are staying in the Union illegally .
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Claudio Fava , on this report and on the fact that agreement was reached in the trialogue meeting .
Of course , it is always possible to ask for more and to achieve more .
However , the fact that it has at last been recognised within the European Union that illegal immigrants who are caught must also be granted rights and must be protected against exploitation represents an important step forward .
Of course , this must form part of an overall policy on migration and immigration .
No one disputes this .
However , there is one thing that I do not understand .
While the Greens - Jean Lambert is no longer here - or those on the left from the so-called communist side , such as Giusto Catania , maintain that this does not work , that it has once again come to nothing , that nothing can help , I would like to say that it does not help to promise the people living in these difficult situations a four-course meal and then to fail to give them their daily bread .
This is cowardly and unhelpful .
I have to ask myself what the Greens really want if they always vote against measures which would improve people 's situations .
We have already seen this in the case of many reports and actions .
In addition , there is nothing to prevent national states from establishing proper controls , imposing fines and making subsidies and national and EU funding unavailable to companies who employ illegal immigrants .
I would like to see the same tough approach which the Member States sometimes use in the case of illegal immigrants being applied to tax evaders and those who work on the black market .
Of course , we must speak to our colleagues in the national parliaments to encourage them to demand that illegal immigrants be granted the rights which have been decided on here .
There is , of course , one thing that we can be sure of .
If someone is employed illegally because he can no longer survive in his own country , he does not have the option of going to the police and saying that he is being exploited .
In the same way , a woman who has been raped cannot report the crime .
Both of these people know that if they do go to the authorities , they will be deported .
This is why we will be voting in favour of this report .
It represents the first step in the right direction .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , I believe that what Mr Kreissl-Dörfler has said is right .
I would like to thank Mr Fava for his report and for the excellent work that he has done .
The report makes it clear that both parties involved in illegal employment must be held equally liable , which will create a legal balance .
Illegal employment must be penalised and prohibited in all Member States .
Employers must be made responsible for upholding this ban , but it is also the job of the relevant authorities to monitor the observance of the ban and to impose penalties .
The most important issue is to protect the people in these employment relationships from exploitation .
Establishing legal penalties certainly represents a step forward .
However , the authorities must put in place more controls and prosecute those suspected of committing offences .
The report is a compromise between the Council and the European Parliament and specifies minimum standards .
Nevertheless , the prospect of Member States strengthening or weakening the requirements is not inspiring .
We have taken the first step forward .
Now we should go the rest of the way together .
I think I can say , at least for myself and on behalf of parts of my group , if not for the majority , that we can support this report in good conscience .
( EL ) Madam President , the directive we are examining concerns one of the most basic aspects of development and economic sustainability in our countries .
It concerns illegal employment , which often leads to wage compression and a reduction in state revenue , with all the concomitant difficulties in providing benefits , and a reduction in the operation of the welfare state .
It deprives employees of access to social and other insurance , to pensions and even to bodies responsible for protecting the conditions that prevail at their place of work .
Unfortunately , illegal employment forms part of the current system , which has resulted in a global economic crisis that we need to address with means which will help to safeguard not only therapeutic , but also real corrective measures which will safeguard prosperity in the long term .
As such , we consider that the fight against illegal employment cannot be examined in a piecemeal manner .
The measures being proposed to safeguard a humane approach to immigrants do not satisfy us .
Let us take care , therefore , not to turn them into duplicate issues .
( EL ) Madam President , the rapporteur Claudio Fava and the shadow rapporteurs truly deserve our hearty congratulations .
They have managed to achieve an exceptional compromise with the Council , with the help , of course , of Vice-President Mr Barrot , whom I also congratulate .
At long last , the directive imposing sanctions on employers of illegal immigrants has been advanced to the stage of final approval .
I believe that , formulated as it is now , the directive will effectively serve the objective of combating the employment of illegal immigrants .
This is the first time that the European Union has turned its attention in the right direction towards people who exploit illegal immigrants , towards employers who break the law .
At long last , the employment of illegal immigrants has been criminalised .
The criminal and other sanctions provided for in the directive will , I am sure , be a frightening deterrent which will help to limit and prevent the unacceptable exploitation of illegal immigrants .
Multiple , balanced and realistic sanctions are provided for in the directive .
I trust that they will prove to be effective .
Despite the fact that illegal immigrants are treated as victims and protected by the directive , they too are being given a dissuasive message that it will no longer be easy for them to find employment and , consequently , that there will be no attraction in obtaining work even on unfavourable terms .
However , special care must be taken for all those illegal immigrants who are already in the European Union .
In my country , Cyprus , where illegal immigration is a huge problem , illegal employment was criminalised some time ago .
Of course , it has not wiped out illegal employment , but it has limited it .
However , with the multiple sanctions provided for in the directive and the system of inspections of employers being introduced , the problem of employment of illegal immigrants and of illegal immigration in general will certainly be mitigated .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Fava for the remarkable job he has done over the last few months to produce this balanced text .
It was no easy task and the path was strewn with pitfalls .
However , I think the results are very positive and I will mention three points in particular .
The sanction applies here to the offending employer , whilst the migrant is considered to be the victim .
Apart from financial penalties , penal sanctions are recommended for repeat offenders , for trafficking in human beings or exploitation of minors .
I believe that penal sanctions are essential and I also believe that it is up to us to ensure that regular checks are carried out so that this directive is effective .
Another positive point to mention is the automatic payment of outstanding wages to the workers .
Finally , associations and unions are advocating the defence of the interests of workers living in a country illegally so that they can report a dishonest employer without fear of subsequent prosecution .
Of course , as with many other texts , we could have gone further but can we take the risk of threatening the compromise position when this text will already allow major advances in protecting workers and their dignity ?
We need to support a balanced view of the migration issue and recognise that immigration for work is more than necessary and will become increasingly so in the future given the demographic forecasts .
In this context , it is therefore essential to state that the model we want is one in which immigrant workers are viewed as fully-fledged workers enjoying the same rights as workers from Member States .
We must therefore mobilise to defend these rights and this is why I think we should give our support to this report , because it is a decisive step in the introduction of minimum standards and in the fight against illegal working and the exploitation of migrant workers .
( SV ) We know that more and more people are hiding within the EU 's borders .
We know that , in the near future , the EU will need rising numbers of immigrant workers .
We also know that thousands of people every week are trying to find a better life in Europe .
Many of them die on their way to our continent .
We know that many people without documents are exploited and live in miserable conditions .
This is not worthy of the European Union .
The universal values that the EU wants to spread throughout the world include the right of every person to a dignified life .
There is a shameful paradox here .
The fact that the EU is to have a common asylum and migration policy is reasonable , but it must not mean that those countries that want to take a harder line and hunt down people in various ways should be the ones making the decisions .
This will reduce the chances of finding a decent life in Europe .
At the same time , it is important that the devious employers who exploit people in a vulnerable position know that punishment and sanctions can be meted out anywhere in the EU .
I admit that the report is a difficult balancing act and I can sympathise with Mr Catania 's reasoning with regard to his reservation .
However , the compromise is a step in the right direction , even if I have certain opinions on , for example , the extent of the employer 's reporting obligations .
I would like to say to Mrs Segelström that we do not have a conservative government in Sweden .
We have a four-party government with strong liberal elements .
( PT ) The Fava report introduces progress and humanisation into the immigration laws .
It provides us with the moral reassurance which we have owed ourselves since the Return Directive .
The general ban on employing illegal immigrants not only avoids the endemic illegality of immigration , but above all avoids the potential for exploitation and taking advantage of human misery that generally goes hand in hand with this type of work .
The first essential point about the Fava report is that it challenges the school of thought on illegal immigration that settles for an easy but unacceptable condemnation of immigrants , instead setting out a systemic response that makes the state and the employer equally responsible .
Until now , the main failure of immigration policies has been the lack of a fair response to the terrible situation of illegal immigrants , with the weight of the legal system falling on them and their status as culprits rather than as victims .
The second essential point about the report is that it brings into the European public arena an ethic of shared responsibility between the state and companies .
The obligation of employers to carry out advance supervision by checking workers ' residence status is valuable in that it grants a competency to the private sector ; something that the European Union has not often tried .
We applaud this competency because the defence of legality and public ethics falls not just to the state , but to everyone .
The report is therefore blazing a trail for a new political method which other reports ought to follow .
The third point - and , coincidentally , the most fundamental one - is the crucial separation of the obligation to pay remuneration from the problem of the legality of residency .
It constitutes a simple declaration of the universal moral precept that states that humanity comes before the rules of the legal system and takes precedence over them .
Congratulations , therefore , to Mr Fava .

( ES ) Madam President , firstly I would like to thank our rapporteur , Claudio Fava , for his hard work in reaching a common position with the Council ; the result includes many improvements suggested by our Parliament .
With this directive , once again we are showing our commitment to developing a common migration policy based on a global approach .
The aim of this directive is clear : to fight against mafia groups , to penalise unscrupulous employers and to protect exploited immigrants who have no form of social protection .
We want to see the disappearance of starvation wages , which are unfair on immigrants and , what is more , distort average wages , particularly in sectors such as construction , agriculture , domestic services and the hotel industry .
These measures require a great deal of courage and political will , for there are many vested interests and a lot of money circulating in the informal economy .
Particularly in difficult times , it is more important than ever that we manage migration flows intelligently and generously , but responsibly .
It would be easy to succumb to the temptation of not trying to keep the informal economy in check .
We cannot look the other way and leave some 8 million illegal immigrants defenceless against working conditions bordering on slavery .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we want this directive to be effective , there need to be rigorous inspections and economic sanctions , including criminal sanctions in the most serious cases , which will act as a deterrent to employers .
We will thus succeed in shrinking the informal economy market and putting an end to the incentive to migrate that arises from the possibility of working illegally .
It must be made clear that working legally is the only way to work in Europe .
For this reason , we want to move forward with a global approach and , Commissioner , Mr Barrot , we call on the Commission to introduce the new ' blue cards ' for all other employment categories as soon as possible .
( PL ) The result of easy access to illegal work is that there are several million illegal immigrants in the European Union .
Illegal employment , very often in conditions of exploitation , leads to reductions in pay levels in the sector concerned and also imperils competition between businesses .
Furthermore , unregistered workers do not benefit from health insurance or pension rights .
It is therefore essential to establish mechanisms which will enable exploited workers to file complaints against their employers personally or through the agency of a third party .
I will also draw your attention to the fact that the directive should also include in its scope workers who are legally resident in the EU , in particular , citizens of the Member States which acceded to the EU in 2004 and 2007 , and who are still subject to transitional provisions which restrict their access to legal work .
( EL ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , today 's proposal forms part of an overall attempt to find a solution to immigration policy in the European Union which , of course , we must all accept smacks of dishonesty .
Dishonesty because we are trying to correct certain aspects of this policy with the blue card , with the decision to remove illegal workers , with the decision today to punish employers of illegal immigrants , but these are only some aspects of the problem that we are trying to correct .
Of course , we cannot understand how an illegal worker takes on work and the person who takes him on in order to cover his residency and survival costs is ultimately punished .
It is a logical contradiction which we need to cover with the terms imposed by decent work .
The legislation of all 27 Member States prohibits illegal and undeclared work , especially with the dual absurdity we have here of illegal entry to the Member State and illegal exploitation .
The problem is therefore a complicated one and the compromise achieved does , of course , have a lot of gaps .
One such gap is with employees who are used mainly by people , shall we say , for charitable reasons and , of course , they provide work but , at the same time , they find a way to live .
What will become of them ?
How will they live the rest of their life within the framework of their forced illegality , given that neighbouring countries have not accepted the return of immigrants ?
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we well know in this House , compromises must be analysed by separating the pros and the cons and reaching an overall judgment that takes on board the constraints and the legislative and political context .
With regard to the employment sphere , a prominent element in the directive that will be put to the vote tomorrow , our judgment is positive on many aspects .
Some positive points include the insertion of a definition of remuneration that makes comparison possible with legal employment relations ; the reduction of the procedural burdens of sanctions for domestic and care work ; and the linking and strengthening of Community provisions protecting the victims of trafficking and exploitation , particularly minors .
The undertaking not to regard the provision on subcontracting as a precedent is also important .
Some doubt remains on liability in the chain of employers and on the difficulties workers face in receiving payments due to them before they leave the country .
The question is not entirely hazy but , since this directive is tightly bound to the Return Directive , its hands are tied with regard to the situation of illegal workers and employers who have not been able to find legal employment routes .
My confidence that we will decide to adopt this document at first reading is not diminished if I point out a couple of risks : the risk that Parliament 's work will continue to suffer pressure from the national governments , and the risk that we will be reinforcing the ' evil stepmother ' face of Europe .
( FR ) Madam President , this draft directive is of key importance in the fight against illegal immigration and has been essential to the introduction of a common policy on immigration .
We are all aware that undeclared work is the main attraction for the thousands of men and women who cross our borders every day in search of a decent job and a way to feed their families .
In reality , they often find employers who use and abuse their fragile situation and their ignorance of their rights to exploit them and use them as cheap labour .
This is what we know as modern slavery .
We must not hide the fact that this phenomenon also involves individuals , be they European citizens or people from third countries , who are working and residing normally , but who fall outside the scope of this directive , as it forms part of the framework of the fight against illegal immigration .
It is not a case here of pointing the finger at men and women who are often of good faith yet are victims of dishonest networks or employers .
The aim of this text must be precisely to protect these vulnerable people and ensure that their most basic , most fundamental rights are respected ; this is precisely the declared objective and ambition of the compromise achieved .
We should not tar all employers with the same brush and , of course , we should not treat someone who employs a person in good faith , believing them to be working and residing legally , in the same way as those who seek to exploit the situation of these people .
We need to be firm , to send out a clear message .
We need courageous provisions that are conscientiously applied .
The adoption of this text will indeed send out two clear signals .
The first is to employers , to tell them they will be unable to carry on abusing this vulnerable workforce and they will thus be truly dissuaded from recruiting an illegal immigrant .
The second signal is to those thousands of would-be illegal immigrants who will be discouraged by the rigorous employment conditions in Europe .
My thanks to all the shadow rapporteurs and to the rapporteur and , like many , I hope this text will soon be put in place to fight against illegal immigration and , therefore , the promotion of immigration ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur .
I am aware that it was no easy task to reach a compromise solution taking account of the interests of the national labour market whilst simultaneously protecting immigrants against exploitation .
Mr Fava is certainly to be commended .
I travelled to Italy , to Foggia , as soon as the so-called work camps were discovered .
In the latter , both Union citizens and illegal immigrants were living and operating in appalling circumstances .
I have an abiding memory of the conditions in which they were living and working .
Indeed , they often died as a result of hunger and cruel inhumane treatment .
I warmly welcome this directive because it will at last put labour relations on a civilised footing .
It represents a victory over grasping employers , their pursuit of profit , a cheap and often even free labour force , and their exploitation of illegal immigrants .
For this directive to come into force , it must be implemented in all Member States .
Paradoxically , under the internal law of the latter , illegal employment is considered a punishable action , and an offence .
Nonetheless , the law is not working .
We must therefore make every effort to implement this directive .
All the necessary legal mechanisms need to be in place so that no more unfortunate cases of this kind can arise .
I should now like to address the British Members of this House , and ask them to tell their employers that illegal employment of immigrants is a crime .
Do not complain that the Union ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , the most important result of this report is that not only illegally employed third-country nationals , but also their employers , will be penalised .
We must be aware - and this really is a crime - that these people are being exploited even in a progressive confederation of states such as Europe .
Someone is making a good profit out of them .
They have no right to healthcare or pensions and they live in constant fear of being caught and sent back to their home country .
For this reason , I believe that another very important point is the opportunity in future of imposing penalties on employers who exploit illegal immigrants .
Measures such as fines , responsibility for the cost of deportation , withdrawal of public funding or support or even temporary or permanent closure of the business are , in my opinion , urgently needed to bring about a change in the situation .
Regular and effective inspections by the individual Member States are also , of course , essential in this respect , along with the possibility of requiring tax and social security contributions to be paid retrospectively .
A Europe in which some people are exploited by others is not a truly social Europe .
It is my belief that this directive represents a step in the right direction .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his outstanding work .
However , this must not , under any circumstances , be the last step that we take .
( RO ) I feel that this legislative initiative is welcome at a time when workers from third countries account for a non-negligible percentage of the European Union 's labour force , making illegal immigration a concern .
With this in mind , I would like to stress the need to establish a legislative framework which will allow us to define more clearly the sanctions to be imposed on employers of third-country immigrants staying illegally in the European Union , considering that illegal work is an alarming problem at European level and exploitation of the immigrant labour force is a reality .
We also need to be aware that a number of employers are boosting their profits by employing immigrants without papers , thereby avoiding payment of social insurance contribution or taxes to the state .
We must also ensure that this kind of behaviour is appropriately punished .
This is why each individual state must adopt measures to combat illegal employment , offer greater protection to immigrants and organise regular inspections , especially in business sectors where illegal immigrants are assumed to be employed .
We also want access to be given to the European labour market in a controlled manner and for immigrants ' rights to be respected .
For this reason , we are asking Member States to adopt all the measures necessary to ensure more effective cooperation and facilitate the exchange of information between the national authorities involved .

( FR ) Madam President , I would first like to congratulate Mr Fava for his excellent work that will allow the adoption of a directive setting out sanctions for the employers of illegal workers .
However , I would like to draw your attention to the complexity of the current situation .
We need to draw up legislation which is equal to this complexity .
Throughout the European Union , those who place orders are resorting to a cascade of subcontracting , using subcontractors from the Member States without knowing whether or not the employees are working legally .
An amendment was proposed that would check the legality of their employees ' situation .
Why has it not been included ?
Also , it is stipulated that the main contractor is responsible for the payment of wages , but only if they know that the subcontractors are employing illegal immigrants .
Well , you are not going to find anyone who places an order who will spontaneously admit their guilt .
Finally , the best directive in the world can only be effective if it is accompanied by real checking mechanisms .
We could improve these checks if we had more employment inspectors in each European country with wider roles .
It is essential that we design a more rigorous legal arsenal as soon as possible so that those placing orders are declared wholly responsible in case of fault on the part of subcontractors .
We should not close our eyes to known practices in certain economic sectors that are complicit in the activities of organised illegal immigration networks .
( CS ) Madam President , in the context of this report , I would like to draw your attention to an urgent problem that has emerged as regards the present crisis .
In some countries - including my own - we are witnessing the mass dismissal of agency workers , the majority of whom came to our country from eastern European and Asian countries .
They have become illegal workers .
After their dismissal , they have been left with no means of support , and so become pawns in the hands of so-called ' entrepreneurs ' who subject them to even worse exploitation than the agencies did .
At the same time , I would like to reiterate the very inadequate human resources that labour inspectorates have at their disposal in many of our Member States .
Nothing will change unless we set up a thoroughly trained and equipped network of inspectors who understand labour legislation and who are familiar with European directives .
While the European institutions have now agreed on certain standards for business , there is usually an outcry among the Member States whenever even the slightest attempt is made to do something similar in the field of social legislation .
Referring to tradition , subsidiarity and the like in a situation when workers in the European Union are subjected to unbridled exploitation is ridiculous and hypocritical .
For this reason , I welcome any attempts to prosecute and sanction those who employ illegal immigrants and I thank Mr Fava .
( RO ) Illegal employment is concentrated in certain sectors where the work is assumed to be of an unskilled nature , such as construction , agriculture , cleaning and the hotel and catering industry .
These sectors use illegal labour to an alarming degree .
Especially in times of crisis , employers are tempted to try to get round the law and resort to illegal workers in order to maintain profits or simply survive on the market .
The document we have before us today marks a step towards reducing the incidence of illegal employment , which has so many adverse repercussions from a fiscal and social perspective .
It is a good idea for us to punish the illegal employment of third-country nationals , but we must not forget that the same scourge is afflicting our fellow citizens from the European Union 's less developed Member States .
Even Romanians are facing numerous abuses by employers within the European Union .
With regard to the report text , I would like to see tougher sanctions for punishing labour market intermediaries .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that we are dealing with this subject at a particularly sensitive time .
The international economic crisis has led , or is leading , the countries that are in the worst crisis to use illegal labour , which almost always involves illegal immigrants , especially in certain sectors , among which construction , agriculture and others have been mentioned .
This encourages illegal immigration , resulting in the tragedies that we have been experiencing .
It is not surprising , then , that illegal immigration is increasing enormously , and this afternoon and tomorrow , we will be dealing in this House with the problems of Lampedusa and other border countries .
This measure therefore comes at just the right moment .
I believe , therefore , that the sanctions laid down for employers will certainly act as a further deterrent , because there are already sanctions for illegal work , especially involving illegal immigrants .
These sanctions will further deter employers from hiring workers .
We have heard that there are 8 million illegal residents doing illegal work ; we must assume that as soon as these measures enter into force , we will have 8 million illegal immigrants on the streets , and we will have to deal with them .
I think this is a problem that we must start to recognise , because otherwise those who survive illegally , but survive none the less , will be officially reported as illegal by their employers , who will no longer be able to house them , and we will have an enormous problem of 8 million people in Europe that we will have to expel and help .
I believe this is a subject that must be addressed in advance - I am finishing , as I see I am out of time .
We must look carefully at the problem of the temporary hiring of workers , particularly in agriculture , and we must cut out red tape to facilitate their inclusion and acceptance .
( CS ) Madam President , illegal employment not only affects five to ten million people but , in particular , those who employ them .
Unlike the author of this report , I believe that the problem affects not just illegal migrants from third countries , but also millions of citizens of the European Union who do occasional work for wages which are not taxed and from which the employers do not deduct insurance contributions .
The growth of illegal work seriously undermines economic competition .
One effective cure that the Member States have at their disposal would be to reduce the tax burden on employment .
However , I also support this proposal of the Commission to harmonise sanctions for employers , as I believe that consistent sanctions aimed mainly at employers who are repeat offenders will restrict the availability of illegal work and , hence , also the number of illegal migrants .
It will also reduce the scope for social exclusion and , to some extent , also the exploitation of the citizens of third countries .
However , I see problems in placing the onus of checking the residential entitlement of workers on employers .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to return to the issue of sanctions against employers whose subcontractors employ illegal workers .
I am very concerned about this provision , because an employer has no way of checking if the subcontractor is employing such persons or not .
Should the employer even harbour any suspicions that such is the case , what action should the employer then take ?
Should he or she report the matter to the police , or terminate the contract ?
If the contract is terminated , the employer risks being taken to court , and it would then be necessary to justify the reasons for terminating the contract .
The employer would not be in a position to provide the relevant evidence .
I would therefore like to reiterate my serious concern about this provision .
The provision may well turn out to be useless .
Alternatively , it may be that it will be used to sanction employers unfairly and unjustifiably .
Madam President , I welcome the report as we need to highlight and tackle this problem of employers exploiting illegal immigrants .
I have received representations from constituents , so I welcome action on this matter .
There are numerous damaging consequences , including the exploitation of immigrants through underpayment or , in some cases , non-payment .
It creates negative pressures on the wages of legally resident workers and distortion of competition between companies that comply with employment legislation and those who flaunt it .
In conclusion , if we are to strive to stamp out this illegal practice in our Member States , we have to get across that this is not only a workers ' rights issue but also a competition issue .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to conclude the comment made in my main intervention , and explain what I wished to convey to the United Kingdom MEPs who are complaining that this directive is interventionist and amounts to interference in the internal affairs of Member States .
In fact , rather than interfering , it actually puts things in order .
I wanted to say to the United Kingdom MEPs who have voiced complaints that they should approach employers back home to ensure that immigrants ' rights are respected and that individuals illegally present on the territory of the United Kingdom are not employed .
Then we could all agree that this is a good directive .
( PL ) It has been suggested that migration might be one way of alleviating the negative consequences of the demographic crisis .
It is very important to encourage citizens of third countries to enter the territory of the Union in order to take up employment .
We are , however , only interested in legal residence and legal employment .
Illegal foreign workers mean budgetary losses and distort healthy competition between enterprises .
The employers benefit most from the efforts of illegal workers .
They can easily procure a cheap labour force .
Foreigners from third countries are most often employed in the heaviest and lowest paid jobs .
As they are in a difficult situation , they are prepared to do everything the employers ask of them .
The latter often exploit their despair .
Not only are these people poorly paid , but they are also working without any social protection or health insurance and are under constant threat of expulsion from the country where they are staying .
The Union should make it easier for immigrants to take up employment , and we should act accordingly .
I have in mind , for example , work in Poland for citizens of Ukraine .
Madam President , I think this very interesting debate , for which I thank all the speakers , has shown that there is very broad agreement in Parliament on the need to target employers who take on and , very often , exploit illegal immigrants .
I would point out to Parliament that the impact assessment the Commission carried out showed that the current sanctions have failed to guarantee compliance with the rules .
The directive has improved this situation by obliging Member States to introduce equivalent penalties and ensure their effective application .
At the start of this sitting , I also stressed that the Commission will monitor the inspections that Member States have to carry out .
I would also like to thank Mr Fava and Parliament once again for having enabled this compromise .
It seems to me to be a good first step .
I would also point out that this directive is part of the framework of the European Union 's common immigration policy .
We must , of course , fight against illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings .
This is the subject we are dealing with today , but we must also underline the benefits of legal immigration .
Apart from the two proposals presented in October 2007 , on the blue card for highly qualified migrant workers and on the single permit , relating to migrant rights , in spring 2009 , the Commission will present three other draft directives on legal immigration aimed at establishing common rules for seasonal workers , who are generally less qualified , for individuals transferred within their companies and for paid trainees .
I would add that the Commission , in accordance with its commitment to the European Parliament and within the framework of the preparation and implementation of the Stockholm programme , will consider if there is a need for legislation for other categories of migrant workers .
There you have it .
I felt it was necessary to put this proposed directive in the general context of the Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
I wanted to bring it before Parliament to show that your wishes will be put into effect .
Thank you as well for the quality of this debate .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the Commissioner 's remarks and hopes .
Parliament has , I think , said quite clearly - and not just today - that measures on legal immigration are needed and immigration needs to be dealt with in an overall context , which does not just seek to produce punitive measures against illegal immigration .
We are overdue in that respect , and of course we are not happy that the Treaties do not authorise this Parliament to enter into a codecision procedure with the Council on legal immigration .
The legal basis that now constrains us to talking only about legislation to combat immigration is something that I too find frustrating , but it is the legal basis that we have to abide by .
Having said that , I believe that our report today has introduced articles that genuinely protect the rights of foreign workers , even if they are illegal immigrants .
I am thinking of the temporary residence permit for minors who have been exploited .
I am thinking about pay : it is , at last , expressly stated that remuneration cannot be lower than that which the law recognises for all other European citizens .
I am thinking of the role of the trade unions which , for the first time , can defend and represent foreign workers , even illegal ones , in administrative and civil cases .
These , I believe , are all reasons why we can talk of recovered rights , a step forward and not back , and a directive that tackles a difficult and sensitive subject , but with a sense of balance to which this Parliament is particularly alert .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 4 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
This report has various merits .
Its first is that it aims to be informative : it records the alarming facts of the growth of illegal immigration in Europe , immigration estimated , according to the Commission 's own figures , at between 4.5 and 8 million people .
It also identifies those sectors of the economy in which illegal working is most concentrated , namely , construction , agriculture , cleaning , hotels and catering .
Its second merit is that it intensifies the fight against undeclared work , particularly with the option of financial and penal sanctions for employers of illegal workers .
Unfortunately , the report has many limitations .
It says nothing on what measures should be taken to stem these intermittent flows of illegal immigration .
It does not even consider the reintroduction of checks at internal borders .
In a time of both social and economic crisis and a big rise in unemployment , the first requirement for the countries of the Union is to protect their jobs .
To do so , it is essential to introduce national and European social protection policies .
Jobs in France must be reserved for the French , while jobs in Europe are reserved for Europeans .
Application of the principles of national and European preference and protection is an essential condition for economic and social recovery in the countries of the European Union .
No one can cast any doubt on either the usefulness or timeliness of the measures aimed at punishing those employing illegal immigrants .
The country which I represent is less prone to these particular concerns because it is still more of a transit country for illegal immigration .
At the same time , we need to be aware of the future risks which we are exposed to .
As regards the actual report , I welcome the proposal to remove the mandatory control percentage which the Commission would like to impose .
This percentage is excessive and would only have the effect of generating red tape and huge public expenditure , without actually making an impact .
I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on the fine job he has done .
We all know that between 4.5 and 8 million illegal immigrants work in the European Union in sectors such as construction , agriculture and tourism .
I welcome the fact that the directive provides for criminal sanctions against employers guilty of repeat offences , of employing a large number of people whose status is unlawful , if the employee is a victim of human trafficking and the employer is aware of this fact , or if the employee is a minor .
Member States must also establish a mechanism which offers illegal immigrants the opportunity to lodge a complaint when they are , for example , victims of exploitation .
We must bear in mind the fact that people staying illegally have left their country of origin to provide a better future for their families .
An ever-growing number of children are being left behind : some are unsupervised , while others are left in the care of grandparents and neighbours , and even in institutions .
Whenever these children accompany their parents , we need to offer them the chance to have access to the education system and social protection within the European Union , even if they are staying illegally .
The report compiled by Claudio Fava is part of the package of measures aimed at combating illegal immigration by discouraging companies from employing these people .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur placed too much emphasis on measures aimed at punishing employers and supported the extension of illegal immigrants ' rights .
As it is extremely important to maintain a balance with regard to the sanctions which can be imposed on employers , I have tried , with the amendments I have proposed , to highlight those provisions in the report where sanctions against employers are too harsh and which could have left scope for an interpretation which would lead to abuses against them .
At the same time , special attention must be focused on the humanitarian situation of these immigrants .
For this reason , it is of paramount importance to encourage Member States to impose criminal sanctions in serious cases , such as when the employer knows that the employee is a victim of human trafficking .
In addition , the verification and notification obligations incumbent upon employers as specified by the report play a proper role in making the latter accountable with regard to this acute problem which we are facing in the EU with ever-increasing frequency .
The Member States should cooperate more closely to combat illegal immigration by strengthening action against illegal employment at the level of Member States of the European Union .
One of the main factors encouraging illegal immigrants to travel to the EU is the possibility of taking a job without the need to regularise their legal status .
Action against illegal immigration and illegal residence should serve as a deterrent .
Nonetheless , the directive on combating illegal immigration should apply without detriment to national legislation banning illegal employment of third country citizens who are legally resident on the territory of Member States , but who are working in violation of their status as authorised residents .
Reducing the financial penalties for employers of third country nationals should also be considered in cases where the employer is a natural person .
Common definitions , methods and standards in the area of combating illegal immigration are a sine qua non in the process of creating a common European policy on migration .
in writing . - ( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking all those involved in drafting the directive .
The statistics on the number of illegal workers in the Union are alarming .
Close cooperation is undoubtedly needed in order to combat illegal immigration .
Dealing with illegal employment is a priority of the EU 's strategy in the area of immigration .
The draft directive leaves something to be desired .
It could be wider in scope and cover citizens legally resident on the territory of the EU , but employed in very unfavourable conditions .
It would also be beneficial to broaden the definition of employer to include temporary work agencies and also employment agents .
Despite its shortcomings , the project under debate merits commendation .
It is true that employers bear responsibility for illegal employment .
The directive imposes additional administrative obligations on employers and provides for a range of different sanctions for failing to meet these obligations .
This does not , however , mean that the directive is only about penalising employers .
I should like to make it very clear that our primary aim is to do away with situations where individuals are exploited at work . It must be made impossible for people to be employed in undignified and inhumane conditions , deprived of their rights and of basic social benefits .
I believe that the directive in question is essential in order to obtain minimum harmonisation of provisions banning illegal employment .
I trust , too , that these provisions will be effectively implemented by the Member States .
1 .
Extension of the EC-USA agreement for scientific and technological cooperation (
2 .
Renewal of the Agreement between the EC and Russia on cooperation in science and technology (
3 .
Wilderness in Europe (
rapporteur . - Mr President , as we did not have a plenary debate on this item and there was no possibility to table amendments following the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , you either have to trust your rapporteur - myself - or reject the whole resolution .
In my view , it is not a good system , but that is the current tool .
Many aspects of the Natura 2000 Directives should be reopened in the near future in any case and hopefully , the legislative act will cover the wilderness areas as well , giving full opportunity for the next Assembly to go further on this beautiful topic .
I hope that my resolution will become a basis for further legislative actions providing the possibility for members to improve it in the future .
4 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Miloslav Ransdorf (
5 .
General and business aviation (
6 .
Pre-commercial procurement : driving innovation to ensure sustainable high quality public services in Europe (
7 .
Second Strategic Energy Review (
8 .
Non-discrimination based on gender and inter-generational solidarity (
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to make a minor linguistic , and perhaps semantic , observation .
( PL ) Paragraph A contains the wording ' ... and recognising the diversity of 21st century family patterns ... ' rendered in other languages as ' a także uznając różnorodność wzorców rodziny ... ' ' ... en reconnaissant la diversité de schémas familiaux ... ' ' ... Anerkennung der Vielfalt der Familienmodels ... ' .
If this is to be understood as acceptance of diversity along with a model of a single sex family , if that was indeed what Mrs Záborská intended , then I shall vote against it .
I would welcome clarification as to whether this is simply about noting that such models have been observed , or whether it is about recognising and accepting them .
We need to understand what we are voting on .
Thank you , Mr President and Mr Zaleski .
Of course , in this context we recognise other models .
It is clear then , Mr Zaleski : we note that they exist .
9 .
Combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography (
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( CS ) Wilderness and its diversity represent a gift and treasure that humanity should look after not just in the European Union .
The European Union 's efforts will remain ineffective as long as we do not stop the destruction of tropical rainforests , plundering Asian , African and American waters , as long as we do not spread more effective education about our joint responsibility for protecting nature against humanity all over the planet , and it will make this report , which I also supported today , just another scrap of paper .
( PL ) Mr President , if we wish to halt the accelerating process of loss of biodiversity , it is essential to protect Europe 's wildernesses forests and water bodies .
For our common actions to be effective , it is vital , firstly , to draw up unequivocal definitions of wildernesses and to establish the precise location of the latter on the map of the Community .
It is also vital to develop a strategy based on expert analyses of risks and of the processes involved in the degradation of wilderness areas .
This relates , in particular , to the invasion of foreign species that compete with the indigenous ones , and also to the impact of ongoing climate change .
Another key issue is tourism in its broadest sense .
I refer , in particular , to the implications of unsustainable or indeed aggressive tourism .
If we are to raise awareness of these issues amongst the Community 's citizens , it is important to conduct information campaigns , to provide special funds in the framework of local authority institutions and to support grass roots initiatives .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Gyula Hegyi on his dossier and thorough research .
At this time of global climate change and environmental troubles , it is clear that we need to address the issue of the European wilderness .
I believe that it is important that we coordinate a strategy for the protection and restoration of our precious wild lands .
We have a responsibility to nature to use land properly .
In my own country , Slovakia , an increase in the bark beetle population forced the national park services in the High Tatra region to use pesticides to combat the corrosive nature of the insect .
However , these pesticides contain the chemical cypermethrin , which often destroys healthy vegetation and poses serious health risks for humans and animals in the region .
Just as we must find a better solution to this dramatic insect population explosion in Slovakia , it is necessary across Europe to find ways to effectively protect our natural and wild lands .
I urge the European Parliament to act responsibly and quickly in order to protect the remaining wilderness .
( CS ) Mr President , I am pleased to support the report on pre-commercial procurement as it greatly minimises the risk of investing in innovation .
This aspect is particularly important at a time of recession .
The success of pre-commercial procurement will enable public institutions to collaborate in developing new products in order to improve the quality of public services .
We believe that this will increase the interest of SMEs in proposing innovative solutions for improving the quality of public transport , healthcare , reducing energy consumption in public buildings and protecting citizens from security threats without having to intrude upon their privacy .
This new approach will help Europe 's public sector to tackle fundamental public tasks without state aid while , at the same time , increasing the innovative potential of European firms .
With this report , we have given the European Commission a powerful signal to hurry up and make some specific legislative changes .
( CS ) Mr President-in-Office , at this point , I would like to express my opinion on the unbundling of production and transmission systems for gas in connection with the adopted legislation .
The proposed certification procedure for third countries seems a reasonable solution .
This is the very first time that the EU is giving its attention to energy security in the context of the gas market .
In response to the gas crisis which we have experienced , it is also necessary to speed up the construction of alternative pipelines to Europe which are not dependent on Russia .
The main infrastructure projects , such as the Nabucco gas pipeline , which is to link the Caspian region with Europe , cannot exist without large-scale vertically integrated undertakings and their investments .
However , these are hardly going to come pouring in if the risk of unbundling , and hence a weakened economic position , is hanging over them .
The solution that Parliament could use is to establish exemption from unbundling for the new infrastructure until such time as there is a return on investments .
I do not know whether we have exhausted all the possibilities open to us in this legislation .
( PL ) Mr President , the common energy policy is currently one of the greatest challenges facing the European Union .
Our response to it must be based on solidarity .
We are all aware that Russia remains one of our most important and also most difficult trading partners .
The fact that Russia is our main source of gas supply cannot , however , be allowed to mean that it can receive special treatment .
The rapporteur suggests relaxing the Union 's policy towards the Russian Federation .
I believe that we must pursue a fair but strict policy towards a trading partner that uses the raw materials of energy as a weapon with which to exert political pressure .
It is emphasised that diversification of energy sources is one of the fundamental issues arising in the area of energy security .
One way of tackling this would be to free ourselves from dependency on Russian raw materials .
The construction of the Nabucco pipeline and the exploitation of other sources of energy are steps in this direction .
Mr President , once more we have preened ourselves in this Parliament on our green credentials , and speakers have competed to push higher and higher the unrealistic targets for energy from only renewable sources and the targets for reductions of CO2 emissions - all in the belief that by our puny but costly efforts , we will save the planet .
Yes , we should use and promote sustainable energy sources , but pursuit of what for most has become a dogma with no regard to cost or viability needs to be tempered by reality , including the reality that climate change is not new , but cyclical , as well as the reality that while we inflict these targets on ourselves , manufacturing increasingly switches to where no such restraints inhibit them .
One day , we will have to account for the own goals in which the EU excels .
( DA ) Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Laperrouze 's report , but I also voted in favour of a number of amendments , all of which put a question mark against nuclear power as an energy source of the future .
They were rejected .
By voting in favour of the report as a whole , I am supporting the many good elements it contains , but I also recognise the fact that the majority sees nuclear energy as part of Europe 's CO2-free energy mix .
However , I still feel that this is not the solution for the future .
The solution for the future is a massive investment in , and development of , renewable energy .
( LT ) I agree with the provisions of the Second Strategic European Energy Policy Review , but I would also like to mention some aspects of the gas crisis .
The current gas crisis between Ukraine and Russia , unfortunately , not the first one , has affected 15 Central European and Balkan countries .
I have not seen figures showing the extent of economic losses which the countries affected have experienced , but I would like to underline the moral and valuable losses .
How are EU citizens supposed to feel when the conflict between Ukraine and Russia , which was obviously political , ruins the EU economy , energy security , political stability , and EU states are unable to take any measures ?
I refer to Slovakia and Bulgaria 's intentions to renew operations at safe nuclear power stations which had been closed , something which many of us parliamentarians support .
When we debate any EU legal act , including any in the field of energy , we stress that the consumer is most important , in other words , a layman .
When are we going to pay attention to a layman - the European Union citizen ?
Mr President , to many colleagues , a target of a 95 % reduction in CO2 emissions by 2050 may seem extreme but , if we are to accept - as I do - the peer-reviewed science as represented by the latest IPCC report , that level of reduction will be required if we are to keep the 2 ° C increase in global warming in our sights .
Secondly , while I voted against a range of nuclear-related amendments due to my ongoing concerns with nuclear fission , I have no problem with references to research on safety issues or on new generations of nuclear energy .
Like many , I watch and wonder as to whether nuclear fusion will ever become a reality .
The third point I would like to put on the record is my ongoing concern with the Irish situation and the lack of transparent and real ownership unbundling of our electricity grid , which remains a major disincentive to investment by other producers , especially using alternative fuels , with the result that the Irish have one of the highest electricity costs in Europe .
Mr President , that issue of high electricity prices in Ireland has been tackled by a colleague of ours , formerly of this Chamber , Simon Coveney , and we hope that he is successful in it .
I voted in favour of this report because it talks about sensible issues like energy efficiency and energy security related to the climate change agenda .
I have concerns about nuclear power , as do many people in Ireland , but I think we need to acknowledge that , when interconnectors are up and running , we are likely to be using power generated by the nuclear sector .
So , yes , we need research into the safe disposal of nuclear waste and into new developments of this technology to enhance the safety and security of it .
In the absence of that , I remain concerned and voted in accordance with those concerns in relation to this report .
I particularly regret that Amendment 37 was rejected , as I think it reflected , very fairly , many of the concerns of this House .
Mr President , I was delighted to be able to support Mr Luís Queiró 's report on proportionality and subsidiarity of small airports .
We have always tried to have one-size-fits-all policies in the EU , but the EU must recognise that each Member State and all local circumstances require different solutions .
Mr Queiró 's report has addressed that in its fullest .
There are small airports , there are medium-sized airports and there are large international hubs .
We do not want the European Union to be a massive airport structure .
We have got the right balance in this report , and that is the way we should be looking at our infrastructure in the future .
This is one of the reasons why , in my own constituency of the South-East of England , I am very reluctant indeed to support a third runway at Heathrow when we could have a better structure for Kent in a new airport on the Thames Estuary .
( SK ) In practice , it can be seen that the procedure under Article 45 ( 2 ) has serious shortcomings .
Apart from the fact that no one other than the rapporteur in the debate can discuss the topic in plenary , it even deprives the rapporteur of the possibility of discussing individual amending proposals which are problematic in the report .
I did not vote for the amending proposal of the Green group because , on two points , the new version expresses reservations regarding the Czech Presidency 's proposal .
However , as this is not the official position of the Council , such recommendations are premature and often counterproductive .
If working life is to be compatible with family life , one 's professional career must be placed on an equal footing with non-gainful activity which takes place in the context of inter-generational solidarity .
I am convinced that the report brings new incentives to eliminate the multiple discrimination facing men and women who freely decide to care for their nearest and dearest .
I would like to emphasise the work done by rapporteur Anna Záborská , but I am sorry that because of the procedural processes , we have not voted on her draft report .
( CS ) Mr President , I distance myself from the amendments just announced to the Záborská report on non-discrimination based on gender and inter-generational solidarity .
A mature European society must learn to see full-time care for children and other dependents as a fully valued alternative to professional life .
The proposal from the Greens , which attacks this approach by the Czech Presidency and calls it reactionary , is , in my view , erroneous and immature , although the MEPs have unfortunately voted for it .
Far from being a reactionary relegation of women to a role of subordination to men , it is a way to rehabilitate the family within society , giving equal rights to men , too .
Today it is men , too , who push prams and care for children in hospital .
Those men and women who devote part of their lives to caring for a child or for infirm parents are performing socially important work which must not , in future , be considered an inferior occupation .
I welcome the fact that the Czech Presidency has placed this approach among its priorities .
Our aim must be to create conditions where a man or woman who decides to take this course will not suffer discrimination in the job market and will be able to use a range of options for balancing work and family life according to the principles of flexicurity .
We must strengthen parenthood , and hence inter-generational flexicurity , instead of weakening it with obstacles imposed by the labour laws .
The prejudices of the last century are deepening the demographic crisis .
The Záborská report was a step in the right direction , and I object to the amended version which has been adopted .
( CS ) Likewise , I would like to express full support for Mrs Záborská , who has presented her own-initiative report which indeed addresses and underlines the need for inter-generational solidarity between individual family members .
This is not only a question of care for the younger generation , the new arrivals in the family .
In many cases , we also need to solve the problems of caring for older members of the same family .
I think the Czech Presidency has rightly grasped the urgency of this current demographic situation - and there are also economic benefits to be considered - and I reject the position of the Greens , who have quite wrongly submitted an amending proposal which devalues this correct intention .
I fully support Mrs Záborská 's report .
At voting time on the final report , my voting machine did not work .
I was in favour of the position put forward by Mrs Záborská .
Mr President , thank you for your patience and indulgence .
Let me take the opportunity to explain why I voted against the Greens and their amendment .
I do not want to vote against the Czech Presidency .
My first point is that the Czech Presidency does not call for a particular change in the so-called Barcelona targets , but for the opening-up of the debate on a possible and viable revision of the targets .
My second point is that it is evident that there are different social , cultural and economic conditions which can hardly enable the achievement of the Barcelona targets in general terms and equally all over the EU .
Thirdly , the report does not take into account further factors , such as the freedom of each family , as well as the interests of children .
Last , but not least , it is also difficult to achieve the Barcelona targets because childcare is , quite rightly , entirely in the hands of national governments .
( NL ) I , too , intended to vote in favour of the Záborská report because it was , all in all , an even-handed report that does not lapse into the traditional , politically correct clichés when it comes to matters such as discrimination or what is meant by it .
The amendment tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance which I voted against , has , in fact , completely nullified the report and does contain a number of very questionable elements , including the attack on the Czech Presidency and the gratuitous claim that raising children in the home would , in fact , have a role-confirming effect .
This is a particularly weak argument , but any stick will apparently do to beat a dog and to hold debates , to provide real arguments for an issue such as pay for stay-at-home parents .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Záborská , notably because it recognised the work undertaken in the home by women .
Work of a nursing , caring , educating and teaching nature should be properly valued .
After all , if such work is undertaken outside the home , it is recognised and included when calculating the GDP .
Gary Becker , a Nobel prize winner , refers to the importance of the economic contribution made by people undertaking domestic tasks to the economic progress of society as a whole .
As to the definition of a family , in Polish , this term refers to a union capable of procreating , and does not therefore encompass same sex unions .
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the Záborská report , which the Greens were opposed to and introduced an alternative discussion about .
I am of the opinion that we in Europe must ensure , on the basis of our community of shared values , that women in particular who are starting a family have the right to choose whether to stop work completely or only to work part-time after the birth , in order to care for their child .
I was very fortunate that my mother was able to do this and I must say that I have benefited from it .
If my mother had been unlucky enough to be divorced after twenty years of marriage , she would have been in a difficult situation , because she would not have received any social security support , particularly in old age .
I have been fighting for forty years to ensure that women who choose to devote themselves to their family and their children are not discriminated against and do not put themselves in the wrong by making this choice .
I cannot vote in favour of an ideology which wants to entrust children and adults to the state from the cradle to the grave .
I regret the fact that the report from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality was rejected .
The majority of members who voted against it did a disservice to women , to the family and to society .
Mr President , I am very grateful to Anna Záborská for producing this report .
Even though my group had some issues with it , I feel that she has touched upon something which is fundamentally important for the EU .
The EU 's population is dropping sharply .
The role of women in raising families is not recognised in many of the Member States as a contribution to their national GDP .
Women and mothers are an integral part of working life in our society , and there are many millions of mothers looking after their children in my constituency in the South-East of England .
Their contribution to the British GDP and to my own region 's wealth is of fundamental importance for our country .
This report , for the first time in the European Union I believe , recognises that contribution .
We need to encourage our Parliament to look at these issues in technical detail in the future so that we have equality and solidarity between the sexes .
Mr President , today we debate and deplore the evil of the sexual exploitation of children .
Virtually every speaker in the debate rightly condemned paedophile activities and pornographic abuse of children .
Likewise , the misuse of the Internet drew the wrath of many .
It is disappointing , however , that , despite such unanimity , several Member States have not attained the same level of criminalisation of this abuse of children .
Grooming , sexual abuse and child pornography should have no place anywhere in the EU , nor should we tolerate any of it .
Silence is the best friend of paedophilia .
We have seen it in churches , families and communities , where a blind eye has been turned , leading to some of the scandals of which we are aware in our various Member States .
( CS ) Mr President , I was glad to support the report just now , but I should add to my previous comments the fact that seven countries have not yet committed themselves to the Council of Europe Convention or to the UN 's Optional Protocol containing modern instruments for fighting child trafficking , prostitution and pornography .
I am sorry to say that this also applies to my country , the Czech Republic , which , of course , wants to combat this more effectively , but for a long time has been resolving the issue of incorporating criminal liability of legal entities into its legislation .
It is , of course , these legal entities that are organising child trafficking and making fat profits from it .
I therefore call on the Czech Presidency to ensure that this domestic problem is resolved and that it serves as an example to the other EU Member States .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - Such agreements are vital in the process of strengthening the ties between the European Union and the United States of America .
With competition from the new emerging markets ever increasing , it is of the utmost importance to be on top of the situation , and I think that this report expresses this feeling exactly .
I voted in favour of the Niebler report as scientific and technological cooperation between the EU and US is an absolute necessity .
This transatlantic agreement must inspire both the US and European Community to reap the reciprocal benefits resulting from the scientific and technical progress achieved through research programmes .
This agreement will facilitate the exchange of ideas and the transfer of expertise for the benefit of the scientific community , industry and ordinary citizens .
I would like to emphasise that the US is a global leader in the field of science and technology .
We must take note that the agreement is based on the principles of mutual benefit , promotes participation in cooperation activities , such as coordinated calls for joint project proposals and access to each other 's programmes and activities .
Principles supporting effective protection of intellectual property and equitable sharing of intellectual property rights are actively promoted .
The proposal also provides for missions by EU experts and officials and for workshops , seminars and meetings to be organised in the European Community and in the United States .
I hope that this agreement will also contribute to the success of the Lisbon Strategy which is aiming to create a knowledge-based Europe .
After setting up the European Institute of Technology , this transatlantic scientific and technological cooperation will generate new opportunities .
in writing . - Mrs Niebler has presented the report on the third extension of the EU-United States Agreement , which supports the Council decision concerning the extension of the Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and the Government of the United States of America .
As a mutually beneficial agreement advancing scientific knowledge and technological progress , I am very pleased to support this measure .
in writing . - The extension of the Scientific and Technological Cooperation agreement between the EU and the USA is , beyond doubt , a positive aspect for European Research .
The overwhelming vote shows just this .
However , experience shows time and again that the most fruitful scientific collaborations are obtained when two researchers from two institutions collaborate on a commonly designed and jointly funded project .
Therefore , in order to bring more substance to the scientific cooperation with the US , I call upon the Commission to explicitly establish simple , project-oriented financing instruments of joint research grants between researchers in the US and the EU .
The explicit inclusion in the agreement of fields such as biomedicine , nanotechnology and space research is welcomed .
I would like to see included also other cutting edge fields , such as stem-cell research .
The fact that there are justified ethical issues related to some research fields should be a drive to a common reflection on these aspects rather than a barrier to common scientific progress .
Due , in particular , to the European Research Council grants , the EU is increasingly attractive for American researchers .
The EU now has instruments to seek higher and longer term incoming scientist mobility and must act so that the EU achieves a net brain-gain .
Extending the agreement for scientific and technological cooperation with the United States is a confirmation of the need for cooperation and mutually beneficial exchanges between the EU and US in the cutting-edge sectors of research and innovation .
The inclusion of the space and security sectors in this agreement marks an important step towards consolidating transatlantic relations , which is a priority objective of the PPE-DE Group .
This cooperation must also cover forms of civil and military collaboration in areas of common interest , including pioneering fields such as the new space technologies , nanotechnologies and defence research .
I firmly believe that this cooperation will help boost the results obtained from the activities which have been carried out aboard the international space station , as well as in the sensitive area of communication satellites .
In addition , I feel that cooperation with third countries is important , especially with Russia , mainly in projects of the GPS-Glonass-Galileo type .
All stakeholders must benefit from the valuable results obtained by one of the parties , whether in the civil sector or in the military sector with an application for the civil sector , because safety and security are the prime concern of the world 's citizens nowadays , and sharing this success is not only proof of mutual trust and partnership , but is also a guarantee that these results will not be used for anything other than the benefit of mankind .
in writing . - I wish to record that I support this report on Extension of the EC-USA agreement for scientific and technological cooperation .
However , my voting machine did not work and I wish to record my vote in favour of this report for the record .
I voted against Angelika Niebler 's report on the extension of the agreement for scientific and technical cooperation between the European Community and the Government of the United States of America .
The content of the extended agreement differs from the previous agreement in that sections on space research and security research have been added .
As both the USA and the EU are explicitly planning to use space for military ends and as they define security primarily in military terms , it is reasonable to assume that the cooperation agreement will also serve military purposes .
Cooperation in the fields of science and research is extremely important .
However , it must be used for civilian purposes .
I am opposed to any military use .
I voted for this report proposing renewal of the December 1997 agreement , renewed for the first time in 2003 , which will allow the two parties to continue , improve and intensify their cooperation in scientific and technical areas of common interest .
This collaboration will bring mutual benefits from the scientific and technical progress achieved by our respective research programmes .
There will also be a transfer of knowledge that will benefit our companies and our citizens .
This cooperation is part of the European policy on technical research and development that is such a major part of the European legislation .
It will allow us to strengthen the scientific and technical bases of European industry and promote its increased international competitiveness .
Today I did not vote for the report on the continuation of scientific and technical cooperation between the EU and the USA .
This is despite the fact that the level of investment by the EU and USA in this field is amongst the highest in the world , and many interlinked scientific institutes are leading scientific and technical progress around the world and are contributing towards solving a number of global problems .
In the long term , however , I would criticise the unwillingness of the Commission and the Council to reach agreement with the USA on basic common ethical principles for science and research .
It troubles me that the present agreement once again contains no such provisions .
This is irresponsible towards humanity and shows a lack of consideration for those scientists who voluntarily maintain specific ethical principles while others do not .
This applies especially to biotechnology .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the Niebler report concerning the extension of the EC / US agreement for scientific and technological cooperation .
The agreement for scientific and technological cooperation came into force a little over 10 years ago and has already been renewed once , after the first five years .
I fully agree that the agreement needs to be extended again so as to continue to foster scientific and technological cooperation with the United States in common priority areas that provide both parties with socio-economic benefits .
I am also satisfied that the terms of the agreement are virtually identical to those signed previously , except for a few technical amendments .
Finally , I applaud the addition of space research and the security sector to the EC / US agreement .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council decision on extending the Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and the Government of the United States of America as I feel that any scientific cooperation can lead to new discoveries which , in turn , can support the development and evolution of mankind .
Given that the US is one of the biggest global driving forces in the field of scientific research , I feel that the extension of scientific cooperation with this country will be beneficial to every Member State in the European Union .
The renewal of the agreement for another five years would be useful for both parties , as cooperation between Russia and the European Community in the field of science and technology would be continued .
As the content of the renewed agreement will be identical to the content of the agreement which expires on 20 February 2009 , there would be no sense in continuing talks on the renewal of this agreement in the usual manner .
Given the advantages to both parties of a speedy renewal of the agreement , a one-step procedure is proposed ( one procedure and one act , linked to the signing and formation of the agreement ) .
Both parties to the agreement are striving to ensure continual cooperation ( in particular implementing such activities , in which third parties must participate , pursuant to the cooperation agreement ) .
I agree entirely with this proposal .
I voted in favour of the Niebler report as scientific and technological cooperation between the EU and Russia is a necessity .
The agreement between the EU and Russia must inspire both the European Community and Russia to reap the reciprocal benefits resulting from the scientific and technical progress achieved through research programmes .
This agreement will facilitate the exchange of ideas and the transfer of expertise for the benefit of the scientific community , industry and ordinary citizens .
I note that this agreement is based on similar principles to the agreement signed between the EU and US in the same fields , namely science and technology .
We must take note that the agreement is based on the principles of mutual benefit , promotes participation in cooperation activities , such as ' coordinated calls for joint project proposals and access to each other 's programmes and activities ' .
Principles supporting effective protection of intellectual property and equitable sharing of intellectual property rights are actively promoted .
The proposal also provides for missions by EU experts and officials and for workshops , seminars and meetings to be organised in the European Community and Russia .
In this European Year of Creativity and Innovation , let us hope that this agreement will contribute to making the strategic partnership between the EU and Russia more effective .
in writing . - Mrs Niebler has presented the report on renewal of the existing agreement between the EC and Russia on cooperation in science and technology .
Peaceful collaboration and work between Russia and EU is mutually beneficial in advancing scientific knowledge and research and I am delighted to support this measure .
Renewing the partnership agreement on scientific and technological cooperation with Russia is an important step in the process of normalising and consolidating relations between the EU and the Russian Federation , apart from easing recent tensions .
However , it is not sufficient to normalise relations for cooperation in these fields .
The EU and Russia must first of all find a way of consolidating their partnership and of cooperating in the area of security policies , primarily the energy security policy .
The recent gas crisis highlighted the need for us to adopt a serious and united approach to dealing with the issue of the European Union 's dependency on its resource suppliers .
Let us not forget either the crisis in Georgia which , for a time , put at risk the whole post-Cold War structure in Europe .
In view of all the challenges posed by globalisation and the global crisis , Russia is an important player which cannot be excluded from or ignored at the negotiating table .
However , the Russian Federation must observe these agreements and standard international regulations .
I appeal to the European Commission and Czech Presidency to find specific ways of resolving these problems as soon as possible , for their own benefit and that of Europe 's citizens and third country partners ( Ukraine and Moldova ) .
in writing . - I wish to record that I support this report on agreement between the EU and Russia on cooperation in science and technology .
However , my voting machine did not work and I wish to record my vote in favour of this report for the record .
in writing . - ( SK ) I voted in favour of scientific and technical cooperation between the European Community and Russia because it is necessary to build firm , stable and genuinely neighbourly relations with the Russian Federation .
I see cooperation in science and technology as an excellent means of building such a relationship .
The European Community , like Russia , has achieved significant scientific advances which may be mutually beneficial to both sides .
The Community can certainly benefit from such cooperation , realising and perfecting its own scientific and technical projects .
However , I would underline that for genuine neighbourly relations , willingness and reliability are needed on the other side , too .
The last few days have borne witness to Russia 's serious unreliability as a trading partner .
The actions of the Russian Federation caused a gas crisis in many countries of the European Union and this posed a direct threat to the economies of Member States , showing up the drawbacks of energy dependence on Russia .
I hope that in the interests of good cooperation in the scientific and technical field , such events will not be repeated in future .
Just as I voted against the agreement with the USA , I also voted against the report on the Agreement on scientific and technical cooperation between the EU and Russia .
I did so for exactly the same reason .
It troubles me that it does not have a chapter devoted to an agreement on common ethical limits for research .
I regret the fact that the Commission and the Council underestimate this all-important aspect of research and do not even attempt to frame such an agreement .
It is as if they are not aware that ethical limits have a place , more than anywhere else , in science , where preliminary caution is so necessary .
At least in the case of science and research financed from public funds , an international agreement on ethical principles would be entirely appropriate within such a cooperation agreement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted for the report by Mrs Niebler on the renewal of the EU / Russia agreement on scientific cooperation .
It is indeed essential to renew the agreement drawn up with the Soviet Government years ago .
Cooperation between the European Union and Russia has produced excellent results , due to the fact that they have joined forces to achieve the sole objective of improving general wellbeing .
I therefore welcome Mrs Niebler 's initiative and stress the importance of continuity and constancy in the diplomatic relations between the EU and Russia in order to ensure that the international geopolitical balance is maintained .
in writing . - There are several reasons why this agreement strengthens the EU internal market and cooperation in standards as well as maintaining consumer protection .
First among them is that science is a global discipline and advances we can share go towards increasing the sum total of human endeavour .
Benefits which we can work towards are specifically and generally a positive .
Whether it is the car industry working to reduce emissions , or universities creating strategic links , the success of promoting this agreement is measurable .
Consumers , too , are beneficiaries indirectly , as the best minds can be brought to bear to create greater trust in the answers to our joint concerns .
Although it may seem that the adoption of the draft Council Decision on the conclusion of the agreement ( renewing the Agreement on scientific and technical cooperation between the European Community and Russia ) is really a formality of only secondary importance , I do not think this is so .
With increasing urgency , it is becoming clear that Russia must be a strategic partner for the EU , rather than eternally condemned and seen as a bogeyman .
We should therefore welcome any step in the direction of cooperation between the EU and Russia at various levels and in various forms .
Cooperation with Russia can also be expected to play a very important , unambiguously positive role in the current severe economic crisis .
Russia cannot be separated from Europe .
It belongs to Europe , whether we like it or not , and cooperation with it may soon be vitally important for Europe .
in writing . - When we talk about wilderness , in reality we are referring to a natural environment from which significant human activity has been absent , in other words , virgin areas .
Wilderness may refer to both land and sea .
There are two different approaches : one refers to the concept of conservation and the other to that of preservation .
These are distinct .
The former can be described as ' proper use of nature ' , the latter ' protection of nature from use ' .
I believe that conservation and preservation may be distinct , but their application depends on the particular area .
To take an example , Europe is too small to have forbidden areas for its citizens .
Forests cover about one third of the land area of which only 5 % can be described as wilderness .
Most areas in Europe which are wilderness are protected under Natura 2000 .
This is a European network which already covers the most valuable and bio-diverse areas of the EU .
That is why I agree that no new legislation is required concerning wilderness areas as most are covered by Natura 2000 .
It is , however , important to map wilderness areas according to forest , fresh water and marine wilderness .
I voted in favour of the report .
There are several reasons why Europe should be interested in protected wilderness areas .
Firstly , they function as refuges and genetic reserves for many species that cannot survive in conditions that are even only slightly altered .
There are also many species that have not yet been discovered and described .
Most of these live in the soil or in rotting wood and are highly sensitive to change .
These unpolluted areas are ideal for studying natural changes and the evolution of nature .
At the same time , these areas are extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change caused by humans outside their boundaries .
Then there are many purely ethical reasons for preserving wilderness areas in Europe .
We have a moral obligation to ensure that future generations can take enjoyment and benefits from the protected wilderness areas in Europe .
The development of sustainable tourism is being used as a means to attribute an economic value to wilderness areas and to promote their conservation .
It is therefore important to draw up appropriate recommendations to help the EU Member States find the best way to ensure that present and potential protected areas , as well as wilderness areas and their natural processes , are safeguarded within the Natura 2000 framework .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report since I agree that we really need to proceed with the mapping of the last wilderness areas in Europe .
Of course , this cannot be done without defining wilderness .
Therefore , I urge the European Commission to take action in this field .
I also agree with the idea that we should promote sustainable tourism in these areas and teach site managers how to preserve and protect the wilderness .
Therefore , I join the request of the main NGOs in the field and ask the European Commission to give some guidelines for wilderness preservation in Europe .
in writing . - This report indicates that not even the farthest reaches of Europe are beyond the EU 's grasp .
The whole point of wilderness is that it is supposed to be untouched by mankind - including the EU .
However , given the various pressures on the environment , the Commission has proposed action to protect and nurture Europe 's most remote and isolated regions .
I am therefore generally supportive of this report , provided that Member States retain a prominent role in the management , designation and protection of wilderness .
I am somewhat sceptical about the merits of an EU strategy on wilderness , given that the EU 's management of agriculture and fisheries has proved to be so disastrous .
It is vital that the EU acts as a facilitator and repository of best practice in this process , otherwise the whole point of the measures proposed would be undermined .
Notwithstanding those caveats , my region of north-east England is blessed with isolated areas of outstanding natural beauty largely untouched by humans .
I therefore supported this report .
in writing . - Natura 2000 has done much to protect unspoilt or virgin environment .
This report stresses the importance of such projects and I am in full agreement with the rapporteur that many resources must be used to ensure the protection of such areas .
It is important to map these areas because it might be too late if we leave this too late .
in writing . - Mr Hegyi 's own-initiative report emphasises the importance of the protection of wilderness areas in Europe in the application of existing Directives , proposing a definition of ' wilderness ' as still untouched areas as well as ' areas where human activities are minimal ' .
While the report is welcome , certain areas remain unclear ; for example , whether existing wilderness areas or potential future wilderness areas are being discussed .
I would also like to know whether there are wilderness areas that are currently not listed as Natura 2000 sites which would potentially come under the consideration of this report .
Areas of special consideration under Natura 2000 fall under the competences of various DGs in the Commission .
While I am appreciative of the work undertaken by these different departments and their different mandates , increasing the levels of cooperation and coherence could greatly enhance the protection afforded by Natura 2000 sites .
I am pleased to support Mr Hegyi 's report , but regret that due to the application of Rule 45 ( 2 ) , I was denied the opportunity to debate it .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for the Hegyi report , since I believe it is necessary to improve the protection and promotion of wilderness areas in Europe .
Due to the environmental pressures resulting from centuries of human activity , wilderness areas today cover only 46 % of the Earth 's surface .
I believe that it falls to the European Commission to draw up recommendations for the Member States , which must include the production of a map and a strategy for Europe 's wilderness areas .
We voted in favour of this report because we need to protect nature , but through human use .
Forests currently cover 33 % of the land area of the countries of the European Economic Area , corresponding to 185 million hectares .
Only about 9 million hectares of forest ( 5 % of the total forest area ) is considered ' wilderness ' .
These areas , together with their native plant and animal communities and the ecosystems of which they are a part , are in an essentially natural state .
These wilderness areas should enjoy effective and specific protection conditions , as genetic reserves and refuges for many species which are unable to survive even in slightly altered conditions , especially large mammals , like brown bears , wolves and lynxes .
We have a moral obligation to ensure that future generations can enjoy and benefit from Europe 's wilderness areas .
The development of sustainable tourism can be used as a means of giving economic value to wildernesses and creating support for conservation , encouraging ordinary people to discover the hidden value of nature without damaging it .
Sustainable tourism strengthens acceptance of conservation policies , since the tourists come to understand the need for protection as a result of their personal experience , while helping to economically maintain wilderness areas which can provide job opportunities for local people .
Today , Europe 's wildernesses are reduced to a fraction of what they were in the past , so their protection is a priority .
They must , therefore , be central to European biodiversity policy and the Natura 2000 Network must take these areas into account , so as to make the best use of the ecosystem services they provide .
I therefore approve of the Hegyi report in the hope that European wilderness areas can be better preserved for enjoyment by future generations .
in writing . - I support this report which highlights the need to protect the 46 % of the world 's land which is wilderness and has not been significantly modified by human activity .
Gone are the days when the history of humanity was a story of survival in the face of nature 's adversity .
In our part of the world , although we still need to protect ourselves from nature and its attacks , it has become necessary to protect nature from human presence and domination .
We must do so for ourselves : for the interest we have in preserving the richness of biodiversity and for our need to preserve the planet on which we have been offered the chance to live .
It is on the basis of these precepts that we must consider efforts to preserve wilderness in Europe and , very specifically , in the outermost regions , where such diversity is so important .
The same precepts demand that interventions and regulations be balanced and considered .
If we want to foster a new way to use our rural areas , we must not increase the human activities undertaken there to levels that cannot be borne .
The protection of wilderness , especially where it coexists with human activity , must mean the promotion of balance , preservation and sustainability .
We must not place intolerable burdens on rural life or make people abandon areas already impoverished in themselves .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting for the Hegyi report on wilderness in Europe .
I believe that the European Union should take a greater interest in wilderness areas , because they act as refuges and reserves for many species that cannot survive in altered conditions .
Moreover , the ethical reasons for this decision must not be forgotten .
We European citizens have a moral obligation to ensure that future generations can benefit from the protected wilderness areas in Europe .
I therefore applaud Mr Hegyi 's initiative , aimed at promoting the development of sustainable tourism , a real indicator of the economic value of wilderness .
I voted for this report because , in my view , Europe must protect its wilderness areas and contribute to the upkeep of its national parks .
According to the ' Wilderness in Europe ' report , there are 10 national parks in several regions of Europe .
The upkeep and protection of these national parks also mean protection for the species of animals and birds which inhabit these areas .
In view of the fact that some of these species are on the point of extinction , I feel that the European Union must become actively involved in developing programmes which will help to revitalise these species and repopulate certain areas where , unfortunately , some species of animals and plants have disappeared .
On the same lines , I believe the following measures are necessary : a closer analysis of land clearing activities in areas which are not designated as national parks and the development of specific projects aimed at reforestation in areas which have been cleared .
I personally give my strong support to any such project and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
The term wilderness refers to a natural environment that has not been significantly altered by human activity .
Even now , 46 % of the surface of the Earth is classed as wilderness .
There is a difference between the notions of conservation and protection .
The former involves proper use of nature .
The latter implies protecting nature against exploitation .
In my view , nature needs to be protected , but through human action .
Europe is too small for it to be sensible to ban its citizens from entering certain territories .
The territories in question are of particular and exceptional value .
This can be exploited in an environmentally friendly manner by developing new products in the area of tourism .
At the same time , these territories are especially vulnerable to the impact of environmental change caused by human beings .
It is our moral duty to ensure that the next generation is able to see and experience genuine wildernesses in Europe .
The development of sustainable tourism may prove a way of benefiting from the economic importance of wilderness lands and acquiring resources for their protection .
An interesting initiative linking programmes aimed at wildernesses and sustainable tourism has arisen in Europe .
I refer to the PAN Parks Foundation , whose aim it is to develop sustainable tourism in those lands .
There is no need to introduce new legislation regarding wildernesses , but the European Commission should develop appropriate recommendations to ensure that that Member States of the EU receive assistance concerning the best ways of protecting present or potential wildernesses that might be included in the Natura 2000 network .
in writing . - In recent years , general and business aviation has been the fastest growing branch of the aviation sector .
Airports in my constituency of North-East England , such as Newcastle and Durham Tees Valley , are popular with amateur pilots and , increasingly , business people .
It is therefore a sub-sector that needs support and sensible regulation .
I am impressed with the Commission 's commitment to proportionality in the regulation of general and business aviation .
This approach marks a significant departure from many previous transport-related proposals and is to be welcomed , although we must remain vigilant to ensure that the sector can continue to grow in a sustainable way without the kind of onerous red tape that , far too often , has characterised the Commission 's proposals .
Inevitably , this sector will decline somewhat in the short term as the economic crisis continues to set in .
However , general and business aviation contributes significantly to economic growth , especially at a regional level as we in north-east England can attest .
I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - I agree with the rapporteur on the need to emphasise the importance of data gathering , proportionate regulation , airport and airspace capacity , and environmental sustainability , whilst acknowledging the importance of one of the fastest-growing industries of our time .
We call to strike a balance in these mentioned issues so as not to hinder the business and leave it sustainable .
in writing . - MEP Queiró has responded to the Commission 's communication ' An Agenda for Sustainable Future in General and Business Aviation ' and has highlighted several areas where policy considerations for the non-commercial air transport sector in general and business aviation have additional impact .
Of particular interest are the extension of Community competence in areas of security and safety , and the impact on the sector of Community initiatives such as the Single European Sky and the Air Traffic Management System .
Ensuring safety , while ensuring that environmental concerns are met by the sector in a responsible manner , both in reducing noise pollution and reducing the volume of emissions generated , is a primary concern .
The rate of growth of the sector and its diversity both make it one where future regulation will be necessary .
This communication points to a path for developing future policy .
I have voted against the report by Luís Queiró on the future of general and business aviation .
It is undoubtedly true that the number of general and business aircraft movements has increased significantly and therefore that the environmental impact has also grown .
However , in my opinion , investing in the expansion of airports is the wrong approach , because this will only lead to more demand for travel and an increase in air traffic .
We need to find alternatives so that the level of air traffic does not escalate and pollution remains within reasonable limits .
General and business aviation is a flourishing sector characterised by an increased degree of adaptability and flexibility , features which conflict with the rigid inflexibility typical of large airports in particular .
For this reason , I support the recommendations of my colleague , Luis Queiró , on the consistent application of the principles of proportionality and subsidiarity in this sector , on a case-by-case basis , with the proviso that all the security and safety requirements are complied with .
I appeal to all Member States to take into consideration all the recommendations made by the Commission and rapporteur , especially those concerning how to make airport capacity more efficient and use it to optimum effect , not only with regard to large airports , but especially regional and local airports .
In fact , as rapporteur for the European Single Sky II package and the extension of the EASA 's powers , I took into account the need for this segment of the aviation sector to enjoy all the conditions which are required to ensure sustainable development for the benefit of both the industry and , ultimately , passengers too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Queiró on an Agenda for a Sustainable Future in General and Business aviation .
Certainly we are warned that a new European policy is required concerning general and business aviation .
This is because there has been a constant growth in the total turnover of companies in the civil aviation sector .
Indeed , it is estimated that the number of passengers using business aviation could double in the next ten years or so .
Furthermore , the advantages brought by this type of aviation to economic and social wellbeing as a whole must also be acknowledged .
I therefore welcome the report by my fellow Member and hope that the potential of a sector enjoying remarkable growth can be fully exploited in the future .
in writing . - The public sector has been hampered by traditional methods in the procurement of research and development services .
This can be altered through what is known as pre-commercial procurement .
Pre-commercial procurement is a special approach for the public sector to procure research and development .
The EU needs a broader innovation strategy .
And what we are terming pre-commercial procurement has to be seen as part of the strategy .
This is essential to re-enforce the innovation capabilities of the Union and to improve public services for European citizens .
The US public sector spends USD 50 billion on research and development procurement .
Europe spends USD 2.5 billion .
It is obvious why pre-commercial procurement is crucial to help the public sector in Europe address major public challenges .
One of the problems existing in the EU is a lack of awareness of how to optimise research and development procurement .
The problem is a result of what is known as exclusive development .
Companies which have developed a product or service for a public body cannot use their findings for other customers .
Pre-commercial procurement will address this anomaly .
It will allow a specific approach which involves risk benefit sharing .
This will also result in cost-effective development of innovative solutions .
Thank you , Mr President .
I shall vote in favour .
I consider that pre-commercial procurement has the potential to be very advantageous for innovation and that it can offer updated public services of high quality in the European Union .
Not only that .
Pre-commercial procurement contracts offer major opportunities to small and mediumsized enterprises , in relation both to the public contracts sector and to their global development and experience .
Indeed , they are , by their nature , more accessible for small and mediumsized enterprises than traditional large commercial contracts .
Despite all this , I fear that what is proposed will not succeed in attracting small and mediumsized enterprises unless the way in which such contracts are to work is made clear , especially in a cross border context , and unless further clarification is provided on certain procedural aspects , including provisions on State aid and intellectual property , so as to create a transparent and stable environment for public bodies and enterprises .
in writing . - This report makes sobering reading : for all the talk about the Lisbon agenda , and making Europe the world 's most competitive economy by next year , I was shocked to read that the US public sector is spending USD 50 billion per year on research and development procurement .
This amount is twenty times higher than in Europe and an amount that represents approximately half of the overall research and development investment gap between the US and Europe .
I welcome this report by my colleague , Malcolm Harbour , who has set out ways in which Europe can begin to close that productivity gap .
The key to this process is in the title : driving innovation .
In my view , the best way for the aspirations of this report to become reality is to ensure that the EU encourages innovation and technological development rather than throwing regulatory obstacles in the way .
Given the important role of public procurement in promoting and supporting new technologies , I supported this report .
I hope its principles will be of use to local authorities in my region of North-East England .
in writing . - I agree with the rapporteur on the importance of innovation , especially in demanding sectors such as health , ageing and security .
Pre-commercial procurement marginalises the room for error and should thus be used as an innovative means .
in writing . - My colleague , Mr Harbour , has presented an own-initiative report regarding increasing innovation in Europe to ensure sustainable and high-quality public services .
Access to such services in a fair and equitable manner is essential for the full functioning of the free market .
This communication addresses the issue of the research and development ( R & D ) phase of a pre-commercial product .
Pre-commercial procurement is a specific approach for the public sector to engage R & D , with a view to driving innovation to ensure sustainable high quality public services in Europe .
The scope of public services concerned covers healthcare , education , security , climate change and energy efficiency , all issues which benefit the entirety of society .
The adoption of this strategy will allow for cost-effective , value-added development of new and innovative solutions , and so I supported this proposal .
Public procurement in the area of research and development in Europe represents an insignificant proportion of total public procurement .
Europe does not appear in a favourable light either in comparison with the United States , whose public sector allocates USD 50 billion a year to public procurement in the area of research and development , an amount 20 times greater than the sum spent in Europe .
This is most unfortunate if we really want to strengthen our innovative potential .
It is worth noting that many products and services currently available would not exist were it not for the commitment of public resources .
The GPS satellite navigation system and semiconductor technology are but two examples .
Europe needs to make technical improvements in many areas , such as health , sustainable growth and security .
For many of these areas , no commercial solutions are yet available , or if they are , further research and development action is required .
Pre-commercial procurement is one way of eliminating this gap between public sector demand and supply , offering the public authorities the possibility of improving the services they provide .
Pre-commercial procurement also represents an important opportunity for SMEs .
The innovative potential of the latter is enormous and , thanks to the commitment of public resources , they have the opportunity to develop and sell the solutions devised to other clients .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly welcome the report by Mr Harbour on precommercial procurement : driving innovation to ensure sustainable , high quality public services in Europe .
It is extremely important for the European Union to confront social challenges in an appropriate fashion , so as to guarantee considerable improvements in the provision of public services .
Precommercial procurement , from this perspective , can help to bridge the gap between supply and demand in the public services sector .
I agree with the rapporteur when he emphasises the need to educate customers on how to approach innovation in public contracts , since the profession is highly skilled and needs well-trained staff .
Pre-commercial procurement occurs when the public sector places orders in the area of research and development , thus supporting innovation and ensuring the sustainability and high quality of public services .
Pre-commercial procurement is tremendously important in terms of strengthening the innovation potential of the entire European Union , improving public services provided directly to the citizens , and also eliminating the gap between supply and demand in the public sector .
One example of a solution developed on the basis of public procurement is the GPS navigation system .
In the United States , the funding allocated to orders in the area of research and development is 20 times greater than that allocated in the European Union .
For SMEs , public procurement represents a valuable opportunity to gain experience .
Pre-commercial procurement contracts are advantageous for smaller enterprises , as the latter often do not comply with the requirements for ordinary commercial public procurement .
As a matter of urgency , Europe should develop comprehensive solutions to improve the use of pre-commercial procurement , not only by national authorities , but also by local and regional ones .
First of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Harbour for the report he has compiled , for the way in which it reflects the work of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection ( IMCO ) .
Adopting this own-initiative report compiled by Mr Harbour will help boost innovation in research and development within the European Union .
We must capitalise on the benefit which we will gain from a pre-commercial procurement policy .
Public procurement is an area which offers the prospect of huge opportunities for SMEs , with pre-commercial procurement being easier to access than large-scale procurement contracts .
We need to follow the example of the US and focus more on procuring research and development services .
We must define a beneficial pre-commercial policy instrument in order to boost the EU 's innovative base .
At the moment , companies which have developed a product or service for a public body are not able to reuse their findings for other potential customers , which comes on top of the financial barriers to procuring rival solutions .
Pre-commercial procurement allows cost-effective development of innovative solutions .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against Mrs Laperrouze 's report , as we believe that the final report is unbalanced and infringes the right of the Member States to decide whether or not they wish to use , develop or invest in nuclear energy .
We are in favour of common research into nuclear safety , for example , but we feel that , in several cases , the report is far too pro-nuclear energy .
These decisions should be made at Member State level .
Moreover , we are , in general , in favour of investments in energy infrastructure , but we are dubious about supporting all of the projects and investments that the rapporteur would like to support .
We would have liked to have seen clearer criteria in order to be able to support such a position , particularly in the light of the debate on Nord Stream .
in writing . - First and foremost , Europe must devote its efforts to help its members in their quest for the search of oil and gas .
There is a probability that Malta has fossil-fuel reserves beneath its seabed .
Full exploitation cannot be carried out because of issues on the median line between Malta and its Northern African neighbours .
This should not only be a bilateral issue but it is also in Europe 's interest to seek a solution on behalf of its Member State .
The issue of nuclear energy has once again taken a prominent position .
There are pros and cons .
The nuclear debate is never-ending .
One cannot fail to take note of the possibility of evaluating this energy supply .
I am informed that Malta was considering the importation of energy generated from nuclear plants in France .
This energy , on reaching Malta , would be in the form of electricity and the negative aspects associated with nuclear plants would not be an issue .
The energy generated would be cheaper than that from a gas pipeline from Sicily .
Malta would not have to undertake the capital expenditure needed to construct a power station .
in writing . - I welcome this week the financial allocation of EUR 100 million that is being given by the European Union in support of the construction of new electricity networks between the East Coast of Ireland and Wales .
This new project is part of the EUR 3.5 billion economic stimulus package which was announced by the European Commission last week in Brussels .
It will help to construct more modern energy networks which will fully protect the security of energy supplies into Ireland into the future .
The European Union is also going to financially support new projects in the field of alternative energy , and this includes the wind energy sector .
As a member of the European Parliament 's Environment Committee , I have witnessed the growing dispute about energy supply .
We all must reflect on what has been happening for a number of weeks now concerning energy supplies coming from Russia into the EU via the Ukraine .
The reality is that we in the EU need to break down our absolute dependence on Russian energy supplies .
We need to develop other energy sectors
Thank you , Mr President .
I am voting in favour .
I consider that forms of renewable energy , such as wind and solar power , hydroelectric or geothermal energy , biomass or marine resources , are potentially the most important source of energy for the European Union .
These can help to stabilise energy prices and contain the increase in energy dependency .
It is therefore very important to set out a European energy policy that will allow a substantial shift towards energy technologies that are efficient and have low carbon emissions , so as to cover our energy needs .
If energy efficiency and energy saving continue to be a priority , in line with the continuing development of renewable energy sources , I agree that it should be possible to meet our energy requirements using low emission sources by 2050 .
I also agree on the importance of a systematic approach founded on synergies between the various sectors .
In short , the long-term energy and climate challenges , at both European and global level , are an exceptional opportunity for encouraging new business models in all economic sectors , in order to stimulate innovation and to encourage environmentally friendly entrepreneurship .
We do not have a single European energy policy .
Each state defends its own interests .
An additional EUR 5 billion have been allocated to EU electricity connections and broadband Internet .
This is an historic event as , for the first time in the history of the EU , the European Commission debated the budget again and proposed such a project .
This is especially important for Lithuania since , so far , it has neither an electricity link with Sweden nor one with Poland and is an energy island .
Energy links are investments which do not reap many rewards financially .
Therefore , such vitally important projects should be financed with EU funds .
Today , Lithuania buys gas for around USD 500 , while other EU states , which are much further from Russia than Lithuania , pay less for gas .
We would gain a lot by showing solidarity and speaking with one voice to Gazprom about pricing .
in writing . - The three main objectives - security of supply and solidarity between Member States ; combating climate change : recalling the ' three times 20 ' objective for 2020 and the aim of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by between 50 % and 80 % by 2050 ; and the economic growth of the EU : obtaining the best prices while avoiding price volatility - are of utmost importance when we discuss the European energy policy .
We have to consider the policy that the decentralisation of energy sources will have , and new types of renewable energy should also be encouraged .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues welcome the strategic approach on the supply of energy as contained in the Laperrouze report on the Second Strategic Energy Review .
We voted against the references to the Lisbon Treaty in line with our long-standing policy of opposing it .
However , because there are references to the Lisbon Treaty which we could not specifically vote against , we have decided to abstain on the final vote .
I voted in favour of Mrs Laperrouze 's report on the strategic analysis of the EU 's energy situation because it stipulates that the EU 's future energy policy should include emergency action plans , the implementation of projects aimed at diversifying supply sources , as well as new climate change objectives .
We voted against this report because we disagree with many of the proposals that it propounds , as they are always based on free competition and liberalisation of markets in a strategic sector in which the existence of public policies and public ownership of the principle means of energy production was essential .
However , we voted in favour of several proposals .
For example , we are also concerned about the security of fossil fuels such as oil and gas , and the rapporteur 's statement regarding the unlikelihood of world production exceeding 100 million barrels per day ( currently 87 million ) . when requirements in 2030 are estimated at 120 million barrels per day , as well as the risk of a major crisis during the next decade .
We also agree that more research in the energy field should be undertaken , specifically into the transmutation of nuclear waste and nuclear fusion .
Nevertheless , we oppose the attempt to put economic groups in the European Union in a position of strength relative to the public companies of third countries , and the use made of this report to defend the Treaty of Lisbon and call for its ratification .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Laperrouze report on the Second Strategic Energy Review despite ( for me ) its over-enthusiasm for nuclear energy .
I am not in favour of early closure of safe nuclear plants , but my enthusiasm for new plants is extremely limited .
In my own region , the South-West of England , we have the possibility of constructing a tidal barrage across the Severn that would , with far less potential damage to the environment , have an output of two nuclear power stations and provide in a ' green ' way 5 % of Britain 's energy needs .
I also voted in favour of the Green Amendment 22 pointing out the delay and escalating costs of the fusion power ITER project .
I was not in favour of basing this joint project in Europe as the host pays a disproportionate part of the total budget .
I was therefore in favour of Japan , which wanted it , hosting this white elephant .
Far earlier than anticipated , I am being proved right .
Everyone is aware that energy is a major challenge for the Member States .
Energy saving , increased energy efficiency , research into commercially viable renewable energy and new technologies for transport and diversity of supply are all known routes to reduced dependence for the Member States .
We do not question the need for some cooperation , organisation even , at an intergovernmental level , for solidarity between the States .
In reality , though , it seems from the report that the design of an energy strategy and security of supply are much less important than the introduction of a single energy policy or the introduction of a single network for gas and electricity , under the aegis of a single European regulator for each sector .
Now , the choices , needs , options and capacities of the various states are extremely different .
This sensitive issue really is a strategic one and , as such , can only be left up to the sovereign decision of the states in accordance with their interests .
The objective once again , though , is an increase in the powers of the Brussels bureaucracy .
We know this is what we have to thank for providing us with problems ranging from an explosion in electricity prices to regular power cuts .
That is why we have voted against this report .
The report again suggests the nuclear option , even though this energy is not competitive and uranium is obtained in dangerous conditions that give rise to ethnic discrimination and have an unacceptable impact on health .
Due to the issue of global warming , coal cannot be considered a ' transitional component ' .
I believe that the ' diversification of EU energy resources ' is linked to the exploitation of fossil resources in the Caspian Sea .
The gas and oil fields of the Kashagan region are putting pressure on the populations and their environmental resources : the extraction of oil rich in sulphides threatens the health of the populations and biodiversity .
The diversification of energy supplies assumes that there are gas and oil pipelines to transport resources to the EU .
The TBC and Nabucco projects are affecting the political stability of our neighbours .
We have an obligation not to allow our energy needs to threaten their stability .
The populations of the Southern Caucasus must receive an economic and social benefit from the extraction of energy from their territories .
In Africa , the production of solar energy destined to meet our needs has to be suitably rewarded .
Why not say in the report that renewable energies and energy saving are the answer in the future ?
As it stands currently , I am voting against this report .
To guarantee EU energy security , a common EU energy market is needed , into which all Community Members would be integrated , above all the Baltic region .
The dependency of countries in this region on Russia , as the single supplier of energy resources , stands in the way of energy security , not just for these countries themselves , but for the Community as a whole .
Therefore , it is necessary to allow the connection of the Baltic countries to EU networks through priority and sufficiently funded EU projects .
The diversification of energy sources and suppliers cannot remain a matter for the member countries themselves .
It must be decided at EU level .
Therefore , I particularly support the rapporteur when she urges the Commission ' to prepare a European strategic plan which would set out long-term investment intended to satisfy the needs of future electric energy production and concrete guidelines for investment in nuclear energy ' .
As the financial crisis has hit the construction sector particularly hard , equally so in Lithuania , the rapporteur 's call for ' greater efforts to solve the problem of final disposal of all types of radioactive waste , and especially very radioactive waste ' , becomes particularly relevant with the closure of the Ignalina nuclear power station .
Partnership and Cooperation Agreements ( in particular with Russia ) must be a means of safeguarding the interests of all EU Members , and EU Member States must adhere to the principles of solidarity and unity in discussions with energy suppliers in third countries .
Only a united Europe is strong and competitive in an age of rapid globalisation .
The issue of the European Union 's energy security is a regularly recurring topic , which is becoming increasingly relevant , clearly indicating that there are deep-seated , unresolved problems .
The recent gas crisis has demonstrated the absolute need for Member States to join forces at Community level and show solidarity , both in crisis situations and in devising and implementing joint solutions which are mutually beneficial .
Being located at the EU 's eastern border , Romania is aware of both the risks and benefits accorded by this geo-strategic position .
For this reason , Romania supports and promotes , on the one hand , the construction of alternative energy transit routes , primarily the Nabucco gas pipeline , while , on the other , it supports the process of clarifying and strengthening partnership relations with Russia , which is a major player in the international arena , not only in this difficult sector involving the supply of energy resources .
With this in mind , the recommendations made by the rapporteur regarding the Southern Europe Corridor , especially Nabucco , and the interconnection of the gas and electricity networks running from north to south in South-East Europe , must be considered and implemented as quickly as possible .
The gas crisis which we have just survived has clearly demonstrated once again how important a secure , reliable and cheap energy supply is for the EU .
It is disturbing that nuclear power is suddenly being promoted as ' climate friendly ' as part of the energy debate and that reactors which have come to the end of their useful life and which have had millions in subsidies spent on decommissioning are suddenly being reactivated .
This is probably a result of the fact that the EU ignored the gas dispute and left the Eastern Member States in the lurch .
This is a lesson for the future .
We must reduce our energy consumption , although critics doubt whether the compulsory introduction of energy-saving bulbs will achieve this , and we must push for the use of alternative forms of energy .
However , while the focus of the budget is on nuclear power , this will never happen and new energy technologies will be marginalised .
Although considerations relating to the security of the EU 's energy supply are important , they must not result in support for Turkey 's entry into the EU for reasons of energy policy .
Even if Turkey does not become a member , the planned oil pipelines will still be able to pass through Turkey and it will still be possible to implement the gas infrastructure projects .
I greatly valued Mrs Laperrouze 's work and have therefore voted in favour of its adoption .
I only hope that the ideas and indications she has supplied in her report will be adequately appraised by the Commission and interpreted in the most positive and wide-ranging way possible .
I therefore hope that no obstacles will be put in the way of the quickest possible definition of projects regarding infrastructures and that they will be appraised in accordance with priorities that relate solely to development times , financial structure , available supplies and the relationship between public support and private commitment .
In this connection , the presentation of the Commission 's proposals for the European Recovery Plan , with a plan for financial support for certain projects , neglects the Mediterranean area by excluding the AlgeriaSardiniaItaly natural gas pipeline ( including the section within Italy ) from the highest priority European projects .
I still hope that within the ambit of diversification of sources and supply routes , we can make gradual progress , making use of new opportunities to start on infrastructure where it is lacking .
I hope that the mechanisms of solidarity will not permit market distortions or give rise to excessively onerous procedures .
I hope that the Energy Charter will be able to play a fundamental role together with the enlargement of the Energy Community , in particular , in relation to transit countries , including in the field of renewable energy sources .
The context in which a strategy that is intended to be long-term is given consideration has a decisive influence on the result of the analysis and the content of proposals .
The debate on the Strategic Energy Review is no exception .
In this context there are , however , repeated indicators suggesting that it is more permanent than transitory .
These indicators include energy dependency ( whether on Russia or on the main oil-producing countries ) and its consequences ; increasing energy costs , whether because of higher prices brought about by greater global demand or because of the decreased purchasing power of states impoverished by a severe economic crisis ; and the environmental consequences on various levels of constantly increasing global energy consumption , which the economic crisis is unlikely to reverse .
Together , these factors point to a need for a strategic approach based on lesser dependency and , as a result , greater diversity ( either of suppliers or of energy consumed ) ; greater efficiency ; a sustained research effort into alternative energy ; greater integration ; and , at the same time , the development of production capacities at a local level - specifically , those using alternative energy sources .
It is an enormous challenge , but it is a strategic issue which we cannot ignore .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Laperrouze , on the Second Strategic Energy Review .
I agree that we need to establish a true base for future European energy policy , aimed at pursuing the objectives of security of supply , combating climate change and the economic growth of the European Union .
Like the rapporteur , I emphasise the importance of achieving the institution of a European fund , guaranteeing the noncommercial risks of certain projects for the production and transport of energy that affects Europe , so as to encourage investments in all networks .
in writing . - The EU has ambitious plans , matched against a risk that resources will be increasingly constrained as populations around the globe demand more energy .
The answers , in maintaining current security of supply and developing efficient non-carbon based energy , are not mutually exclusive .
Safety of our environment and avoidance of energy poverty among those people , particularly in the South-East of England who live on fixed incomes , are equally important objectives .
That is why I support a mixture of technological solutions to energy supply in the EU .
Whilst I respect the necessity for caution in the nuclear industry as regards safety , I believe it offers a degree of certainty : if we were deprived of this process now , it would be accordingly disastrous for many of my constituents on fixed incomes .
The report on the second strategic review of energy policy shows far too little in the way of cohesion .
In my view , total commitment to bringing about an energy-efficient economy should receive top priority in European energy policy .
Restricting the consumption of energy should be given absolute priority in a bid to achieve the objectives concerning climate change , sustainable development , innovation , job creation and competitiveness .
In fact , an approach such as this is a very effective and inexpensive way of safeguarding a continuous energy supply .
As already stated , it creates a huge number of jobs for both highly qualified workers and unskilled ones .
European energy policy must give due consideration to the changing way in which energy is consumed and produced , with a view to the future .
Decentralised energy systems will need to be combined with extensive sources of renewable energy .
Alongside energy efficiency , energy-saving measures are of key importance .
We should therefore insist on insulation , as well as other measures , in the building industry .
In this report , the significance of nuclear energy is overrated .
It may cover about a third of total demand for electricity , but that only comes to 6 % of the total demand for energy .
In this context , I would like to remind you that there is still no sustainable solution for the problem of ( highly ) radioactive waste .
in writing . - Energy independence in Europe needs to be higher on the political agenda .
The need for clear definitions across the European Union on energy poverty is also important .
There also requires to be more joined-up thinking in terms of how we can harness the Green Economy to help us through the current financial crisis by creating jobs , but also to give the EU the energy independence which we need .
An investment in the EU Grid has to be addressed .
The report by Mrs Lapperouze on the Second Strategic Energy Review contains a point advocating the construction of the South Stream pipeline .
This is a sister project to the North Stream pipeline , aimed at making it totally impossible to implement the Nabucco project .
The South Stream pipeline strengthens Russia 's position in terms of the supply of sources of energy , and cannot therefore be considered a project to achieve diversification in this area .
in writing . - ( SV ) We are highly critical of Mrs Záborská 's report and intended to vote against it , as we thought that it was extremely hostile to women .
Women were to take care of the home , children and the elderly instead of working .
As luck would have it , we did not need to vote against the resolution , as the amending resolution from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance was approved .
Even though we ultimately chose to support the resolution , there were wordings that we were opposed to or were doubtful of , and therefore it was not clear how we should vote .
As Swedish Social Democrats , we think that the right to work should apply to everyone .
Society must , then , also provide the tools and conditions to enable women to go out to work , something that is a pre-requisite for their emancipation .
Well-developed childcare and care for the elderly is one of the most important pre-requisites necessary for women , too , to be able to go out to work .
Of course , there must be solidarity between the generations , but this solidarity must not result in women being forced to stay at home to look after the elderly and children .
We nevertheless believe that the resolution adopted by the majority sends a clear message to the Czech Presidency to show that its objective of placing the care of children and the elderly in the home on an equal footing with work is both old-fashioned and extremely hostile to women .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues are supportive of a number of the general principles outlined in this report , including support for carers , work-life balance , and parental leave .
However , due to certain references in this report , particularly with regard to the Working Time Directive , we have chosen to abstain .
in writing . - It is a fact that in the Lisbon strategy , the concept of ' work ' relates to formal gainful employment .
The concept of ' work ' has to be given a wider interpretation .
There are activities carried out by both men and women which do not qualify as formal gainful employment , but one cannot deny that these activities constitute work .
For instance , voluntary , domestic and family work are all different aspects of the concept but do not fall within the traditional definition of gainful employment .
The definition of work to this day is too economic .
Many people of either gender care for dependents and yet , notwithstanding this , the input of such work is ignored by employment statisticians .
In my opinion , domestic work is household production and should form a significant part in statistics relating to the economic output of a country .
This , however , is not recognised when calculating the goods and services that make up the GDP of a country .
The result is that women , who are responsible for the greater part of household production , are undervalued as regards their input .
Given the hours of work in household production , one must accept that this should be taken into account when computing the total production of a country .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Záborská .
I believe that in particular , women running a household and bringing up children should not encounter discrimination on the labour market .
Running a home and bringing up children is largely unseen work .
It does not enjoy prestige , yet it is work undertaken for the benefit of the entire community .
There are some six million women in Poland who are homemakers .
Accordingly , the EU 's policy should define the notion of work in such a way as to allow for a series of concessions benefiting women who put their professional career on hold , women who devote themselves to their family and also women who care for their family whilst they are also active in the workplace .
In Europe , the employment rate for women caring for children is only 62.4 % , while for men it is 91.4 % .
Moreover , 76.5 % of part-time workers are women .
Unsuitable services , low pay , late inclusion in the labour market , lengthy procedures regarding agreements on fixed-term work and insufficient incentives for young couples - these are some of the reasons why young people choose to get married and have children later .
I urge EU states to make provisions for the cost of maternity leave to be covered not just by the employer , but by society too , and to offer parents more opportunities for flexible working , and child care institutions more opportunities for flexible working hours , so that both women and men can balance work and family life more successfully .
in writing . - I support this report which focuses on the various aspects of direct and indirect discrimination towards women and men who are responsible for taking care of dependents .
It argues that a better understanding of the relationship between employment ( paid work ) and family obligations ( unpaid work ) is essential to enhance economic independence of women and consequently gender equality .
The non-gainful employment of women and men who , for instance , educate children , care for the elderly at home , provide inter-generational solidarity and work for the common good , is still not considered economic work to this day .
The report calls on Member States to take measures aimed at the recognition of not just traditional forms of gainful employment but also of various other forms such as voluntary and domestic and family work , and to assess how they should be included in Member States ' systems of national accounts , and to assess its impact on GDP .
in writing . - MEP Záborská has presented a report which presents a definition of the term ' work ' which includes non-monetary and informal labour , which extends recognition to non-market-based or non-remunerated work .
Despite the prevalence of this work in all Member States , statistical evaluations of ' labour forces ' rarely take this into account , leaving it under-analysed , ill appreciated and unrecognised .
At the very least , all full-time mothers ' work must be credited for contributory pension purposes .
I voted in support of this report despite some misgivings and concern with the overall thrust of the report .
We voted in favour of this alternative position presented by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , even if there are certain parts with which we are not in complete agreement , because it improves on the rapporteur 's proposal .
This is an area in which public policies that are intrinsically linked to achieving gender equality are essential .
It is essential that public services exist and that everyone has access to quality services , irrespective of their financial position and gender , and without suffering any discrimination .
This requires national public health services that are free or mainly free , and quality , free , public education for all .
It is also essential to create and maintain good quality , affordable public health facilities , with opening hours that meet the needs of parents and children , as well as good-quality , affordable care facilities for the elderly and dependants .
All this is essential in guaranteeing the general public better living conditions and facilitating women 's access to the labour market and paid work , so that they can become economically independent , which is a basic issue for the emancipation of women .
The explanation of Mrs Záborská 's reasons shows us that the objective of her report is the proper social and economic recognition of certain activities which cannot be classified as part of the ' formal labour market ' .
To put it clearly and succinctly , we are talking essentially about educating children and , in our ageing societies , caring for dependent people .
That needed to be said because it is not obvious at first , neither in the report 's title , which talks about discrimination , nor on first reading of a text which is written in an occasionally strange style .
In fine , the text talks rightly about recognition by society , about including all wealth creation , however invisible , in the national figures , about freedom of choice , and even about the granting of personal rights to social security and pensions to those who choose to dedicate themselves to the family rather than to a career .
However , it is sad that Mrs Záborská didn 't follow her logic to its conclusion and forgot the only measure which would really be able to give both freedom of choice and promote a rise in birth rates by getting rid of the financial constraint , namely , the parental wage that the Front National has been advocating for years .
I have voted in favour of the Záborská report on bringing an end to discrimination .
We must do everything that we possibly can to achieve gender equality .
On the one hand , men must become more involved in housework and childcare and , on the other , it must be possible for women to follow a completely independent career .
However , it is important that we never lose sight of the welfare of children and make appropriate , affordable childcare facilities available .
in writing . - ( SV ) Equality and equal treatment on the labour market , as well as in all other contexts , go without saying in a democracy .
To that extent , the rapporteur is , of course , right .
However , as usual , it appears that the measures proposed to rectify our lapses with regard to human rights and democracy seek to increase the EU 's political power at the expense of the Member States .
It always ends with an attack on subsidiarity .
In practice , this report proposes that the EU should shoulder the responsibility for the Member States ' social policy and legislate on issues that are closely associated with labour market policy .
There are also wordings that open the way for a common tax policy .
All of these are examples of political issues that the Member States themselves should have control over .
In spite of several of the good intentions , I have therefore chosen to vote against both the own-initiative report and the alternative proposal for a resolution .
The Záborská report makes it clear that for women , the decision as to whether or not to go out to work still represents a choice between two unequal alternatives .
I am in favour of the work done by both men and women in the home , including housework , bringing up children and caring for elderly or disabled relatives , being better recognised and better paid .
The household economy deserves a more important role than the one currently allocated to it .
This commitment must be taken into account in particular in national social security and pension policies .
It is right that the demand for ' solidarity between the generations ' has been raised .
We support social responsibility towards older people and we will not permit entire groups to be discriminated against and excluded .
The value of this integration work amounts to almost one third of the national income in Germany .
This example should become the accepted approach throughout Europe .
We also need to recognise the contribution made by people over the age of 50 to the common good .
Younger pensioners currently find themselves in a difficult situation because they have finished working far too early , usually as a result of being forced to do so .
We need more jobs which are suitable for older people .
Their experience , their detailed knowledge and their readiness to try new things put them in a good position on the labour market .
in writing . - I support this report which is in favour of the rights of workers regarding parental and carers ' leave , providing a call for non-discrimination against carers , and more recognition for the work they do .
in writing . - ( DE ) Instead of setting quotas , which can easily give rise to feelings of envy and resentment , it would be more appropriate to provide support for young women in their educational choices and career planning , in order to discourage the focus on women 's professions .
If a woman chooses the security of working in a team or within the family instead of a lonely , stressful managerial role , we must accept this .
Equal pay for equal work is something which is long overdue .
If this is not implemented , then all attempts to provide paternity or parental leave will fail , on account of the financial realities .
Single parents are at particularly high risk of poverty and society needs to show more solidarity in this respect .
Another problem is that work done by women , such as housework , bringing up children or caring for relatives , is often not regarded as proper work .
We must bring about change in this area .
If we want family life to continue , we must introduce family-friendly working hours , but the EU is opposing this .
It is not enough to call for solidarity between the generations .
We must put it into practice .
Today 's report appears to be a step in the right direction , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance as an alternative to Mrs Záborská 's report , since it better tackles the actual problems that still persist with regard to achieving true equality between men and women , recognition of changes in the family model , reconciliation of personal and working life and the positive measures for action that we Socialists have always upheld .
We cannot perpetuate stereotypes nor solve our economic difficulties by forcing women to stay at home and take care of elderly people and children , as stated in Mrs Záborská 's text , which presents women as ' potential mothers ' who procreate and bring children into the world , bringing them up chiefly together with fathers .
With my vote I also want to send a clear message to the Czech Presidency which , as it explained in its programme for these six months , also intends to promote the image of the woman-carer , encouraging many female professionals to give up their careers to take care of their families .
I am given the impression that the Czech Presidency does not understand the term ' equality between men and women ' in its fullest meaning .
I hope that in six months ' time , we will be able to provide it with an explanation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I vote in favour of the report by Mrs Záborská concerning inter-generational solidarity .
I consider that the concept of ' work ' as currently expressed by the European Union does not adequately cover all categories .
Discrimination against women or men who freely choose to assist those who cannot look after themselves , or to bring up future generations , is now anachronistic and old fashioned .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur when she affirms the essential need to make the concept of work sustainable and to acknowledge the unpaid work carried out by women and men towards inter-generational solidarity .
A report on non-discrimination based on gender and inter-generational solidarity was adopted today during the European Parliament 's plenary in Strasbourg .
Inter-generational solidarity is one of the structural and key solutions of the European social model .
The Member States are committed to taking action in order to eliminate the barriers impeding women from accessing the labour market on the same terms as men .
In cooperation with the Member States and social partners , the European Commission should undertake a review of the political strategies aimed at reconciling family and professional life .
Female employment indicators confirm that in many aspects of work , significant differences remain between women and men as regards reconciling private and professional life .
Pursuant to the aims of the Lisbon Strategy , the Member States are committed to finding employment for 60 % of women capable of working .
The Commission should present its views on the new directive concerning specific rights and protection regarding the reconciliation of family and professional life in families where certain members require care .
I have in mind for example , families with children , older persons or disabled persons .
The own-initiative report speaks of improving the existing situation as regards valuing women 's role in inter-generational solidarity - caring for children , older people and dependents in the family .
The report which I presented was truly revolutionary , because it was the first time that a Parliamentary initiative called for recognition of women 's ' invisible ' contribution to the financial system and GDP .
The report was unanimously approved in the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Even the Green group did not vote against it .
Today , these same MEPs have submitted an alternative resolution without proposing any consultation beforehand .
The entire left-wing spectrum in the European Parliament voted for the alternative resolution .
I draw two conclusions from this .
Firstly , the left has shown that it does not respect the work of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , although it ostensibly recognises its importance .
Secondly , the left has raised doubts on the issue of equality and non-discrimination between men and women , creating a suspicion that for the left , this issue serves only as a media eye-catcher .
I voted against the resolution .
It was definitely a step in the wrong direction .
Although it contains paragraphs from my original report , it shows that the left does not respect the work of millions of women throughout the EU .
The authors of the resolution have shown that they are still entrenched in old ideologies that have now lost their validity .
Furthermore , the resolution , in an unprecedented way , calls the Czech Presidency into question simply for having proposed some discussion of the Barcelona targets .
Thank you , Mr President . I voted in favour .
I am very worried that child pornography on the Internet is a phenomenon that is spreading at a growing rate and , in particular , that it is involving ever younger children .
The sexual exploitation of minors and child pornography are a grave violation of human rights .
I therefore regard it as important , in the framework of international cooperation , to intensify the steps being taken to filter out and close down the websites containing child pornography , so that Internet service providers are obliged to block such criminal websites .
However , despite the fact that the legal systems of Member States provide for penalties and a fairly high level of protection against the sexual exploitation and abuse of children and child pornography , we need to increase the level of protection for children , also in view of the constant development of new technologies , in particular , the Internet , and the use of new forms of online grooming of children by paedophiles .
In short , we need to develop awareness campaigns for parents and adolescents concerning the dangers of child pornography on the Internet , in particular , the risk of sexual exploitation in chat rooms and Internet forums .
I voted in favour of the report discussed and would like to congratulate Mrs Angelilli for tackling such a difficult but also important subject .
Child pornography is an ever-increasing global problem .
Every effort should therefore be made to combat it at international level .
The police forces of the various Member States should exchange information and cooperate so as to prevent as many crimes of this sort as possible .
I should also like to underline the need to develop effective methods of helping children who have been the victims of paedophilia .
In my opinion , all EU countries should make sexual relations with minors up to 18 years , where there is use of force , rape or threats , a criminal offence .
Obvious exploitation of children 's trust , using a position of authority against them or influence on them , including within families , and abuse violating a child 's situation , especially a psychological or physical disability , should also be made criminal offences .
EU countries should demand that Internet service providers block access to websites promoting sex with children , while bank and other credit card companies should block payments on child pornography websites .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree that Member States need to ' criminalise all types of sexual abuse of children ' , including online grooming .
Convicted sex offenders must be prevented from gaining access to children through employment or voluntary activities involving regular contact with children .
Member States are obliged to ensure that applicants for certain jobs working with children undergo criminal records checks , which includes setting out clear rules or guidelines for employers on their obligations in this regard .
in writing . - Often , the EU seeks to take common action where things are better left to Member States .
In this case , however , I believe we can make a difference acting together .
The scourge of child pornography and child sex abuse is a serious blight on our society , wrecking the lives of those most vulnerable and worthy of protection .
Given the nature of the EU and the free movement of people , it is vital that we use the various means at our disposal to combat these sickening crimes wherever they occur .
In particular , it is important that information about offenders is coordinated and updated regularly .
We must also improve cooperation with third countries so that EU citizens travelling outside the EU to commit sex crimes against children can be identified , stopped , prosecuted and extradited as required .
The EU 's global role offers an important opportunity to promote our values in countries and regions where children 's rights are less well protected .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) The delegation of Swedish Conservatives in the European Parliament have today voted on Mrs Angelilli 's ( Union for Europe of the Nations Group , Italy ) report on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
The fight against the dissemination of child pornography must be prioritised .
In this regard , European cooperation has a very important part to play in various roles .
We Conservatives therefore voted in favour of the report .
However , at the same time , we would like to point out that we did not share the rapporteur 's view with regard to two of the many proposals that were presented .
Unlike the rapporteur , we do not believe that we should compromise the strict professional secrecy by which certain professions , such as lawyers , priests and psychologists , are bound .
We also believe that we can hardly hold the owner of an Internet site strictly responsible for all discussions that are held on a website , including in private conversations in closed rooms .
In spite of the objective , it is disproportionate to require all owners of Internet sites to monitor all of the private conversations that are conducted there in order to be able to guarantee the lawfulness of the site in accordance with this proposal .
Instead , we must focus on other , more effective methods of combating networks that disseminate child pornography that do not have such serious consequences for the integrity of ordinary Internet users .
I voted in favour of the Angelilli report because I believe that the protection of children 's rights must be a priority for the EU and its Member States .
Legislation combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography must be updated to take into account the development of new technologies , especially the Internet , as well as the use of some new forms of online grooming of children by paedophiles .
I feel that the institutions of the EU and Member States must focus , in particular , on increasing institutional capacity to combat these offences .
As these offences respect no borders , the EU must develop a transnational network to combat this crime .
In this regard , I support the idea of EUROPOL setting up a specific unit tasked with combating child pornography and child prostitution , comprising experts trained in specific issues .
This unit must cooperate effectively with the police authorities in Member States and in third countries , with the relevant expertise .
in writing . - I fully support MEP Angelilli 's own-initiative report and the recommendation to the Council on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
Previous common positions have not yet been implemented in all Member States , while the threat posed to children 's safety by greater technological progress continues to mount .
This report would update and strengthen existing measures for combating these abhorrent behaviours , and define them as criminal offences , punishable by law .
The implementation of Ms Angelilli 's report means that the protection of children from these abusive practices will increase in response to technological developments , targeting , in particular , the sinister practice of ' grooming ' .
Other important proposals include cross-border checking of persons convicted of sexual abuse , to prevent them from obtaining employment where they would have direct contact with children in other Member States , and increased victim protection during investigations and trials .
The Internet is a vital part of our interconnected information society .
Children are more computer literate than ever but , with this increased literacy and confidence , the dangers posed by unscrupulous persons are not clearly apparent to them or to their less literate parents .
These common sense proposals aim to protect the most vulnerable members of our societies .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Angelilli report on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography because I consider it essential to update the means of fighting all forms of exploitation of children , so as to ensure a high level of child protection within the European Union .
That is why I support the recommendations of the present report , specifically the proposal to criminalise in all Member States all sexual crimes against children , increased vigilance and monitoring of new forms of grooming of minors , particularly on the Internet , and the creation of the Missing Child Alert System to improve cooperation at European level .
The sexual abuse of children and child pornography are especially odious crimes which require , in an age of the Internet and sex tourism , stronger legislation , increased cooperation between the police and legal systems and improved victim support .
Mrs Angelilli 's report is worthy of our support .
I should , however , point out that , apart from the developments in technology that are giving the perverts many more opportunities to satisfy their cravings , we should also look at moral decadence and the lowering of values as further reasons for the large increase in this type of crime .
Just about 30 years ago , in the name of a so-called liberalisation of morals , unbridled pleasure seeking for all and the pseudo-personal growth of the individual from the earliest years , a certain political tendency promoted the sexual activity of minors , even in the columns of that mouthpiece of the trendy left , the French newspaper Le Monde .
Whilst this undignified argument has , it is to be hoped , been rejected , its authors continue to preach and their political tendency continues to hand down lessons without ever having admitted its culpability .
Finally , I wish to know why the only right not afforded to children in most of our states is their right to be born .
As mentioned in the present proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council , the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse ( the CoE Convention ) - already signed by 20 European Union countries , is the first international legal instrument to classify as crimes the various forms of sexual abuse of children , including abuse committed , inter alia , using force , coercion or threats , even within the family .
In this context , Parliament calls on all Member States which have not already done so to sign , ratify and apply all relevant international conventions , starting with the CoE Convention .
Amongst other recommendations , Parliament calls on Member States to improve their legislation and cooperation on this area , to ensure that sexual crimes against children under the age of 18 are always classified throughout the EU as exploitation of minors and to criminalise all types of sexual abuse of children .
Irrespective of the necessary analysis and sovereign decision of each country regarding each of Parliament 's decisions , we are in agreement with the main thrust of the resolution aimed at protecting and safeguarding the rights of children .
in writing . - The sexual exploitation of children and child pornography are abominable crimes and international cooperation is necessary to put a stop to them .
Therefore , we voted in favour of the Angelilli report today .
However , there are aspects of the report that we do not support , such as creating uniform , extraterritorial criminal legislation applicable throughout the EU , as well as defining at EU level what should be considered a crime and aggravating circumstances .
I am voting in favour of the Angelilli report on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
Nowadays , it is more important than ever for children 's development and integrity to be protected in every possible way .
Since , in most families , both parents work , the grandparents are not available to look after the children and the Internet is often the only form of entertainment , the extent of the risk is undeniable .
in writing . - The sexual exploitation of children and child pornography are abominable crimes and international cooperation is necessary to put a stop to them .
I therefore voted in favour of the Angelilli report today .
However , there are aspects of the report that I do not support , such as creating a uniform extraterritorial criminal legislation applicable throughout the EU and defining at EU level what should be considered a crime and aggravating circumstances .
in writing . - ( SV ) Sexual crimes against children and child pornography are among the most abhorrent crimes that people are guilty of .
These are crimes that should have tough criminal penalties or extensive reliable care if the perpetrator is mentally ill .
The report proposes many constructive measures to improve the handling of these horrendous social problems .
Member States are urged to ratify and implement all international conventions in this area , they should receive help to improve their legislation in this area and child sex tourism should be criminalised in all Member States .
This is wholly in accord with my view of the EU as a union of values .
I support a lot of what the report contains and have voted in favour in many individual votes .
However , the report also seeks to harmonise criminal legislation within the EU and to establish a system of preventative measures to be financed from EU funds , despite the fact that this is a global problem that should be regulated by means of conventions and agreements at UN level .
It is difficult to avoid the impression that , once again , we are faced with an example of the cynical use of a terrible social problem to boost the EU 's position at the expense of the independence of the Member States .
Criminal law is an absolutely crucial part of a sovereign state 's competence .
I have therefore voted against the report as a whole .
I voted in favour of Mrs Angelilli 's report on the sexual exploitation of children because this issue concerns one of the most sordid inhumane acts , which must be punished by measures adopted by all Member States .
In Romania , there is still a great deal unknown about this issue .
We have little data about how extensive it is .
This is why I feel that adopting this report will help expand the campaigns providing information , focusing attention and warning about child sex abuse , increase the number and scope of actions aimed at detecting minors who are being sexually exploited , set up rehabilitation services and then carry out regular checks on their situation , as well as improve the system for registering and monitoring child sex abuse cases .
Furthermore , I believe that underage victims of trafficking must be provided with specialist services within transit centres , including assistance and rehabilitation across all Member States .
in writing . - I support this report which calls on the remaining three countries which have not yet done so to implement the Council framework decision on combating sexual exploitation of children .
I support the increase in the level of protection for children , in particular , on the Internet , and also on other developing new technologies .
While the European Parliament is discussing how children can be better protected , the Islamic world is moving in the opposite direction .
The most senior Islamic cleric in Saudi Arabia has described girls aged 10 or 12 as ' marriageable ' and has demanded the right for child marriages to take place .
As a result of Islamic immigrants , this will also have an impact on Europe and we must prepare ourselves for this eventuality .
Our children must be given the best possible protection .
As sex offenders who target children have a high reoffending rate , we must establish an EU-wide register of the names of potential sex offenders , paedophiles and people with relevant behavioural problems .
We must combat violence against children and child abuse in all its forms more effectively and increase the penalties for sexual contact with children and the possession of child pornography .
I have voted in favour of the Angelilli report because it will improve the protection for our children .
Information technology is growing and expanding in the European Union as we are now in the ' digital age ' .
Certainly , there are major advantages associated with this technology and with the facilities that go with it from the point of view of jobs , education , social life and research .
This does not mean , however , that we should ignore the dangers associated with this technology .
There is a particular freedom associated with the Internet - a freedom without physical or practical limits .
This freedom can be a good thing , as is the case the majority of the time , but it can also be used for the sexual exploitation of children and for child pornography .
Nothing is more important than the health , wellbeing and future of our children .
We must do everything possible to protect them from harm .
To this end , I was happy to give my support to Madam Angelilli 's report , and I commend her for all the work she has done on this subject .
I voted in favour of the Angelilli report on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography , because it demands compliance , which should go without saying , by all the Member States with current international law and a review of the Council 's framework decision , in order to improve the protection of children at European Level .
The United Nations statistics are dramatic .
The large majority of victims of human trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation are children and adolescents .
International cooperation in an integrated fight against these crimes is needed and all Member States should ensure that their perpetrators are taken to court .
I voted for the Angelilli report because we need RAPID , EFFECTIVE action to combat the causes and , above all , the effects of the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
Our children are finding themselves increasingly on their own as we are increasingly busy .
This is how they fall prey to dangerous temptations .
The EU 's commitments , voiced by Commissioner Barrot , provide us with the guarantee that from March , we will have an excellent legal framework .
I voted for this report aimed at adapting and reinforcing the Framework Decision of 2004 , the objective being to protect children from sexual exploitation and violence .
Given , in particular , the developments in technologies ( especially the Internet ) , it turns out that protection thresholds in the framework decision need to be raised .
The solicitation of children for sexual purposes should be seen as a crime .
Cooperation between Member States should be strengthened in terms of the exchange of information about criminal records related to convictions for sexual abuse , so that those convicted of such offences can be prevented from taking jobs involving direct contact with children .
Victim protection , too , must be improved .
I voted in favour of the report initiated by Mrs Angelilli , which has tackled the issue of combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography , placing the emphasis on the preventive measures that need to be considered by the Member States when they are drafting their legislative framework for combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
The report also sounds an alarm bell concerning the poor application of the existing framework decision , along with the relevant international instruments , particularly the Council of Europe 's Convention for the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse , to which Romania has been a party since 2007 , while also requesting the incorporation of new sexual offences .
Member States must encourage the victims of sexual exploitation to contact the police and relevant courts competent in criminal and civil matters .
They must also make accountable and inform both the legal representatives of minors and the staff having direct contact with minors about the dangers relating to grooming children online .
All these dangers can be restricted through setting up national control bodies and cooperating with Internet service providers to block child pornography websites or materials .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of the report by Mrs Angelilli on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
Condemning these practices is , in fact , not enough to eradicate this extremely serious violation of human rights .
It is worrying , however , that not all Member States have conformed to the prescriptions of Council Framework Decision 2004 / 68 / JHA of 22 December 2003 .
This decision , among others , needs to be updated in order to increase the level of protection for children , also in view of the constant development of new technologies , in particular , the Internet , and the use of new forms of online grooming of children by paedophiles .
I entirely agree with the rapporteur , who has given us a detailed and constructive report that reflects excellent expert knowledge of the issues .
Child pornography is a delicate subject which should always be a main focus for European and national authorities .
European Union Member States should severely punish any kind of child sex abuse and any kind of online grooming .
I welcome the European Parliament 's decision to request Member States to make a firm commitment to combating child sex abuse , especially bearing in mind how vulnerable children using chat rooms and online forums are to abuse .
With this in mind , effective cooperation is essential between national authorities and Internet service providers in order not only to restrict access to pornographic websites by children , but also to block the access of children to websites which advertise the opportunity to commit sexual offences .
There are also recommendations for creating national schemes for providing psychological rehabilitation to both sex offenders and the victims of sexual abuse .
I would like to stress the fact that every Member State must individually keep a child sex offender register and prevent such offenders from being employed in sectors which involve working with children .
in writing . - ( NL ) I emphatically voted in favour of the report combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
It is beyond dispute that grooming ( approaching children for sexual purposes ) and paedophile chat rooms should be liable to punishment .
In addition , indecency offences involving children should fall within extra-territorial criminal legislation .
The European Union should also be able to use the general budget to fund the EU 's intervention programmes to prevent recidivism for sex offenders .
I also support the proposal in which the Commission , together with the major credit card companies , will look into the technical scope for blocking or closing Internet payment systems of websites on which child pornography is sold .
Finally , I urge the seven EU Member States that have not yet signed the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse to do so soon .
This also applies to the eight Member States that have not yet ratified the Optional Protocol from 2000 concerning child trafficking , child prostitution and child pornography to the UN 's Convention on the Rights of the Child .
in writing . - ( EL ) The political forces which support imperialist barbarity , war , the plundering of wealth-producing resources and the exploitation of peoples are jointly responsible for the daily crime being committed against millions of children in the world .
They are responsible for the millions of children who are hungry , who are malnourished , who are forced to work and who live below the poverty line in the countries of the ' civilised West ' , for the millions of children who are victims of sexual exploitation and for the flourishing child pornography industry , which turns over and generates profits of over EUR 3 billion from the Internet alone .
The criminal measures proposed in the report will not be able to protect children , because they cannot and will not address the main cause which is giving rise to corruption and depravity at unprecedented rates : profit and the deeply rotten exploitative capitalist system .
Nor do measures such as abolishing the principle of non bis in idem , monitoring communications and arbitrary intervention by the prosecuting authorities in the Internet make an effective contribution to child protection .
On the contrary , experience has shown that , where such measures are adopted , usually by way of exception in the name of combating crimes which meet with a general outcry and repugnance , the aim is to get the grass roots to come to terms with them , so that later they can be used to restrict personal rights and democratic freedoms .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have voted against the report on the EU harmonisation of criminal legislation in connection with sexual crimes against children .
I am in favour of strong cooperation within the EU to combat the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography , but I believe that criminal law should be a national matter .
Protecting children and young people from sexual abuse is an important issue and , indeed , a problem of our times .
I have always been in favour of prior rights for parents in the upbringing of their children , but in this case the state , too , must protect children and adolescents .
This protection does not apply only to the Internet .
It also applies to media advertising , which should be decent and in keeping with moral values , and should not attack young people 's right to innocence .
Parents play a special role in protecting their children against sexual abuse .
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights clearly says , in Article 26.3 , that ' parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that shall be given to their children ' .
The education given by parents includes education on responsible use of the media .
However , parents cannot consistently perform their educational role if they do not have adequate time to devote to their family and their children .
The state should allow parents this free time .
The Internet can never replace time spent in dialogue between parents and children .
A computer game cannot replace talking to one 's grandmother .
The joystick is no equivalent to an hour spent with one 's grandfather in the garage .
The natural family is the space for protection of children , and parents are their first protectors .
This is why I have started a project in Slovakia addressed primarily to parents : ' Do you know where your child is now ? '
In a civilised society , we must put the safety of our children above everything .
Sexual exploitation is a violation of a child 's right to care and protection .
Sexual exploitation leaves children with psychological scars and sometimes even physical ones , thereby diminishing their hopes of leading a life of dignity .
I would like to support the idea put forward by the rapporteur , Mrs Angelilli , that the framework decision currently in force since 2004 should be updated .
We welcome the decision whereby this updating process must be carried out in order to increase the level of child protection , especially with regard to the new threats posed by the Internet and other new communication systems .
Member States must ensure that the legislation will be amended so that websites with criminal content are blocked .
We must encourage cooperation between Member States to put an end to this type of crime and actively combat child pornography and other forms of commercial sexual exploitation of children .
We need a comprehensive global strategy , along with diplomatic and administrative cooperation in order to ensure that this legislation is enforced for the benefit of children .
We must offer protection to victims of abuse .
We must also put an end to sex tourism .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Resettlement of Guantánamo prisoners - Alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners ( debate )
The next point consists of the Council and Commission statements on the return and resettlement of Guantánamo inmates and the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am certainly aware that the issue of Guantánamo has been a subject of great concern to this Parliament .
I am also aware that this Parliament , through the various resolutions adopted since 2002 , has consistently expressed its opinion on that particular problem .
I therefore believe that you have welcomed , as has the Council , President Obama 's decision to close Guantánamo within a year .
The Presidency expressed this sentiment through a statement which was issued shortly after President Obama signed the Executive Orders .
Ministers unequivocally welcomed this decision at the last General and External Affairs Council meeting , as you probably know .
President Obama has also announced his decision to suspend military commission trials , to reaffirm the Geneva Convention , to end the secret detentions programme and to put a stop to enhanced interrogations .
These welcome developments will enable us to strengthen even more transatlantic cooperation in the area of countering terrorism .
The decision to close Guantánamo is , of course , primarily the responsibility of the United States .
Nevertheless , given our shared interest in countering terrorism , and in upholding human rights and the rule of law , ministers at last week 's Council discussed ways in which the Member States might be able to offer practical assistance to the US and , in particular , whether they might accept former detainees .
In his executive order to close Guantánamo , President Obama ordered a review of the status of all detainees .
This is now under way .
Resettlement of detainees would concern those cleared for release in the light of this review .
The question of whether Member States might accept former detainees is a national decision .
However , it was agreed last week that a common political response would be desirable and that the possibility of coordinated European action could be explored further .
This subject raises a number of political , legal and security issues which need further study and consultation and which - and this is also very important - will require the involvement of the Justice and Home Affairs Ministers in the Member States .
This process has just begun , and the Council will return to this issue once some of these issues have been further clarified .
This is a subject of ongoing work and COPS is discussing it today , for example .
I fully understand the continuing interest in this Parliament , as reflected in the draft resolution which has been tabled at this session , and which I have read .
I would like to assure you that the Presidency will pay great attention to this issue and will keep you fully informed of the outcome of further discussions in the Council , as well as any other developments .

Mr President , I warmly welcome Mr Vondra and am glad to be able to echo what he has just said , since it is obvious that the Commission has to work closely with the Presidency on this difficult issue .
I would also particularly like to add my support to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner who , at the last moment , has been prevented from joining us this evening .
I will therefore speak on her behalf and on my own .
The Commission has given a very favourable reception to the initiatives taken by President Obama since his inauguration .
All of the components are now in place for a relaunch of US / European relations and the Commission will make major efforts to revitalise this partnership .
The most striking example of the change of direction by the United States is their intention to look at the issues of human rights in relation to the treatment of suspected terrorists .
We welcome , of course , President Obama 's haste to close the Guantánamo detention camp , to reach out to the Islamic world and confirm the United States ' commitment to the Middle East peace process .
We also note with satisfaction other equally important features of the orders signed on 22 January , namely the closure of the secret CIA prisons , the total ban on the use of torture and cruel , inhumane or degrading treatment , and the suspension of trials by military tribunals .
The European Union maintains an active political dialogue with the United States in which , of course , we give priority to the promotion of human rights throughout the world .
We are also active partners with the US in the fight against the terrorist threat , but always in accordance with our human rights obligations .
The detention without trial of prisoners at Guantánamo over several years has played into the hands of the terrorist groups who are trying to radicalise and recruit new members .
The European Union has already shown its opposition to Guantánamo .
Your Parliament , the European Parliament , has incessantly called for its closure , because the fight against terrorism has to be carried out in accordance with international law .
In the fight against terrorism , it is important to respect human rights not only as a matter of principle , but also to counter radicalisation around the world .
We believe that the rights conferred under international law to all detainees should be respected .
Except in the case of armed conflict , individuals should not be detained arbitrarily and should have the right to a fair , legal trial .
We have raised these issues in the framework of the political dialogue with the United States .
The European Parliament has played an important role in raising awareness of this issue .
I would add , still echoing Mr Vondra , that the case of each of the Guantánamo detainees should be reviewed by the American authorities .
A working group , chaired by the Attorney General and consisting of the Secretaries of State for Defence and Homeland Security and high level officials , has just started work .
President Obama has announced that new diplomatic efforts will be made to find a solution to the problem of Guantánamo .
At the last Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers of 26 January , as Mrs Ferrero-Waldner would have reported , there was a brief discussion about Guantánamo .
Several Member States have expressed their desire to establish a common framework for a concerted European Union approach , even though in the first instance , Mr Vondra , it is up to the Member States to decide , on a case-by-case basis , on the response to any requests from the United States .
We have proposed , in close collaboration with the Council Secretariat , to investigate these issues more closely .
We are examining the issues around how third countries might receive former detainees .
Even if freed detainees ought , in principle , to return to their countries of origin , some of those likely to be released after review could not return to their home country for fear of persecution , torture or ill-treatment .
In conjunction with the United States , we wish closely to examine what the European Union could do to help to relocate these people in a safe place .
However , these particular cases will raise delicate , complicated questions that have to be considered in advance .
The principle never changes : we should do whatever is needed to guarantee absolute respect for human rights .
In all cases , we want to take a positive and constructive attitude towards the new US administration .
At the same time , we must take all measures to ensure that the European Union 's approach complies with our obligations on human rights and our own legislation .
This approach will be neither easy nor quick .
We will face complicated questions requiring coordination of the Member States ' action to arrive at a coherent European Union response .
We will do all we can to contribute to the debate on what practical measures should be taken at a Community level .
At present , the US has not made a formal request .
As Mrs Ferrero-Waldner repeatedly says , positive cooperation is required .
We have to work together with the Member States to put this in place .
At the next Justice and Home Affairs Council of 26 February , we will call on the Member States to take a concerted approach and we might also use the precedent of the solution used when the Palestinians were brought to Europe in the wake of the events at the Church of the Nativity in 2002 .
The Commission wishes , of course , to assist those Member States who decide to receive former Guantánamo detainees on their territory .
Obviously , though , it is up to those Member States to define the status of former detainees who are also citizens of third countries and who could potentially be transferred to their territory .
Each case will be considered individually , taking into account the situation of each individual , humanitarian considerations and security implications .
The decision to receive and allocate a status falls , in the end , within the competence of each Member State .
This approach must , however , be part of a joint framework as far as possible .
Mr President , that is what I have to say on my own and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner 's behalf .
I wonder if I should now make the statement about the transport and illegal detention of prisoners across the European area .
I shall continue then and make a statement which , although fairly short , will answer a lot of Parliament 's questions .
It concerns the CIA using European countries for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners .
The line taken by the Commission from the beginning revolves around three ideas : first , the war against terrorism has to be carried out in full respect of fundamental rights ; secondly , the truth , whatever it may be , must be established ; thirdly and , for me , most importantly , such acts must be prevented in future .

The Commission has repeatedly expressed its view that the practices referred to as extraordinary rendition and secret detention are a violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Commission has also stated that it is essential for the Member States involved to conduct comprehensive , independent , impartial investigations to establish the truth , whatever it may be .
This is a positive obligation resulting from the European Convention on Human Rights .
It has to be said that investigations have begun in several Member States .
As for the allegations of secret detentions in Poland , the Commission has written to the Polish authorities several times .
As I have been entrusted with responsibility for ' justice , freedom and security ' issues , I myself wrote to the Polish authorities on 28 May 2008 to stress the importance of conducting proper investigations .
Following this letter , in August 2008 , the assistant attorney general informed me that a criminal investigation had finally begun and that he will inform me of its results .
I believe that this is a major development .
I have also approached Romania about this issue of secret detentions .
In June 2008 , the Prime Minister of Romania sent me the report from the Romanian Senate 's investigations committee .
After further contacts , the Romanian authorities decided to carry out further investigations to examine the information included in the second report from Mr Marty , who himself has been chosen as rapporteur by the European Council .
Only such an approach , that puts the accent on the need to conduct proper investigations at a national level , will allow us to move forward .
The Union and the Commission have neither the powers nor the resources to replace the Member States in this task of uncovering the truth .
Only the investigative instruments and resources of the Member States will be sufficient for the task .
Obviously , the Commission , and here I am going to make a commitment to you , hopes that these investigations will be completed and will make it possible , where appropriate , to determine who was responsible and , where appropriate , ensure compensation for the victims .
In addition to the requests to the Member States to carry out investigations , one of the practical contributions made by the Commission , following the European Parliament resolution of 2 February 2007 , was to clarify the definition of ' state aircraft ' and , when I was Commissioner for Transport , I presented a communication on civil and business aviation that clarified matters .
Parliament has also requested an assessment of national anti-terrorist legislation .
To get an overview of the current situation , the Commission has sent a questionnaire to the Member States on the effectiveness of the measures to combat terrorism and on their relationship with fundamental rights .
The Commission has received replies from the 27 Member States and a document presenting these replies will be published in the next six months .
There is now a need to throw real light on all these replies .
There you have it , Mr President ; I have taken up quite some time , ladies and gentlemen , but it is true that , whilst this is an area in which the Union has limited powers , the Commission has endeavoured to encourage the truth to come to light and promote respect for fundamental rights .
I can only say one thing , but in saying it I am making a personal commitment .
I will , of course , continue to ensure that the whole truth is established , above all , so that we can be sure that such regrettable actions will not be repeated .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I was expecting two disconnected issues : Guantánamo , on the one hand , and the secret detentions and renditions on the other .
As we are all aware , during his first days in office , President Obama in fact made three decisions .
The first one I have already told you about , i.e. Guantánamo , but there were two other important ones as well .
Firstly , he ended the CIA secret detention programme .
He ordered that in future , all detainees held by the US must be registered with the ICRC .
With this decision , he addressed an issue which has been of concern to both the Council and the European Parliament .
This is why the Council has also warmly welcomed this decision .
I am sure that it is equally warmly welcomed by this Parliament .
President Obama also ended the use of ' enhanced ' interrogation techniques by the CIA .
The US investigators can no longer rely on the legal opinions concerning torture and other interrogation techniques written since 9 / 11 .
This decision is important .
The European Union is committed to the absolute prohibition of torture and of cruel , inhumane and degrading treatment .
As regards the third decision , President Obama has also ordered a review of transfer or rendition policies to ensure they are in line with US obligations under international law .
In future , policies must not - I quote - ' result in the transfer of individuals to other nations to face torture or otherwise for the purpose , or with the effect , of undermining or circumventing the commitments or obligations of the US to ensure the humane treatment of individuals in its custody and control ' .
We believe that these decisions , taken together with the decision to close Guantánamo , which I have already mentioned , will further strengthen cooperation with the US in countering terrorism .
I think it can also restore a better climate in transatlantic relations and can respond to feelings which were articulated very strongly in this Parliament , as well as among a substantial part of public opinion in Europe .
I think here we can all agree on one point from the outset : that the context of today 's discussion changed immeasurably .
I am also aware that the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners has been a source of deep concern among many Members of this Parliament .
You have been following these issues very closely , not least through the activities of the Temporary Committee .
The position of this Parliament was clearly expressed in your resolution of February 2007 .
I want to underline to you that the Council has always reiterated its commitment to combating terrorism effectively , using all legal means available , because terrorism itself is a threat to a system of values based on the rule of law .
The Council has also stated repeatedly that the existence of secret detention facilities , where detained persons are kept in a legal vacuum , is not in conformity with international humanitarian and human rights law .
That remains our view today and we are committed to it , but the change of context with the current developments in the US means that I would also like to focus primarily on the future .
Let us look forwards rather than backwards .
The Council very much welcomes the recent decision by the US President on this issue .
The transatlantic community has been a community of shared values and must remain one if we are to be able to defend our interests in the global world .
There is no doubt that human rights and support for the rule of law in the fight against terrorism belong to this shared heritage .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , should prisoners from Guantánamo be accepted in the European Union ?
This is the question which we must ask ourselves today .
The answer will depend on the considerations which we choose to be guided by .
Some people allege that the prisoners have been tortured .
This is a reason for accepting them , under the dictates of humanity .
It is without doubt true that torture is the most inhumane and degrading practice .
If these people have been tortured , then they have a right to our sympathy , regardless of the individual accusations made against them .
However , is that the only aspect which we have to consider ?
For example , many of the people who are or were imprisoned in Guantánamo went to training camps for terrorists in Afghanistan after 11 September .
They were not tourists who wanted to experience the beauty of the country , but potential terrorists .
We have a duty to protect European citizens against potential terrorists .
Unfortunately , torture takes place all over the world and we constantly condemn it .
We have not yet gone as far as saying that anyone who has been tortured has a right to be accepted in Europe .
We have not yet done this , for good reason .
Instead we have weighed this consideration against the need for security in the European Union .
We must also do that in this case .
We must ensure that potential terrorists do not descend on Europe and , therefore , in evaluating this problem , I would like to see the need for security being given the highest priority above all other considerations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my colleague Claudio Fava will speak on behalf of our group on questions relating to the CIA flights and that part of the discussion .
I will focus on the issues relating to the closure of the Guantánamo camp and I will begin by responding to Hartmut Nassauer .
It is true that the security requirements of the people in the European Union represent a standard against which we must measure our actions .
However , I would like to begin with the question : What causes more damage to our security ?
Is it the fear of accepting Guantánamo inmates here because they are considered to pose a security risk after their release ?
Or , more likely , is it the fact that the existence of this camp , which runs contrary to international law and infringes human rights , is the basic reason behind a wave of overwhelming anger felt by millions of people throughout the world ?
This is because the so-called Western world , which admittedly was provoked in an unprecedented way by the events of 11 September , was , to a certain extent , unable to influence what happened and therefore had to accept the fact that a president of the United States of America disregarded fundamental human rights because he considered this to be an appropriate response to this provocation .
I believe that this has made a more significant contribution to increasing insecurity in the world than if we were to state now , when another president wants to return his country to its former greatness , by making the United States of America a symbol for the preservation of fundamental rights throughout the world , if we Europeans were to say now , we want nothing to do with this , you must work out for yourself what to do about it .
We would give out the message that a confederation of states such as the European Union , which believes itself to be , and indeed is , a community ruled by law , wants to evade its responsibilities by using this argument at the moment when an illegal situation is being brought to an end .
We cannot expect our citizens to accept that this is a security risk .
This is the wrong message .
It is disastrous , because our behaviour is worse than those people who , like Barack Obama , go there and say that despite all the risks that they themselves are taking , despite the opposition among the military , despite the opposition in the USA , because the people there are also saying ' leave them in Guantánamo , do not bring them here , here they represent a bigger risk ' , who say that despite all this opposition , there is a symbolic power which results from the fact that a new president is returning to a respect for human and fundamental rights , including the rights of those who themselves have not shown any regard for human and fundamental rights .
A failure to help him in this situation would be wrong and would run contrary at least to my group 's understanding of the task of the European Union , which is to ensure that the community ruled by law that we have created internally is exported as an aspect of international politics .
We can only do that when we contribute in a credible way within our own boundaries to ensuring that the fundamental rights of every individual have priority .
Guantánamo is a place of shame .
It is a place of torture .
For this reason , it is also a symbol of the fact that the Western confederation of states cannot claim to practise what it preaches , which is that , most importantly of all , human dignity is inviolable .
This is the first article in our Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Charter does not state that this inviolability can be reduced .
Our sense of superiority over the terrorist philosophy has something to do with the fact that we say that we will even grant those people their fundamental rights who want to withhold those rights from others by means of their actions .
For this reason , I believe we can make a greater contribution to the security of the world by closing Guantánamo , by supporting Barack Obama and by playing an active role if the US Administration asks us to do so and if we can work with the government to put in place a process for accepting these people , than if we were to preach a false concept of security which , Mr Nassauer , could only be implemented if the police and the secret service were to do their job .
It is not the case that when people come out of Guantánamo , they can move around here freely and unobserved .
The security aspect is important , but fundamental rights must , in this instance , be given a higher priority .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , when Senator Obama became President Obama , we all heaved a sigh of relief .
The axis of evil , regime change , the war on terror : European citizens yearn to see those euphemisms consigned to history , along with the people who invented them .
But breaking with the past and reverting to the rule of law take guts and grit , so I congratulate the new President .
He was right to condemn waterboarding as torture , right to call a halt to the flawed military trials at Guantánamo Bay , and right to signal his determination to close the camp completely within a year .
I welcome the assurance of the Council Presidency today that the US has now disowned all the squalid practices that have tarnished its Government over recent years , including torture in third countries and extraordinary rendition , in order to put an end to the axis of illegality .
However , Europe cannot stand back , shrug its shoulders and say that these things are for America alone to sort out .
We lack the open debate and the collective change of will which American democracy allows .
Yet , too often , Member States from our Union were complicit in what the Bush Administration did .
If the 43rd President taught us anything , it is this : that in the administration of international justice , the ' go it alone ' mentality ends in a cul-de-sac of failure .
So the challenge of Guantánamo , the problem posed by 245 suspects floating outwith the justice system , is not an issue for America alone .
It is a conundrum we must solve together .
The United States must prosecute suspects , where sound evidence exists and in accordance with the rule of law .
America must free those suspects against whom there is insufficient evidence and defend them if they are likely to face torture at home .
But what about those who are released , who pose no threat , but who have no wish to remain in a country that wrongly imprisoned them ?
If asked , should not Europe offer those few citizens the rights and freedoms that no other country will ?
We cannot forever balance the Council 's assertion that it is for individual Member States to decide with the Council 's stated desire for a coordinated European position .
Europe has to speak with one voice and play its part in ending this affront to justice .
Many of us have criticised America in the past for its failure to work with others .
We were right to do so , but our help may now be sought and we would be wrong to say ' no ' .
Mr President , standard conservative interpretation of international law requires Guantánamo to be closed immediately and unconditionally .
After September 11 , though , nothing is standard any longer .
That is why even President Obama , who is so eager for change , is facing a serious problem in terms of what to do with the people who are currently held in Guantánamo .
These are no ordinary inmates .
Every ninth person of those released from Guantánamo has immediately resumed terrorist activities .
I would therefore urge caution when offering advice to the United States and to Member States of the European Union .
Three things are absolutely certain regarding this matter .
We are certainly bound to remove our citizens and residents from the camp .
We are also required to effectively isolate individuals who represent a serious threat .
In addition , we should review the Geneva Convention with a view to finding a suitable response to the problem of stateless terrorist armies .
Unfortunately , none of these issues have been dealt with appropriately in the draft resolution .
Mr President , my group welcomes the remarks made by Minister Vondra about Guantánamo Bay .
It appears that , in principle , the European Union is seeking a common response , and the Czech Presidency will help us in this .
Where exactly inmates will be moved to is still a question of national agreement , but it is reported that Europe will , in principle , react positively to the request from the US .
This will please Parliament , because we asked back in 2006 for the EU Member States to insist proactively on the resettlement of former inmates , including in the European Union .
My question to the Council is : are you prepared to do this in a proactive manner ?
Would you ask the US now who the inmates are ?
Will you ask about their backgrounds and what will happen to them , so that we can make the necessary arrangements ?
I am , however , pleased with this positive attitude , which will hopefully end the human rights violations to which these people have been exposed .
Mr President , whilst this is wonderful for Guantánamo Bay , which is a symbol , we should not forget that there are also other prisons we should voice an opinion about .
Bagram , near Kabul , springs to mind , for example , where some 600 to 700 people are being held .
I am asking the Council and Commission to ensure that those prisons will also be closed .
Although I was pleased with the remarks about Guantánamo Bay , I am a little dismayed at the CIA .
I appreciate that above all , the Council wants to look ahead , not back .
I can understand that very well , because when you look back , you see a huge mess .
It would be too simplistic to say that since the US now has a new President , we can apply the same standards again for us all , and forget to look in our own hearts and overlook the aid that we have given to a government of which you now say that it has acted incorrectly .
Mr President , my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , has demanded the closure of the US prison camp in Guantánamo right from the start . Contrary to all the relevant fundamental legal principles and international agreements , people have been held captive and tortured over a period of years and denied a fair trial .
Their fundamental human rights have been disregarded .
The very power which tries to uphold human rights , democracy and freedom throughout the world has violated fundamental rights in this case and created its own unlegislated area for its war on terror .
This is unacceptable !
It was important that the European Parliament constantly repeated its call for the closure of Guantánamo over a long period .
However , now that a new government has said that it is changing its policy , we Europeans are now starting to cast doubt on what we ourselves have been calling for .
We are hesitating and starting a shameful period of horse-trading .
I regard this as a cynical approach .
What has happened to our call for the universality and indivisibility of human rights ?
We cannot really be saying that we want to preach one thing and do another .
It cannot be true that , in some way , we want to justify and accept this shameful camp .
We cannot only regard upholding human rights as an important principle when we demand it of others and do not do anything to promote it ourselves .
I call on the Member States to state their position clearly , but I also say on behalf of my group that the closure of the prison camp at Guantánamo only represents the first step .
The US military base at Guantánamo must also be removed .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) We probably all feel a strong sense of relief over what has happened in the United States .
It is similar to the situation we had at the beginning of the 1950s when the American people and the American system demonstrated its ability to get rid of McCarthyism .
It is now demonstrating the same ability by electing a new President , who , on his first day , declared that Guantánamo should be closed .
Thank goodness for that .
What was wrong here , of course , was the detention of those suspected of terrorism or other crimes .
They should be tried and acquitted or convicted , released or punished .
Those who are not convicted should be treated as innocent .
If we then still suspect them , it is the job of the security services to follow up on that at a later date .
I find it difficult to understand why those whom it has not been possible to convict cannot stay in the United States , but European countries should themselves , of course , be prepared to receive those who have not ... Thank you for the opportunity to speak .
( NL ) Anyone who manipulates the principles of rule of law uses the methods of those which the rule of law claims to fight .
The closure of Guantánamo Bay prison , where the rights of defence , as we know them in our western world , were not guaranteed , is a good thing .
There is no need to expand on this as this has been stressed by many before me .
The fact that Mr Bush , through his tough policy , has managed to protect the American people against a second September 11 does not change matters much .
A democracy should respect the rule of law at all times and throughout the world , but democracy should also consider resolute ways in which it can protect itself against the religious extremists who wish to destroy our open society .
This is an emphasis that I cannot find in the draft documents before us .
Finally , we should not be fixated on Guantánamo .
Cuba itself , which is where the enclave of the American Guantánamo is , is one big prison where thousands of innocent political prisoners remain bereft of any prospect of a fair or swift trial .
The same goes for our major trading partner China , which we spare time and again when it comes to human rights .
Mr President , I just wanted to ask why Mr Schulz was allowed to exceed his speaking time enormously - but not the rest of us ?
Why ?
The President of the European Parliament , Mr Pöttering , was in the chair when Mr Schulz spoke , and so this is a question for Mr Pöttering .
I do not see that it has any connection with my being in the chair .
You should raise the matter again when Mr Pöttering is in the chair .
Mr President , what are we to do with the former inmates of Guantánamo Bay ?
How do we strike the right balance between ensuring the security of EU citizens and finding a place to settle former inmates ?
Firstly , let me make it clear that I for one am not discussing inmates deemed to be dangerous but unsuitable for trial by the United States , and please remember that such a sizeable group still exists .
But even those cleared of charges and deemed to be no risk at all still , in my opinion , pose a risk .
We have legitimate fears because , according to the Pentagon , 61 former inmates cleared of all charges and subsequently released are now reported to be engaged in terrorist activities .
One is the deputy head of al-Qa 'ida in Yemen , and one has blown himself up .
Yesterday , President Obama stated on public television that he cannot be sure whether inmates cleared and released will not pose a security threat .
Can we be asked to take that risk in the EU ?
Well I think we can be asked , but we must have the right to decide whether that risk is acceptable to us or not .
Member States have shown different degrees of willingness to take former inmates .
I stress that the decision to accept inmates must be the sovereign one of the Member State .
It cannot be forced upon a Member State by the EU , but neither can it be made in isolation .
Given the freedom of movement we enjoy in Europe , especially the border-free Europe of the Schengen zone , Member States ' decisions to allow Guantánamo Bay inmates to settle in their country has security implications not only for that Member State , but also for its neighbours .
Therefore I require , and we require , that such decisions are consulted with other EU members .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the closing of Guantánamo allows us to rectify a violation that has shamed international law and , above all , has done no service to the war on terrorism .
Today , however , it is not enough to welcome President Obama 's decision .
Now is the time to take responsibility , and responsibility also involves Europe and the Member States .
Guantánamo is , in part , the consequence of Europe 's silence and the collaboration of many of our governments in the system of rendition .
In recent years , what has happened is that our governments were , on the one hand , saying that Guantánamo must be closed and , on the other , sending their police officers there to interrogate the detainees .
We are talking about responsibilities which were denied when this Parliament investigated the matter , but which have been acknowledged and verified in the past two years .
February 2008 : London apologises for the CIA flights ; some aeroplanes have used British bases , said Foreign Secretary Miliband , contradicting what Tony Blair had said three years earlier , maintaining that nothing illegal had taken place on British soil .
December 2008 : the Spanish Government under Mr Aznar knew that many CIA flights had overflown Spanish air space and used Spanish airports .
This emerged from a secret document published by El País that turned out to be true .
The then Minister of Foreign Affairs , Josep Piqué , who acknowledged the use of Spanish airports , said that he did not know what happened afterwards in Guantánamo .
Perhaps he thought that it was an amusement park .
In October 2008 , we learnt that in Portugal , the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Amado , admitted that the former centreright government of Mr Barroso knowingly made Portuguese airports and air space available for illegal CIA flights .
Mr Amado said : ' I did not talk about it so as not to disrupt the serenity of the European institutions ' .
We ask : and what about the citizens ' right to know ?
Or are we to imagine that not even Mr Barroso knew what sort of civil and juridical obscenity Guantánamo was then and still is now ?
This is the point , Mr President , and I am about to conclude : in recent years we have shown much good will and much hypocrisy , not least in what the Council has left unsaid during these years .
Two years ago , Parliament addressed 46 recommendations to the Council .
We would have expected that at least some of these recommendations would have been given due examination and due attention , that there would eventually have been replies to at least some of the recommendations .
For this reason , we believe that providing some help in closing Guantánamo and assuming our collective responsibility , as Europe and the 27 Member States that it comprises , would be a contribution , however small , to atone for our collective silence .
Mr President , the main responsibility for closure of Guantánamo Bay and the resettlement of detainees undoubtedly lies with the US Government .
However , Europe needs to recognise the political reality that the US cannot manage this alone .
We have expressed a lot of goodwill towards President Obama and commitment to transatlantic relations .
That must imply an offer of practical assistance .
There are also other reasons for EU Member States to cooperate in closing the prison .
First of all , the humanitarian argument , which I hardly need to labour , to rescue these men from the hellhole in which some of them have suffered for seven years .
Secondly , Europe 's credibility : we have called on the US to close Guantánamo , now we have to help to make that true .
Thirdly , our own self-interest in ending a potent symbol that acts as a pretext for terrorist recruitment and radicalisation and , lastly , the moral responsibility that Claudio Fava was talking about .
However , I think we will deal with rendition and the collusion by European governments in a second motion for a resolution in two weeks ' time .
So , I strongly welcome the joint resolution that we have agreed between the groups and across the political spectrum , and I really hope we will have a strong vote tomorrow .
Assuming the ALDE Group accepts my advice , we will neither table nor support any amendments to this resolution .
I just want to deal with a couple of things .
Firstly , the allegations about 61 released detainees having become involved in terrorism : we have heard from lawyers who know about these things that this is largely baseless .
We know of two who have become involved in terrorism .
Others include those , like the eight people in Albania , who gave interviews to the media ; the so-called ' Tipton Three ' , British citizens who made a film criticising Guantánamo .
That is not ' returning to terrorism ' .
Lastly , concerning the security issues : we need to discuss those , but credible solutions are being put forward , and we can involve the lawyers in that .
( PL ) Mr President , after Barack Obama 's election as president of the United States of America , and his signature of the document on the forthcoming closure of the Guantánamo detention centre , an unhealthy excitement was felt in this House .
Members of the now dissolved Temporary Committee on CIA Affairs took the floor .
I would remind the House that the aforementioned Committee did not contrive to establish anything , although it was at pains to express its outrage and to condemn types of so-called extraordinary rendition .
We already know now that the new President appreciates the serious nature of the problem .
He has modified his stance since the election campaign and shortly after being sworn , in he issued a regulation extending the period in which the methods used to date in dealing with terrorists may be employed .
We realise that for many Member States of the European Union , including Poland , it is impossible to accept arrested terrorists .
Nonetheless , Member States of the Union and our Parliament , instead of criticising and weakening the front in the war on terror , should cooperate with the United States and take upon themselves part of the responsibility for combating this phenomenon .
I must remind the House once more that terrorism is a global threat that also affects Union citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the prison camp at Guantánamo has become a symbol of contempt for human rights and the rule of law .
The new US president Barack Obama has given out an equally powerful and essential message by ordering the end of the military tribunals in Guantánamo and promising to close the camp within a year .
However , it is not only the United States of America which has lost credibility as a result of its contempt for human rights in the war against terror .
Our European governments cannot disclaim responsibility , as the Temporary Committee of the European Parliament on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners established in its report in February 2007 .
This exposes the double standards of many countries in the European Union , who rightly demand that candidate states uphold human rights , but themselves trample on human rights within the European Union .
The European Union also has the responsibility of playing an active role in the process of finding a joint solution for all the prisoners who are no longer under suspicion and who cannot return to their home countries .
This applies specifically to Germany which can , and should , help to make the acceptance of refugees a possibility .
We must not repeat the mistake we made in the case of the German Turk from Bremen , Murat Kurnaz , who wrongly spent four years in Guantánamo Bay .
The new beginning in Washington is an opportunity for us to send a clear signal that human rights must not be eroded in the war against terror .
( ES ) Mr President , it is my hope and wish that President Obama 's statement on the closing of the Guantánamo detention centre will herald a change in US foreign policy .
I hope it will mean the rejection of a policy that repaid terror with terror and crime with crime , one that , ultimately , rode roughshod over international law .
My hope and wish is for this to be the case .
The problem for the European Union is that many European states have been committed to Mr Bush 's former policy of repaying crime with crime and torture with torture .
And they have been accomplices in that policy .
This is why the committee of inquiry into CIA flights could not finish its work : there were European governments that were hiding their shameful acts , the shameful acts of Mr Bush 's foreign policy .
And this is why we must insist they be held accountable .
The American people have done so through the polls .
I also hope that President Obama shows courage and brings to justice those officials who have tortured and those officials who have detained people illegally , because , ladies and gentlemen , for the Guantánamo prisoners , there is only one solution as far as the law is concerned .
If there is proof against any of them , they should be tried .
If there is no proof , then they must be released .
And US Administration officials must take responsibility for those people who have been detained illegally .
That is what happens in my country and that is what happens in any democracy that is fundamentally based on democratic rights . Thank you very much .
( FR ) Mr President , I think it is not our role to act as an outlet for the arbitrary policy which the United States of America has unfortunately been deliberately pursuing in this area .
The policy flies in the face of our common Western principles and is being conducted in a cynically chosen area which is a relic of colonial times .
There is no rule of law there : neither Cuban law , which , as Mr Dillen rightly said , affords no protection to the individual , nor US law , nor our common heritage of international law .
In legal terms , I think the issue is clear .
If there are criminal charges under common law against some of the prisoners , they should be judged by due process of law .
If they are suspected , for example , of having organised the attacks of 11 September , they should have been told seven years ago of the charges they face , had access to lawyers and appeared before the American courts .
There is no shortage of these in the United States of America .
If others are considered to be prisoners of war following the Allied intervention in Afghanistan , they should be held in the conditions set out in the law relating to war until hostilities officially end .
If there are detainees who fall into neither of these two categories , then they should be freed and sent home .
I am told that some are potentially dangerous , but if I personally were detained for seven years in complete isolation , whilst I might not have been potentially dangerous to begin with , I would certainly have become potentially dangerous by the end .
I believe this is the case for most people here .
If some do not wish to go home , they can ask their gaolers for political asylum .
That is all I have to say and , in passing , I wish to thank Mr Barrot for his investigative work .
Time will show it to have been the best analysis of these illegal transfers of prisoners .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , this House called for the closure of the prison at Guantánamo Bay several times .
We were joined by the other two institutions : the Commission and the Council .
Now that the decision has been made , let there be no mistake about our position .
We heartily congratulate President Obama on this decision , one that he justified with the need to reinvest the United States with the moral authority which it previously enjoyed in the world .
Let us be clear : the Bush Administration 's decision to open the prison at Guantánamo Bay , as well as the ' extraordinary renditions ' programme , was a blow to that moral authority .
The ends do not justify the means .
It is not acceptable for international law to be violated , for torture to be carried out , for secret prisons to be opened or for prisoners to be made to disappear .
In states governed by the rule of law , prisoners are brought to justice and have the right to defend themselves .
The Bush Administration was wrong to commit these abuses , just as its accomplices , whether through conniving applause or ashamed silence , were also wrong .
If the United States requests the help of the European Union , it must not be refused - just , in fact , as Mr Barrot said - provided that we do not forego our citizens ' safety , but without using that as a pretext for non-collaboration .
We also need the collaboration of the United States in order to shed light on the abuses that were committed in Europe , to investigate who was responsible and to ensure that the same crimes will not be repeated in the future .
We must also ask the Member States and European institutions what they have done to implement the recommendations that this Parliament adopted in February 2007 and , where applicable , what explanation they give for not having done so .
Since Mr Fava referred to President Barroso here , I believe that a word of thanks is owed to him because , unlike the Council , which resisted , lied to and hid information from this House , the European Commission behaved loyally and collaborated fully with our investigations .
( NL ) President Obama has kept his word .
One of his first policy actions was the closure of the prison in Guantánamo , which we are naturally delighted about .
Or rather , it was the announcement of the closure of Guantánamo , because the new US Government is faced with the difficult task of finding a solution for the inmates who are still there .
First of all , their status should be identified , and it should be established whether they can all be released without risk .
They have been locked up illegally by the Bush administration , which clearly violated international law .
It is , therefore , first and foremost an American problem that needs to be solved by Washington .
Whether the US will ask for help from the European countries and the European Union is currently not yet clear , and it would be somewhat speculative to run ahead of events too much .
I also beg to differ with those fellow Members who believe that we should already make pledges on the basis of the assumption that the European Union is morally obliged to do so , because some countries could possibly have been involved in the transport of inmates to Guantánamo .
This is based purely on assumptions .
We have never been able to prove that there was any truth in this , and neither do we know which countries would have been involved in such transport , so to base our argument for receiving inmates on this is somewhat weak , in my view , and I am pleased that this has not been done in the resolution .
We should , obviously , not rule out the possibility of the US still making this request , and I share my group chairman 's opinion on this .
If this request is made , we will certainly need to react positively on account of considerations of international law , but also on account of the need for the European Union to react in a humanitarian manner in a situation like this .
( ES ) Mr President , Guantánamo is a problem that was not created by the European Union .
It is a problem that , to be sure , would not exist if the European Union - as well as condemning it so many times - had truly rejected it , rather than passively and , at times , actively , collaborating in the very existence of that black hole of international law .
Yet it is clear that we did not create it ourselves .
However , we most certainly do have a duty to cooperate in order to put an end to this situation .
This is a clear duty that we should carry out .
There is no doubt that each case must be dealt with individually .
The prisoners of Guantánamo cannot be dealt with as if they were an undifferentiated herd .
They are people with rights , but also with their own personal stories .
Some of them are criminals who must be tried as such ; some are innocent and some , no doubt , are potentially dangerous .
In line with its values and principles , as well as its generosity , the European Union can become involved , by drawing up a common response that will help to solve this problem while respecting our own rules .
( FR ) Mr President , according to information from the CIA and NGOs , 728 prisoners passed through Portuguese territorial space between 2002 and 2006 on their way to Guantánamo .
What are the figures for Spain , Italy or any other Member State ?
Having failed to take the lead against the exemption from international law in the fight against terrorism , the Union is now attempting to go along with Mr Obama 's commitments .
This explains why we have this still timid call from members encouraging Member States to receive those innocent detainees who cannot return to their own countries for fear of torture .
This is done not out of solidarity , nor charity , nor even generosity , but purely to comply with our international commitments .
Beyond the message sent by Mr Obama , will Europe be able to raise itself up , will Europe not only be able to investigate , target and assume its responsibilities , but also bring an end to its illegal complicity in extraordinary rendition ?
Will Europe be able to reform the control of its own secret services ?
Will the Union be able to rehabilitate the victims via legal processes and compensation ?
I welcome Mr Barrot 's declaration of intent to this end .
I have to say , however , that whilst we are finding out more and more about what the ex-prime minister of Portugal covered up between 2002 and 2004 , the results of his initiatives as the head of the European Commission to get the Union out of this grey area of non-legality remain completely unknown to us .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that the appropriateness of European countries accepting prisoners from Guantánamo has now been acknowledged , an idea that strangely was missing from my group 's original resolution .
I entirely agree with Messrs Schulz and Watson .
The first point of the resolution mentions the important changes in United States ' policy concerning humanitarian laws .
I see some changes , certainly in tone , but also considerable continuity with the politics of the ' detested ' Bush , given that President Obama has not abandoned the programme of extraordinary renditions and CIA prisons in foreign countries .
I say this for the attention of the Czech Presidency , which seems to have a different idea .
I would not wish Obama enthusiasts to suffer any early disappointment .
Anti-US propaganda , already active in the CIA committee two years ago , has returned in the oral question on CIA flights in Europe .
I shall give you just one example : in one recital , the existence of a secret CIA organisation in Poland is exposed .
Now the fact that there is a CIA organisation in a country like Poland should not come as a shock - it would be strange if there were not - but I believe that the signatories to the question are annoyed that this organisation should be secret .
They would always want secret services to act without secrecy , openly , and the CIA aeroplanes to have ' CIA ' displayed on their aircraft as if they were British Airways or Air France .
Here again , I fear that they are going to be disappointed : not even Obama would go that far .
( EL ) Mr President , the inhumane prison at Guantánamo should never have been opened .
At least it would appear that it is now being closed , but any congratulations to President Obama must , of course , be tempered if reports in the American press about the maintenance of the unacceptable practice of secret abductions , interrogation and imprisonment in third countries are true .
As far as this is concerned , unfortunately , Europe also obviously bears responsibility as regards the fight against terrorism .
One very serious cause for concern is the fact that the only national parliament which has invited the European Parliament to present the conclusions and recommendations of its committee on the CIA is the American Congress .
Not one European government , not one national parliament , has invited us .
Let them do so even now , so that this sort of illegal practice is never repeated .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the United States created the Guantánamo problem and a US President is getting ready to resolve it .
We need to know whether the European Union will have the powers and the competency to play a role .
The European Union must collaborate .
Our Member States must receive the prisoners , such as the Uighurs , without giving in to pressure from China .
If we do not do this , we risk being irrelevant in the process of closing Guantánamo .
This could be the start of new work on revealing the truth , the responsibilities of our national governments - the Portuguese Government , for example , under President Barroso - and our responsibilities relating to the fact that the proposal of exile for Saddam Hussein was dropped .
This proposal was the only alternative to the war and our governments , including the United States , dropped it .
( ES ) Mr President , the existence of Guantánamo has , indeed , been made possible by , among other factors , the collusion and complicity of many European countries , Spain included .
It is not acceptable to say now that this problem is not our business .
It is even less acceptable to say that the closing of Guantánamo and the ensuing consequences are exclusively the US Government 's problem .
For years , US secret service aircraft have been flying around Europe with impunity , transporting detainees , while we have turned a blind eye .
We should , therefore , shoulder our responsibilities and not only demand the immediate closure of Guantánamo but also accept some of the prisoners who , unable to return to their own countries or , indeed , stay in the United States , demand that other countries , European countries included , be able to take them .
Portugal has already promised to do so , and I believe this is partly due to a certain feeling of responsibility and guilt .
Spain 's own guilt is just as great , at least , and I therefore take this opportunity to call on the Spanish Government to take in some of those people , to make that commitment , as Portugal has done and as many organisations have asked us to do .
I stress that it is not only our moral duty but also our political responsibility .
( RO ) Combating terrorism is the number one priority of modern society .
However , mistakes have been committed and controversial decisions have been made in the name of this desired objective .
The closure of the Guantánamo detention facility , which has been a blemish on the image of the civilised world during the last decade , is a just decision of paramount importance .
The next normal step would be for this measure to be followed by the United States resolving the situation of the people currently being held in detention .
The European Union and the United States have championed , and still do champion , respect for human rights and respect for human dignity , and they should therefore work together to correct the mistakes that have been made .
I believe that before raising the issue of accepting the inmates in Europe , it is absolutely necessary to make available all the information relating to possible terrorist activities which the latter were involved in or to possible membership of a terrorist group .
A detailed check must be carried out on this information , along with an objective evaluation of the possible repercussions which allowing inmates to return to their country of residence could have .
An official request from the United States is an absolute necessity and I believe that the decision to accept inmates in Europe must be up to Member States , while those which make this decision must also bear in mind that they are assuming these responsibilities on behalf of the European Union .
As regards Commissioner Barrot 's reference to Romania , accusations have been made in the past without any basis .
However , Romania has responded to all the enquiries from the European institutions , received the CIA committee and supplied all the relevant information .
The Romanian parliament has carried out an investigation and supplied the results to the interested parties .
I believe that this is totally adequate .
I also believe that Romania has given adequate replies to the completely baseless accusations which have been levelled .
( DE ) Mr President , there is no question that the responsibility for Guantánamo lies with the USA .
However , it is an act of solidarity to help and support Barack Obama to return to the rule of international law when he asks us to do so .
I am thinking , for example , about the Uighurs who cannot return to China .
However , we also need to consider the people who have spent five or seven years in Guantánamo .
We cannot decide whether or not they want to live in the USA .
That is their choice .
For example , the city of Munich and the Uighurs who live there would be ready to accept these Uighur people and to support and care for them so that they can come to terms with their traumatic experiences .
However , one thing must be made clear .
It is not acceptable for the Bavarian Interior Minister , Joachim Hermann , to say : ' Everyone who is held in Guantánamo must have committed a crime ' .
The right to the presumption of innocence must apply in this case .
As the head of a police authority , this minister should pack his bags and go .
We are training the police in other countries to introduce precisely this right to the presumption of innocence into their work and not to give premature orders to shoot .
We should think carefully about that .
( FI ) Mr President , Guantánamo and its secret prisons should never have been established in the first place .
It is the United States that has the main responsibility for closing the prison and the treatment of the prisoners afterwards , but humanitarian reasons and considerations of human rights speak for their reception in the Member States .
Each Member State will decide on the basis of its own laws whether to receive them or not .
At the same time I would like to remind this House of the millions of refugees around the world and of the refugee camps where people have lived for years .
We look away ; we turn our back .
Proactive thinking on human rights is regrettably selective in the EU .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , in May 2006 I visited Guantánamo with Mr Mann and Mr Elles .
We made it very clear that the establishment of Guantánamo represents a breach of international law and a violation of human rights .
The then newly elected German Chancellor , Mrs Merkel , also said this in the presence of President Bush on her first visit to Washington and she also demanded the release of Mr Kurnaz .
I believe that President Obama 's decision is a good one and that it will help to restore the credibility of the United States of America and of the Western world as a whole .
For this reason , we must make it clear that the question of credibility is of great political importance .
At the same time , we must establish that the prisoners there should not be regarded as peaceful human rights campaigners and that they must be judged on that basis .
During the course of this debate , I have sometimes had a quite different impression .
We must ensure that the United States of America takes primary responsibility in this case and that it explains why it cannot accept many of these prisoners .
The home countries of these people must also explain why they do not want to accept them or the prisoners must prove that they cannot return to their home countries because they would be exposed to serious persecution .
When all this has taken place , we can begin to consider whether the European Union should accept some of the prisoners .
However , this is only possible once we have investigated in every single case the extent of the risk posed by each person .
This investigation must take place not only at a national level , because the open borders within the European Community mean that we must apply European standards to the evaluation of the security risk which these people may represent .
Someone today spoke about refugees .
These are not refugees .
They are prisoners and we have to prove that they are not dangerous , unless we want to take irresponsible risks .
I think we should ensure that those people who have a link with our Member States should be accepted , such as Mr Kurnaz in Germany or the nine people , I believe , in Great Britain .
In total , I think 60 people have already been taken in by the European Union and we should not forget this .
Mr President , Portugal urged an EU agreement on resettling persons from Guantánamo , and this is strategic for transatlantic solidarity as well as being a humanitarian gesture towards people cleared of suspicion who endured detention , torture and deprivation of justice .
However , it is also a duty for 14 EU States which colluded with the Bush Administration in subcontracting torture to Guantánamo and secret prisons , as this Parliament pointed out .
European responsibility for violations of the rule of law and human rights cannot be erased .
President Barroso has denied knowledge of the cooperation provided by his government in the transfer of prisoners to Guantánamo and secret prisons , yet no one believes that his military , police , intelligence and administration would be so incompetent as to allow Portuguese air , sea and land to be systematically abused by the USA .
In order to clarify this , will Mr Barroso make public the notes of the meetings between his diplomatic advisers and Ms Condoleezza Rice while he was Prime Minister ?
Will Mr Barroso make public the legal opinion he then asked from his legal adviser , Mr Carlos Blanco de Morais , in order to impose special navigation rules for ships approaching US military vessels carrying prisoners through Portuguese waters ?
( EL ) Mr President , the position of the European Parliament on Guantánamo was set out in a special resolution in 2006 .
Guantánamo should never have been created and it needed to be closed .
The position of the European Parliament on terrorism is equally clear .
We want to combat terrorism with all legal means ; we do not want to combat terrorism by infringing human rights and international law .
It is a fact that the United States has shouldered most of the burden in the fight against terrorism .
However , they have also made huge mistakes .
It was a huge mistake to create Guantánamo .
It was a huge mistake to treat detainees as they did .
It was a huge mistake to transport them as they did .
This has been said in this Parliament .
What is important today is that President Obama has made the right decision to close this prison of shame and this decision both speaks well of America and is true to the history of America and of the international community in general .
How is the European Union involved ?
The European Union is involved in that it wants to support and help with the implementation of this correct decision by President Obama .
However , the European Union should do this on one condition : that it does not put the safety of its citizens at risk .
This is a basic requirement and whatever is decided by any Member State should therefore be decided from this point of view .
( ES ) Mr Romeva , do not be concerned : the Spanish Government will cooperate as it always has done .
May I remind you that , on this matter , the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs , Miguel Ángel Moratinos , was the first to appear before the investigating committee and was the one who answered all the questions , including your own .
In this Parliament we have , for some time , denounced the torture and inhumane , humiliating treatment being used at the Guantánamo military base in the name of the fight against international terrorism .
We therefore welcome President Obama 's decision to suspend trials for four months and his intention to close the prison permanently within one year .
However , even though the responsibility lies with the US Government , the European Union cannot look the other way but should offer its assistance in order to guarantee closure of the detention centre .
We should also assess the possibility of taking in prisoners who are from countries where it is not certain that human rights are respected , if the United States should ask us to do so .
We will then have to present a common European response , of which the Spanish government will be part , whilst respecting the international legal framework and assessing , case by case , the legal situation of every citizen , every detainee - his origin , his detention and his situation .
( PL ) Mr President , the terrorists have declared a cruel , bloody and uncompromising war on our civilisation .
They wish to destroy our world , which is founded on respect for human rights and devotion to freedom .
The attack on September 11 demonstrated that terrorists are prepared to use any means whatsoever .
The United States undertook to defend the free world on behalf of us all .
Close cooperation between Europe and the United States offers the only hope for success and destruction of the terrorist networks .
Europe needs to feel responsible for the war on global terrorism .
It is right that human rights defenders drew attention to violation of these rights , and to the use of humiliating methods during interrogations at Guantánamo .
Often , these methods amounted to torture .
It is right , too , that attention was drawn to detention without trial , and without the right to defence counsel .
No means deemed inadmissible under signed international conventions may be used .
The newly elected President of the United States has already issued a regulation banning the use of torture during hearings involving terrorist suspects .
It is right and proper to interpret this as a victory for all those who raised the alarm on this matter .
Pursuant to this same regulation , however , it will still be possible to kidnap terrorists and hold them for short periods in transit countries .
In a nutshell , respect for prisoners ' dignity is increased but , at the same time , the possibility of effectively paralysing terrorist activity must remain , otherwise we would be in danger of becoming helpless .
I should also like to draw the attention of the House that on the same island where the Guantánamo detention centre is located , political prisoners are being held in prison conditions that violate every conceivable standard .
These people have been condemned to long years in prison because they dared to oppose the Communist propaganda of the tyrannous Fidel Castro .
The Chechen nation was murdered before our very eyes .
So far as I am aware , the European Parliament did not set up a special committee to deal with that .
The United States has recognised that the use of torture is inadmissible , as is the existence of secret prisons .
That should put an end to the debate on secret prisons and transit flights .
( NL ) Mr President , the fight against terrorism must be a joint effort to which all democracies should make a contribution .
This means not just Europe , but also the United States , as well as others .
Guantánamo does not fit into a constitutional state , because in a constitutional state a suspect , even a terrorist , is entitled to protection and a fair trial on the basis of the values we share with each other .
I value President Obama 's decision to close down Guantánamo Bay , but it cannot , and indeed should not , be the case that the problem is , in the first instance , placed at Europe 's door .
After all , the people in Guantánamo Bay are prisoners , and not people that can be trifled with .
We can be helpful , but if we are helpful , if there is no other way , this is only possible on the basis of a European decision , European standards which we will need to establish jointly .
We should clearly recognise that it remains an American problem in which we could prove helpful , if only for the fact that human rights are paramount to us .
( EL ) Mr President , the decision by the new President of the United States to close the prison at Guantánamo was one of his first important and positive moves and I warmly welcome it .
However , President Obama has not revoked the right of the CIA to arrest terrorist suspects on foreign soil and to take them to provisional detention centres .
This is particularly worrying and this concern must be set out in a joint resolution .
However , the joint resolution by the two major parties in the European Parliament says nothing about this and , as a result , I am forced to vote against this joint resolution .
( PL ) Mr President , I am convinced that our deeply humanitarian resolution will help to reduce enmity between Europe and the Islamic world .
I call for it to be adopted , bearing also in mind the situation of my fellow citizen who has become a victim of the war on terror , the war of ' an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth ' .
I refer to a Polish citizen aged 42 who was kidnapped .
He was seized in the border areas between Afghanistan and Pakistan .
He is a geologist who was working there .
He has been held in the area ever since .
His family have stated that they know Piotr is not an important figure in the world of top level politics , but they trust everything that can be done will be done to secure his release .
I hereby appeal for this improvement of relations with the Islamic world to be exploited also for the protection and defence of our citizens .
Let us all demonstrate solidarity and act on behalf of European Union citizens who are ill-treated , detained , kidnapped , or held in camps .
( FR ) Mr President , we have all fought for the closure of Guantánamo and we all welcome President Obama 's decision to close this prison of shame .
Now , we should not have to be asked about accepting Guantánamo detainees .
As Europeans , faithful to the values of defending human rights , we have to face up to our responsibilities , our duty to accept these ex-detainees .
There have been reports , and I am addressing the Council here , there have been reports in the press that some Member States are not keen on receiving them .
I would therefore call on the Council and , in particular , on any reticent Member States , to accept the arrival of these detainees on their territories .
I would also say to you , ladies and gentlemen , that the worst we could do would be to let the boost given by the closure of Guantánamo evaporate because Europe was not prepared to stand up and be counted .
Mr President , given that many EU Member States were complicit in the process of extraordinary rendition , I believe that EU countries , including Ireland , have a collective responsibility to accept a certain number of low-risk Guantánamo detainees from the US for resettlement within the EU .
Irish Minister for Justice , Dermot Ahern , has made such an acceptance conditional on getting EU approval , but it is not necessary for Ireland to wait for an EU directive to settle Guantánamo detainees .
We can decide ourselves to sign a bilateral agreement with the US , as Portugal has done .
The Irish Government Ministers for Justice and Foreign Affairs have not been singing from the same hymn sheet on this matter , with Minister Ahern being seemingly unprepared to go as far as Minister Martin regarding detainee settlement .
Cohesive leadership is now needed from the Irish Government in this regard .
In a spirit of transatlantic cooperation and to participate in the fight against international terrorism , Ireland should play its part to assist the new US Administration in closing Guantánamo .
Mr President , the EU has been asking for the closure of Guantánamo for a long time .
Today that decision has been taken by the new US Administration , and EU countries are expected to show solidarity by taking over those prisoners .
However , some think that such solidarity should be demonstrated primarily by the countries mentioned before in the press as hosting secret CIA detention centres .
I would like to stress once more the fact that such allegations have not been supported by evidence , either when they were made or since then .
That is also valid for Mr Mate , who failed to produce the evidence supporting his accusations in this very House .
Moreover , internal investigations have not supported the accusations either .
Exploiting people 's potential lack of memory that such evidence was not produced then does not make it evidence today .
At the most , it is simply cynical manipulation for obscure purposes .
( CS ) Mr President , the whole world welcomes Barack Obama 's plan to close Guantánamo , because it is a symbol of the merciless treatment of people - ruthless terrorists though they may be , or suspected of the gravest crimes .
Some of them have not even been charged and duly tried .
Obama made a popular gesture and is now deciding what to do with them .
He should , above all , persuade Congress to change the law so that the prisoners can be transferred to US soil and some can be given a new identity .
It is an extremely hot potato : after release , 60 Guantánamo prisoners returned to terrorist activity , and therefore each case should be examined individually .
The Czech Presidency 's negotiations on a solution for Guantánamo are an opportunity to emphasise that dialogue between the United States , Europe and Cuba on changes on the totalitarian ' island of freedom ' begins with human rights , and not only the human rights of prisoners at the American base .
Above all , this dialogue should entail the release of political prisoners in Cuba , and freedom of speech and movement for innocent Cuban citizens .
( PT ) We find it obvious that we should applaud President Obama 's decision : the decision to close the prison at Guantánamo Bay , to ban torture and illegal interrogations , and to suspend the military trials .
I can , however , assure my fellow Member , who is no longer present , that Portugal and the Socialist Government of Portugal do not feel guilty .
The Socialist Government of Portugal did not collaborate with the Bush Administration : quite the contrary .
The Portuguese Administration - the Portuguese Government - through the initiative of Minister Amado , has right now opened up the possibility and obligation for the European Union and other democratic countries to accept and receive Guantánamo Bay prisoners who have not been charged .
This is what is truly important and this is what must be highlighted as an example for other EU Member States to follow .
It is also important for the resolution to be adopted tomorrow by all the parties that make up this House , so that unity might lend the decision more force .
Mr President , the prison at Guantánamo Bay was a necessary creation of the United States at the time .
Its closure is now a matter for the United States .
I oppose EU Member States entangling themselves in the inevitable legal complications and the burden imposed on our security services of taking non-EU national prisoners previously designated as enemy combatants .
I do not regret the detention of the most dangerous terrorists intent on destroying our way of life when they were proven to be so .
However , one of Guantánamo 's major drawbacks was that it forestalled any regular criminal proceedings against those held there .
Ultimately , regular criminal trials are the only way to resolve the status of Guantánamo prisoners who are non-EU nationals .
Since the inmates of Guantánamo were captured by the United States , it is America 's responsibility to prosecute them in its own courts , or return them to their countries of origin if innocent .
If President Obama is serious about closing Guantánamo , which I welcome , and about protecting America and its allies , this should be his policy .
( RO ) First and foremost , irrespective of the substance and outcome of the discussions on the CIA prisons , I would like to welcome the concern shown by Members of the European Parliament and by Europe 's citizens with regard to the scrupulous respect of human rights , regardless of the context .
Torture is unacceptable and there are no exceptional circumstances to alter this truth .
However , I feel the need to make some remarks as long as Romania continues to be referred to in this context .
I would like to remind you that so far , accusations have been levelled at us without being backed up by proof .
The Martin report is the best example of this approach .
It contains accusations against Romania which are both controversial and unfounded .
I would like to point out this precedent for the way in which accusations have been levelled against Romania , because this can perhaps tarnish the image of other European states too .
I would like to reiterate that it is unacceptable for the names of Member States like Romania to be freely and constantly bandied about in the context of this debate .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to agree with all those speakers who want to ensure that Europe does its humanitarian duty by supporting , in particular , those people who have been denounced , despite the fact that no evidence has been found against them .
These are classic asylum cases .
However , I would like to ask the Member States not to attempt to go it alone and I would like to put particular emphasis on this .
Europe must learn to speak with one voice and to take united action .
This would allow us to meet the concerns of the new US administration and to live up to our own self-image as a European Union with joint values which oblige us to take joint action .
( FI ) Mr President , we share a common desire to close the prison camp at Guantánamo , and now we have a splendid opportunity to do so , as the new President of the United States of America has shown he has the same wish .
The main responsibility obviously lies with the United States , but I hope that the EU can put up a united front and that the Member States will demonstrate solidarity and be flexible to the extent that they will take these prisoners into their own prisons , where that is possible and where that accords with their own conditions for so doing .
We joined the fight against terrorism to defend human rights .
Now we need to be involved in helping the United States to defend human rights .
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , there are two sides to this matter .
One the one hand , there is the legal position .
I believe that citizens of a country should be readmitted into their country of origin .
Perhaps some kind of humanitarian programme could be provided for cases where some impediment exists , such as political persecution .
I should also like to state quite clearly , that even if Portugal or another country consents to take in 20 such prisoners , that does not mean that those people will wish to remain in Portugal or in any other given country .
The Union is now a unit , and this problem must therefore be considered .
Finally , the appropriate procedures should be used so that such people are no longer stigmatised as suspects or as dangerous .
Unless they are freed from such stigma , nobody will wish to accept them .
This is a serious problem that merits consideration .
I will conclude by saying that the problem mainly concerns the United States of America .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank you for this debate .
I believe it was very useful .
If you had listened to the debate in the last Council meeting during lunch , you would have seen a similar will to cope with the problem , but also an appreciation of the complexity of the problem we are discussing .
It has a moral and political dimension , but also a security and legal dimension .
We all agree that President Obama 's decision to close Guantánamo was an important and good one , which we all appreciate and which is applauded by practically all of you here .
But now that we are discussing the consequences and what we can do to express solidarity - and our interest here is to act in transatlantic harmony - we , of course , see that the problem is a complex one .
Martin Schulz has said that we cannot fight terrorism and , at the same time , get into a conflict over fundamental rights .
He is perfectly right , but Hartmut Nassauer has said that there are two dimensions : one is the moral one and the other concerns security .
He is also right , and that is exactly why the Ministers for Justice and home affairs have to discuss this as well .
From the political perspective , it is not just a flexing of moral muscles , nor should we approach this problem just out of guilt .
It is certainly more complex than that .
Graham Watson spoke of the need to approach this with one voice .
Again , he is certainly right but , at the same time - because this also concerns the legal problem and the competence issue - we cannot force Member States to invite the detainees from Guantánamo on demand .
If you had to solve this problem by deciding to invite those detainees to your homes - imagine taking on the responsibility of the Ministers for the Interior - you would certainly think twice about how this problem is to be handled .
I certainly do not think it should be approached by the Council and the Member States as an issue of horse-trading - not at all .
It is not about washing ourselves but not getting wet .
At the core of the problem is simply the fact that the decision to close Guantánamo is , of course , the primary responsibility of the United States , the country which built the facility .
But we have - and have to have - the goodwill to express solidarity and to be cooperative in solving the problem .
There is also the tactical debate .
Should we offer this on a gold plate now , or should we wait until a request has been made ?
But if we do receive a request , we need to be prepared to react .
Therefore , the Council started to discuss this seriously on the second day after President Obama 's decision .
I do not think we can underestimate the security issue - as you have pointed out - as it is a simple fact that some of the inmates who were released re-engaged in terrorist activity , and it is a simple matter of fact that one man , Mr Said al-Shihri , is now the deputy head of al-Qa 'ida in Yemen .
So the US has to start the serious work of clearing up who those people are , and we have to break with them .
Legally , I think we have to be aware that the decision on the admission of foreign nationals to EU Member States is the national competence of the Member States .
This is one level .
However , on a second level , there is the agreement that we should now work towards a European framework in which to embed the national decision .
Both the Schengen and the Dublin Agreements call for a European approach because the security of all Schengen members will be affected in some way by the decision of the individual Member States .
So there is an internal imperative for a coordinated approach .
Furthermore , the EU is looking into the possibility of assisting the US with the resettlement and rehabilitation of former detainees in third countries .
Some of you have raised the question of speed : can we act faster than we are doing now ?
I think we should be aware that the discussion has only just begun .
It has only been one week .
The questions that have to be addressed are really complex and will need some time , although President Obama himself has requested a review of the prisoners ' files and has set a one-year deadline for the closure of Guantánamo .
One should not expect the Council to be ready to fix all these complex problems in a matter of a few days .
Furthermore , it has to be kept in mind that the primary responsibility for Guantánamo rests with the US .
Although the Member States express their readiness to work on a coordinated approach , the issue has a bilateral dimension as well as the multilateral one .
A clear position of the respective Member States on the resettlement of detainees is not yet known .
The meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Ministers , which is to take place later this month , will be very useful here .
In the meantime , the anti-terrorist coordinator , Gilles de Kerchove , is also working on various option papers here .
So that is my summary on Guantánamo , which occupied most of the time .
On the other issue of illegal detention , Mr Fava 's favourite issue , I will just repeat what has been said several times by my predecessors : the allegation concerned the involvement of national intelligence agencies ; the supervision of those agencies is the responsibility of individual Member States , and the Council has no power here to act beyond what was done .
Pursuant to Rule 103 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received three motions for resolutions on Guantánamo .
The motion for a resolution on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for transport and illegal detention of prisoners will be notified later .
The debate is closed .
The vote on Guantánamo will take place on Wednesday , 4 February 2009 , while the vote on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for transport and illegal detention of prisoners will take place during the next session .
The decision made by US President , Barack Obama , to close the Guantánamo detention centre is of symbolic significance to the whole democratic world .
This gesture highlights that the war against terrorism which is being waged to defend the democratic values of the West must not ignore precisely these values .
Terrorism must be combated vigorously , but human rights must still be respected .
Even those suspected of committing serious offences have the right to be judged according to the correct procedure , by an unbiased court , on a clear legal basis , and to receive a punishment commensurate with their crimes .
The speculation mentioning Romania in connection with the CIA 's secret prisons is totally unfounded .
No one has been able to prove their existence in Romania .
Romania is a faithful ally of the US within NATO and is involved in the battle against terrorism , primarily in Afghanistan .
Both the Romanian authorities and public opinion strongly uphold respect for human rights .
Having suffered the abuses of Soviet occupation and Communist dictatorship , Romania 's citizens disapprove of any violations of human rights .
in writing . - ( PT ) The recent decisions of the Government of the United States have simply confirmed - as if it were necessary - that which has long been denounced : the existence of a US-sponsored kidnapping , torture and illegal detention network .
These decisions must not serve as a whitewash for the responsibility of the United States and of the governments of European Union countries for systematic violations of international law and of the most basic human rights .
As before , we must demand a complete end to such ignoble practices and an investigation into the truth , including EU governments ' culpability regarding the use of their airspace and territory to imprison and transfer illegally detained prisoners to , for example , the US military base at Guantánamo Bay .
This is all the more necessary in light of reports that the clandestine US operations called ' extraordinary renditions ' - in other words , the illegal detention and transportation of citizens - have not been called into question by the new US Administration .
Accordingly , we are opposed to any agreement between states or between the United States and the EU regarding the ' transfer of prisoners ' detained in Guantánamo .
This does not mean that decisions and requests freely expressed by individuals , specifically for asylum in Portugal , cannot be considered within a framework of respect for national sovereignty , the Portuguese Constitution and international law , including the right to asylum .
The European Union proved an incomprehensively lackadaisical community when it did not take any firm diplomatic action in the context of international organisations to condemn , on the basis of human rights , the illegal activity the United States of America was engaged in .
The action taken by the new President shows that that activity is regarded as illegal and intolerable on ethical and moral grounds .
This is all about the EU 's commitment to America 's illicit behaviour while it tailed behind the old US President , and in the eyes of free EU citizens , that means that the EU lost face and respect .
May the EU be ashamed of its failure to act .
Worrying situation in the retention centres for immigrants , especially in the islands of Mayotte and Lampedusa ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the worrying situation in the retention centres for immigrants , especially in the islands of Mayotte and Lampedusa .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am grateful for the opportunity to address you on the issue of the situation in the immigration and detention centres situated in the European Union , of which you have highlighted two in particular , i.e. Mayotte and Lampedusa .
I am very aware of the close interest you have shown in these centres , of the various visits which some of you have made , and of the concerns you have expressed about the conditions in some of them .
I should like to begin by underlining two fundamental principles which lie at the heart of today 's debate .
The first is the need , in the case of third-country nationals requiring international protection , for full compliance with the commitments which we have given , as enshrined in various international instruments .
The second is that we respect fully the human rights and the dignity of migrants and members of their families .
We are all very aware of the pressure resulting from migrants entering the European Union , as well as those seeking asylum here .
This pressure is particularly great along the Union 's southern and eastern borders .
We have responded by developing , over the last 10 years , an effective EU asylum and migration policy .
However , the significant increase in the level of arrivals underlines the need for this policy to be strengthened and further developed .
We need to do this internally in order to establish our own common standards and rules in the area of asylum and migration , but we also need to act externally , in partnership with countries of origin and transit , in order to manage migration flows more efficiently .
All parties stand to gain by such an approach .
The development and shaping of an EU asylum and migration policy depends on your input too .
I am grateful to Parliament for its positive contribution and I am sure that we can work constructively on further developing this important policy area .
You have specifically raised the situation on the islands of Mayotte and Lampedusa .
We should take care to distinguish between the two types of migratory flows in these two cases .
The migratory flows affecting Lampedusa and Mayotte can be characterised as mixed ones : some of the third-country nationals concerned have claimed international protection , others certainly fall into the category of economic immigrants .
Regarding the first category - those who claim international protection - I would draw your attention to the existence of minimum standards for the protection of asylum seekers , set out in Directive 2003 / 9 / EC , which was adopted in 2003 .
This Directive has already been transposed into the national law of the Member States and it is for the Commission to ensure that the provisions set out in this Directive are properly and fully applied .
In December 2008 , the Commission presented to the European Parliament and to the Council a proposal to amend and update this directive .
Since the codecision procedure applies here , the European Parliament will be fully involved in the negotiations on this new proposal .
The Council will shortly begin consideration of this new proposal and looks forward to working closely with you .
Honourable Members will be aware that , in the specific case of the French overseas territory of Mayotte , Community law does not apply .
With regard to the second category - other third-country nationals who have unlawfully entered the territory of a Member State - the competent authorities of the Member States are entitled to detain those falling into this category prior to the adoption of a return decision , and / or with a view to facilitating its enforcement .
Detention may prove to be the only option in cases where it is necessary to seek identification of third-country nationals without travel documents .
Until now , the legislation and practice regarding detention in the Member States has varied considerably .
The recently adopted European Parliament and Council Directive on common standards and procedures for returning illegally staying third-country nationals has introduced specific principles and rules on detention , and so goes some way to establishing a common legal framework in this area .
This directive clearly states that detention for the purposes of removal may be used only where less coercive measures cannot be applied in a particular case and only on specific , very limited grounds .
Furthermore , the directive provides that detention shall be for as short a period as possible , shall require a decision in writing with reasons in fact and law , and shall be subject to judicial review at regular intervals .
It should also be stressed that the directive provides for clear upper limits of detention and the grounds on which - in limited specific cases - a detention period may be prolonged , but not longer than a maximum term .
On the conditions of detention , the directive makes clear that detention shall take place as a rule in specialised detention facilities - or , in any case , away from ordinary prisoners - and that the rights of the detainees - especially those of vulnerable status including minors and families - shall be observed .
As far as the return of illegal immigrants is concerned , the recently adopted European Parliament and Council Directive on common standards and procedures for returning illegally staying third-country nationals is already in force .
Its provisions now have to be transposed by Member States into their national law within a deadline of two years .
This overall legal framework underlines our strong commitment to ensuring that third-country nationals who are held in detention for the purpose of removal are treated in a humane and dignified manner , and that their fundamental rights are fully respected .
It also , through the most recent legislation , sets commonly agreed standards on return policy .
This framework is not only in line with the principles I set out at the beginning of my statement , but actually gives them legal force .
Our asylum and migration policy is thus rooted in the rule of law .
It ensures respect for human rights and for the dignity of the individual .

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Vondra , ladies and gentlemen , our Parliament takes pride in its unceasing defence of the respect for human dignity in all circumstances , including , of course , the conditions in which illegal immigrants are held .
I will concentrate on the case of the administrative detention centre in Mayotte , with whose problems I am very familiar .
The differences in the standards of living and economic and social development between the islands of this Indian Ocean archipelago incite many Comorans to cross the 70 kilometres that separate them from Mayotte , which is a French department as you said Mr Barrot and , as an OCT , is not a European territory .
People residing illegally on the island of Mayotte account for 30 % of the population .
Yes , you heard correctly , I said 30 % of the population .
This is a percentage which is unknown in our European countries , thank God .
It obviously has a major impact on Mahorais society , and represents a source of serious difficulties for public infrastructures and services , crime and illegal working .
The French authorities are well aware of these difficulties .
Work to renovate the current detention centre has just been completed to improve the living conditions of detainees significantly .
Besides these temporary measures , the French Government has also decided to build a new detention centre with a more suitable capacity and in accordance with national standards .
This should be open in June 2011 .
Europe has just adopted common rules so that it can take its share of legal world immigration but we should not hide the fact that certain regions are faced with extreme situations .
Stigmatising the Mayotte detention centre will not bring a quicker or more effective solution , as the pressure of migration is subjecting the island to such a tension .
As Mayotte is on the verge of taking historic decisions for its future , in order to become a French overseas department and then join the territory of the Community by gaining the status of an outermost region of the Union , I believe that the Mahorais have greater need of our assistance than our criticisms .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ' To thwart illegal immigration , one has to be unkind .
Immigrants come because it is easy to get here and no one sends them away , but precisely for this reason we have decided on a change of tune ' : these are the words of the Italian Minister for the Interior , Mr Maroni .
It seems a parody of a policy and yet it is the policy of the Italian Government .
It seems clear to me that inherent in this policy is a profound contempt for what we are discussing here and for the rules that the European Union gives us .
Today , we have spoken about the closure of Guantánamo .
I think that we need to speak urgently about the closure of Lampedusa : about the Centre for Temporary Stay and Assistance in Lampedusa , as it has been pictured in recent months , namely as an openair prison .
The Presidency has rightly recalled the legal framework , referred to also by Mr Barrot - the use of coercion only in exceptional cases , detention only on absolutely clear grounds and for as short a period as possible - a legal framework that is substantively and formally violated every day in Lampedusa .
Most of those who are in Lampedusa are asylum seekers .
The Council recalled the minimum standards envisaged by a Directive on asylum seekers adopted in 2003 ; these rules are being substantively and formally violated .
We often have 180 days of detention , including for those who are fleeing from political persecution or war .
All this , of course , constitutes acts of legal barbarism which , however , are measured by the numbers offered to us by newspapers .
1 200 people died in 2008 when trying to cross the Mediterranean .
Of those who managed to survive , many went through the torments of Lampedusa .
Therefore , Mr Vice-President , I invite you to visit Lampedusa , as you yourself have promised , to go there soon , and ( if I may make a suggestion ) to announce at the last moment that you are going to Lampedusa .
Otherwise they will smarten up the Centre like a ballroom for you and make you imagine that this is the detention centre that we are talking about this evening .
The reports about the tragedies unfolding at our external borders are as plain as day .
The urgency is great , and has been for a while .
This is also what the Council has noted time and again - but only on paper .
With all due respect , President-in-Office of the Council , and we are , of course , grateful for your contribution , but we have been here before .
It is all empty words and no action .
It could almost be considered ironic that we are also voting on the Roure report this week .
This report contains our findings further to our visits to all the hot spots , including Lampedusa .
The European Union is falling short , and not just by a little .
What we would like to know , President-in-Office of the Council , is whether you have taken the trouble to read our interim reports at all ?
Tampere , the Hague programme , the French Pact on immigration and asylum and soon the Stockholm programme : all these fine words are in stark contrast with reality .
It is , after all , this reality that demonstrates to us that the European Union is still a long way off when it comes to facing up to its responsibility .
The lack of solidarity is shocking .
Nobody , not one single person in this Parliament , is suggesting that this is a simple task .
Of course it is difficult to face up to large waves of immigrants and asylum seekers adequately , but this is nothing new .
The review of existing instruments has now got underway , but I already have doubts as to whether this will yield the desired results .
Experience has taught us that the Council tends to cry off at crucial moments .
The fact is that while , in theory , the Member States are aiming for far-reaching harmonisation , in practice they take decisions that have exactly the opposite effect .
The largest common denominator suddenly appears to be minimal then , or this is what my experience has been over the past five years .
And this is quite apart from enforcement .
As I already stated earlier today in a different debate , it should be clear that neither the European Commission nor the European Parliament have magic wands at their disposal because , at the end of the day , it is the Council and the Member States that will have to take action in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I regret that for electoral reasons , Mr Fava has been compelled to say a series of things that are not true .
After the electoral campaign , I shall bring them to his attention .
However , he takes such an interest in the problem of Lampedusa that he has already left the House - a House that ought to express its gratitude for the generous welcome accorded in recent years by the citizens of Lampedusa .
Instead , we must emphasise the European Union 's delay in solving the many problems linked to illegal immigration and in allocating support and aid to atrisk countries with external borders .
Some countries have not shown the welcome given by Italy to thousands of desperate people who risked being drowned in the sea , thanks to people traffickers and the inertia of many nonEuropean governments who have not respected and signed the agreements for the control of illegal immigration .
We call for specific financial assistance to go directly to the people who live in frontier zones and who are more exposed geographically to the arrival of illegal immigrants .
Assistance could also be given by creating free zones which would lead to the investment of resources and fiscal relief , not to be taken into account in the agreements on the Stability Pact .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is clear from your speeches that international and Community law is being violated daily in Lampedusa .
However , all your statements remain formal and reflect wishful thinking that will not be followed by action .
I fear that this especially applies to your statement , Mr Vondra .
I am wondering whether the European Union has any means for bringing this situation to an end : there is unlawful detention , the aberrant retention conditions are obvious , and there is a risk that the right to asylum will be virtually eliminated .
The European Union is the only organisation , and Mr Barrot knows this very well , that can get Italy and other countries out of this situation .
This is why , Commissioner , I am very worried by the announcement of new money for Italy without conditions .
How will it be spent ?
Is the Commissioner aware that the much criticised monitoring - in other words , cataloguing - of the Roma last year had financial support from Europe ?
It is something that is included in your press releases .
Therefore , what sort of trust can we have in action of this kind ?


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday Mr Maroni announced that one had to be unkind to illegal immigrants , but for days and months , Mr Maroni has been practising unkindness towards migrants whose position is irregular .
I say this because the Lampedusa emergency , the so-called Lampedusa emergency which has now lasted for 10 years - therefore it seems to me to be a bit of a pleonasm to go on calling it an emergency - was desired and created by the Italian Government .
In fact , by choosing Mr Maroni , the government made a decision not to allow any more migrants to leave Lampedusa .
The Centre for Temporary Stay has had at least 1 800 people shut up in there without the government arranging for any of them to be transferred .
They are held in such inhumane and degrading conditions that the centre exploded into a true democratic emergency .
Now I believe that this is the true Lampedusa emergency , that is to say , the need to establish a sort of juridical free zone , a place where migrants would enter and be deported without each case being examined individually .
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees states that at least 75 % of those who arrive by sea in Italy and gain the right to asylum request it .
Thus , if Mr Maroni 's practices were put into effect , the migrants would probably not have the right to asylum since they would immediately be deported directly from Lampedusa in accordance with the wishes of the Italian Government .
Hence , there is a genuine emergency and the cause of it is Italian government policy .
The citizens of Lampedusa have become aware of this , Mrs Muscardini .
Indeed , they have carried out a general strike against the government , against its immigration policy , in order that the centre for immediate expulsion from that place - the centre for identification and expulsion - should not be opened .
They have also asked the Italian Government to modify its position on the Centre for Temporary Stay .
It is good of Commissioner Barrot to go to Lampedusa in the next few days and I appreciate this .
I have prepared a dossier and sent it to Mr Barrot .
In the next few days , my group , too , will organise a delegation that will visit Lampedusa .
It is now a good two or three years ago , in 2005 and 2006 , that a delegation from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs visited various refugee centres .
After Lampedusa , visits were also made to places including the Canary Islands , the Netherlands and Poland .
The reports on those visits resulted in heated debates , and this Parliament urged the Council and Commission to take action .
This morning , we discussed the proposal to tackle illegal employment in the absence of the Council .
The period within which the Member States have to transpose these directives into legislation is two years .
The issue of immigration is urgent , though , and a two-year period is too long .
We have been debating Lampedusa for three years now , and each time , we discuss measures to drive back illegal immigration .
After each measure , though , it turns out that , after a brief reduction , there is an increase in immigrants .
It is shocking that the reception situation at Lampedusa should need to be discussed in this manner again .
Parliament reports regarding the reception situation appear to be completely ineffective .
I would therefore call on the Council Presidency to make this a priority .
I understand that , in 2007 , more than 12 000 immigrants arrived at Lampedusa , and this figure rose to more than 30 000 in 2008 .
The detention centre was not built to cope with this capacity .
We have known this for three years .
The old NATO base is being rebuilt to house more immigrants , but this is not an adequate solution .
I should like to hear from the Council what you will do to back the Italian initiatives for better reception facilities .
Is this , perhaps , something Frontex could do , and are other Member States prepared to support Italy financially and equipment-wise ?
Last night , on the 8 o 'clock news , the whole of the Netherlands witnessed what the situation at Lampedusa is like , but the door has now been closed again to journalists and NGOs alike .
I would call on Italy to be open and transparent about the treatment of immigrants on Lampedusa .
( NL ) Everyone has been aware of the problems surrounding Lampedusa for years .
Capsized ships with unfortunate asylum seekers before the European coasts were , in recent years , a regular occurrence .
Tens of thousands of people try to reach Europe , enticed by unscrupulous human traffickers who are prepared to bring economic fortune hunters to Europe for huge sums of money .
I do not intend to mince my words , though , when I say that Lampedusa 's plight is , first and foremost , the result of the failure of European immigration policy and should not be attributed to the Italian local authorities or the people of Lampedusa .
Europe should dare to send clear messages , for desperate times call for desperate measures .
We should come down hard on human traffickers , and their punishments cannot be severe enough .
This should go hand in hand with a strict asylum policy , one that demonstrates to the rest of the world that Europe is serious about protecting its borders .
Europe should follow the example of the Swiss , who decided two years ago to tighten up legal conditions for immigration and asylum .
It is the only way of sending human traffickers and economic fortune hunters a clear message that Europe is prepared to protect its borders to avoid social catastrophes .
Only then will a debate such as the one we are holding today prove unnecessary in future .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , nothing in this House surprises me any more .
However , someone who declared in July last year , concerning the same topic , that he was ashamed to be an Italian citizen would have no choice but to make the assertions that Mr Fava has now made .
I am sorry that he is not here in the House .
It would be interesting to know how many votes he gains in his city and how many constituents he represents .
Nevertheless , Mr President , some ignorant and stupid things have been said by some people on this occasion .
I hope and believe that Commissioner Barrot will indeed pay an early visit to Malta , Lampedusa and so on and realise how wrong it is that the European Community lacks a policy on this matter , because the truth , Mr Barrot , Mr Vondra , is precisely this : there is no Community policy .
What is the consequence of this ?
That some stupid ignorant people can be allowed to attack what are , in fact , the tragic realities experienced by citizens , individuals and , above all , national governments .
I believe that it is important to give you a few figures .
In 2007 , around 11 000 migrants arrived in Lampedusa .
In 2008 , three times as many arrived , about 31 000 .
It is not true that the number of asylum seekers corresponded to the total number ; they made up about one tenth of the total .
Two thousand migrants arrived in just the three days from 26 to 28 December , that is to say on St Stephen 's Day and just after Christmas .
76 requests were examined in 3 days .
Of these 76 requests for asylum , 36 had a positive outcome , 3 were suspended and the rest ... I have nearly finished , Mr President .
After the assertions that have been made , be patient .
Then Mrs Frassoni will reply when you wish , when it seems right to you and in any circumstances ; there is no problem .
Now what counts are the true facts : Lampedusa and Malta and others are carrying a terrible burden .
The citizens are not annoyed with the Italian Government .
They are annoyed because they themselves can no longer endure this situation .
Therefore , this Parliament , rather than accusing the lawful authorities who are doing as much as they can , should instead try to get the European Union to carry out its obligations .
( FR ) Mr President , since 2005 , we have been greatly moved by the catastrophic situation of the migrants held on the island of Lampedusa , whose numbers are well in excess of its real accommodation capacity .
The situation is difficult for this small island which , in 2008 alone , had to cope with the arrival of almost 31 700 immigrants .
These massive flows have been brought under control in recent years as these migrants have been sent to other centres on the Italian mainland .
These transfers were interrupted following a decision taken by the Minister for the Interior and we are seeing a serious deterioration in the situation .
However , the Presidium project , which is jointly managed by the Ministry of the Interior , the High Commissioner for Refugees and the Italian Red Cross and part-funded by the Union , has become an example of good management of migrant reception .
The decision to end the transfers to Italy is creating a real problem of access to asylum procedures .
As for Mayotte , since 2007 , we have known that the nominal capacity of the Pamandzi centre has been exceeded .
It became known that 204 people , generally minors , were being housed there , while the maximum capacity is for 60 people .
The current conditions are catastrophic : the men are sleeping on the floor ; there is no distribution of any bedding or toiletries and men , women and children have to use the same lavatories .
The detention conditions are degrading and an affront to human dignity .
The pressure of migration is indeed felt more strongly in these territories , but the dignity of each person must be ensured and each case should be investigated in accordance with the law .
It has already been stated that we have an unavoidable need for a real European policy on asylum and immigration and for solidarity at the Union level .
We have been making this request to the European Parliament for several years and we are therefore making a fresh appeal to the Council .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , you are a thoroughly sensible person and I therefore invite you , and in so doing , associate myself with other Members , to go to Lampedusa and , I beg you , to go without prior warning , so that you find out in person how difficult it is to manage an emergency situation of this kind .
This is the situation of an island of only a few square kilometres where thousands and thousands of people have been continuously disembarking for many years - and during this period , left- and right-wing governments have come and gone .
Some of these people die during the journey because of the inhumane conditions to which they are subjected by unscrupulous people traffickers .
What therefore should be done : ignore the rules ?
In order to proceed to possible repatriation or to check whether they have political refugee status or need to be granted political asylum , these people have to be identified and this obviously takes time .
Enough then of demagoguery !
Italy is paying a price in terms of very heavy responsibility which is disproportionate to the support , both financial and legislative , that is given by the European Union .
( SV ) Unfortunately , no country can have unrestricted immigration in this world .
The differences between the different countries are too large , and that is why we have the problems that we are talking about now .
Those who come normally present themselves as asylum seekers .
When that happens , we must preserve the rule of law .
We must treat these people as free citizens and with respect .
We must protect their human rights pending examination of the question of whether they are asylum seekers or not .
What we are talking about now seems very strange to me .
Why should those who arrive on the island of Lampedusa be forced to remain there forever ?
As the previous speaker said , if people pour into a small town in southern Sweden , for example , we do not expect them to remain there .
They will , naturally , be relocated around the country pending legal examination of their case .
The same must be done in Italy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the struggle against illegal immigration , given its extent and consequences , is a problem that must be resolved at Community level , since only the European Union has the necessary political clout to identify effective solutions and control the phenomenon .
No individual State , operating on its own , can achieve the required results .
While waiting for Europe to implement its strategies , the Italian Government is pressing ahead with work on both the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , adopted by the European Council in October 2008 , and the Return Directive of December 2008 .
This is important work at both domestic and international level .
At domestic level , there has been much criticism , unfair in my opinion , of Interior Minister Maroni 's proposal for a Centre for Identification and Expulsion on the island to implement , for specific cases , a policy of direct repatriation .
This option does not compromise the fundamental rights of illegal immigrants , refugees and asylum seekers , as has been claimed by several parties .
To prove this , I will cite just a few figures on Lampedusa that have already been given : 76 requests were examined in January 2009 ; of these , 36 were granted , three were deferred and 37 were refused .
All asylum seekers , by contrast , were transferred from the island to the centres in Trapani , Bari and Crotone .
That is to say , those who qualify are accepted .
At international level , the Italian Parliament is today ratifying the agreement with Libya , Article 19 of which expressly states that a more effective control system on Libya 's land frontiers should be established to prevent illegal immigration .
Furthermore , Ministers Maroni and Frattini met the Tunisian authorities last week to try to conclude an agreement on readmission with that country , an essential condition for sustainable repatriation .
The concept that must be accepted here in Parliament , as Vice-President Barrot has also said , is that we must be absolutely firm towards illegal immigration but , at the same time , be welcoming and supportive towards those who become integrated and contribute to the social and economic development of our countries .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , I welcome the fact that you want to visit Lampedusa , but I recommend that you go there soon and without giving advance notice , otherwise you will find that you are presented with a mere sham .
When we visited , the camp had been cleared and the detainees replaced by puppets .
You should also go quickly before Mr Berlusconi and Mr Maroni turn Lampedusa into Europe 's new Alcatraz and continue to keep the citizens there in captivity .
Of course , we in the European Union must show solidarity .
We must establish quotas for refugees which are distributed across the different Member States and which also include the refugees who come across the ' green border ' .
These represent quite a significant number .
What is happening here - and we have visited many camps - is appalling and completely inhumane .
Mr Berlusconi says that they can all go and have a beer whenever they want to .
This shows the level of intelligence which this man has , in other words , none at all .
I want to make this very clear .
It is people like Mr Maroni who say that we must be tough and apply the full force of the law and then go and kneel on the Vatican steps on Sunday and claim that they are good Catholics .
This two-faced approach is no longer acceptable .
We must support the other Member States , such as Malta , Greece and Italy , but not these hypocrites .
We should not help them .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has to decide : does it want regulated immigration or the invasion and criminal exploitation of illegal immigrants ?
The Italian Government has made the right choice : to detain the illegal immigrants in Lampedusa and , at the same time , renegotiate repatriation agreements with the countries from which they come .
However , this requires adequate means and Europe must not merely discuss , merely criticise , merely look at the problem through binoculars .
Europe must certainly come to Lampedusa and help our country and those others who maintain the Maroni line on this problem .
Today , 120 illegal immigrants are going back to Tunisia from Lampedusa , something not done by previous governments because the immigrants had to be taken back - thus drawing the teeth of the exploitative Mafia criminals who cause these journeys to be made and then exploit them for criminal trafficking .
An anti-Mafia professional like Mr Fava should be able to understand it , it is not difficult , he too should understand it .
The Maroni line is approved by Malta , Greece and Cyprus , and by those who live near the southern frontier of our country .
All asylum seekers and all minors have already been transferred to appropriate centres .
What has been said is false .
If Mrs Roure wants to go to Lampedusa tomorrow morning , she will not find a single minor , and if she reads the Italian newspapers , she will discover that it was Mr Maroni who exposed trafficking in organs : children used to disappear from Lampedusa when we had a Left government in our country .
Maroni exposed this .
Well , the message is clear : people must enter Europe only legally , not by means of Mafia boats and criminal traffickers .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must give priority to the careful treatment of refugees .
In Europe , we are all familiar with the concept of compulsory school attendance .
We should start by allowing the people who are stranded here to have a proper education .
Language teaching and vocational training are both urgently needed , together with the opportunity to learn about European culture so that the time spent in these detention camps is not wasted , but instead we help people to help themselves .
This should be our main objective .
Perhaps we can include a preparatory measure in the budget to allow us to offer these people educational opportunities .
They have come to Europe in desperation and we should be able to give them a basic framework to enable them to be successful in their home countries and to play an active role in promoting democracy and freedom .
- ( MT ) .
I was pleased to hear Commissioner Barrot say that he even plans on visiting Malta , and I assure the Commissioner that he will have no problem finding the immigrants in centres in Malta , for the simple reason that Malta cannot simply take these immigrants and move or transfer them to some other place , and this is partly why the situation in my country is so difficult .
Mr President , last Sunday , a boat carrying 260 immigrants landed on our shores .
To make it more comprehensible to the Commissioner , this is equivalent to 39 000 immigrants arriving in France or in Italy in one day .
To place it in a clearer context for Minister Vondra , this is the equivalent of 7 000 immigrants arriving in the Czech Republic in one day .
The 2 000 arriving in Lampedusa over Christmas is nothing compared to this !
What is needed therefore , in a case as sensitive as this , is not criticism towards the country 's authorities but solidarity in order to put a stop to this flow and lighten the burden . Thank you .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to remind you what the Lampedusans want .
At this moment , the Lampedusans are protesting and almost all of them marched the other day in the island 's streets , because they want neither the Centre for Temporary Stay nor the Centre for Identification and Expulsion , which is the latest idea .
The latter was to be created on an island which , let us remember , is eleven kilometres long and three kilometres wide : a ludicrous amount of space when faced with the thousands of immigrants who will arrive there in the next few months .
The other day , just when there was the sudden and unexpected escape of 1 000 immigrants from the Centre for Temporary Stay , I was on the island and observed the consternation and fear of the people who live there and no longer want to witness things of this kind .
This is an island that has lived off fishing and tourism and sees its own economy being destroyed by a blind immigration policy .
( DE ) Mr President , I have listened very carefully to this debate and have remained here from beginning to end , unlike many group spokesmen .
I have noticed one thing and that is that more than half of the debate was devoted to internal Italian politics .
This is a legitimate concern , but I suggest that the debate should primarily take place in Rome and not here in the European Parliament .
We are discussing a European issue here and we should include one additional point in the discussion .
Hardly any of the speeches have referred to the fact that this issue concerns not only refugees , asylum seekers and economic immigrants to Europe , but it is also , to a large degree , about finally putting an end to organised crime .
None of the people who come to Lampedusa or Malta have organised a boat for themselves .
They come because they have been enticed by organised crime organisations and have paid a great deal of money .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I should like to thank you for a very constructive and helpful debate .
There are things the Council can do ; there are other things which the Council is not obliged to do or which do not fall within its remit .
Let me start with the negatives - the limitations .
As has already been stated , it does not fall within the Council 's remit to monitor the implementation of Community law by the Member States ; that falls to the Commission , and my colleague Commissioner Barrot talked about that , and we are certainly working closely with the Commission on many issues .
It also does not fall within the Council 's remit to implement national provisions of the Member States .
A lot has been said during this particular debate about the countries most involved : Italy and France .
On the other hand , we certainly have the will and the instruments to act , and the Council is willing to act in the future .
I think we all agree - I was listening to you carefully , because you were talking about the further need to improve EU action in the area of migration and asylum policy - that a lot was done last year and I think we are all grateful to the French Presidency for taking the initiative in promoting the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which specifically mentions some instruments of solidarity .
Now is the time to gradually implement that step by step .
Certainly Parliament , together with the Council and the Commission , will have the possibility to work together on that .
I can just promise you that our Presidency , as well as the upcoming Presidency - because this issue will not be resolved within the next few weeks - will be working hard on that .
There are strategic issues .
There are also issues that required more immediate reactions , such as reducing the risk of humanitarian crisis and the negative impact .
I come from the Czech Republic , which is not under the media spotlight , but we have had our own experiences too : after the division of Czechoslovakia in 1992 , there was a huge inflow - hundreds of thousands - of the Roma peoples from Slovakia into Czech territory .
Perhaps it was not like the situation in Malta , where I understand the situation is particularly difficult , but I think everybody in the EU has some experience of that and , without a doubt , there is a need for us to work together .

Mr President , as Mr Vondra , the deputy Prime Minister has said , the Commission must ensure that the rules are applied .
However , Mr Vondra , the Member States must also cooperate and I think that with the Pact on Immigration and Asylum and the dynamism of your Presidency , together we will be able to do a good job .
I have noted Members ' impatience during this debate , but it has to be said that it is still early days in the implementation of the pact and , as I just said , the legal framework is beginning to take shape and can be used as a support .
Now , obviously , we must use this to arrive at a Community policy on asylum and a Community policy on immigration .
Europe needs to show greater solidarity .
I have just listened to Mr Busuttil and it is true that , faced with the influx of immigrants and asylum seekers , Member States like Malta find themselves in extremely difficult situations .
Europe has to decide what solidarity is required .
That is absolutely essential
I would also say that we are trying to give as much help as we can via the European Refugee Fund .
I would , however , say to Mrs Frassoni that there is probably an error , as the European Return Fund cannot be used , in any case , for registration of the Roma .
That is not possible .
That is not the aim of this fund .
In any case , when I go to Lampedusa and Malta , I will see how the financial aid that we are giving to the Member States is being used .
I would therefore say to you that we are now going to pay a great deal of attention .
We finally have a solid legal framework that will allow us to act much more than previously on reception conditions .
I also hope that a more united Europe will allow an improvement of the situation of these immigrants , especially these asylum seekers who are worthy of our full attention .
I would like to reply to Mrs Sudre , since she gave a very good explanation of the extremely worrying situation in Mayotte .
What she said is correct : the French authorities have informed us that a new centre with 140 places will open in 2010 .
Above all , these same authorities are currently negotiating with the Comoran authorities to conclude an agreement on movement and migration , as a lasting reduction must be made to the migration pressures on that island .
In general terms , I must say that we need the policy of partnership with the countries of origin .
Mr Vondra , that is the condition we have to meet if we are to reduce somewhat the very high migration pressure on some of the Member States , for some of whom it is causing problems .
However , I think that if the European Union can be very united , we could find an answer to the need for a more concerted management of migration flows .
This will obviously benefit these men and women , whom we should never forget , and who are in very painful situations .
The debate is closed .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0006 / 09 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Award procedures for public works , public supply , and public service contracts in the field of defence and security
European arms markets are fragmented and have consequently suffered adverse economic effects since the 1990s .
Within the last 20 years , defence spending in Europe has been halved , and sales , employment , and research- and technology-related investment have declined .
However , even the large Member States are finding it difficult to shoulder the financial burdens imposed by the cost of developing new weapons systems .
The reorganisation of armed forces since the end of the cold war has led to a numerical reduction in stocks of conventional defence equipment , but has also created new requirements in terms of quality .
Does the Commission not believe that countries which are essentially buyers , such as Portugal , are being placed at a disadvantage because the latest proposal fails to lay down a compensation system whereby Member States would be able to secure industrial returns , of a civil or military nature , on purchases of defence equipment ?
Is it willing to allow a compensation system ?
Member of the Commission . - One month ago , Parliament adopted a resolution on the proposal for a directive on the procurement of defence and security equipment .
This means that the proposal has successfully completed first reading and will shortly be adopted by the Council .
The new directive is a major step forward towards the establishment of a common European defence market .
It will introduce fair and transparent procurement rules applicable throughout the Union .
This will enhance the openness of defence markets between Member States to the benefit of all .
European industries will get a much larger home market and become more competitive ; our armed forces will get better value for money , which will help to improve Europe 's defence capabilities ; and last but not least , taxpayers will benefit from more efficiency in public spending .
One of the controversial issues during the debate on the directive were ' offsets ' - that is , economic compensation for defence purchases from foreign suppliers .
Some Member States proposed to include in the directive a compensation system which will allow them to secure such industrial returns on defence investments .
Offsets aim at fostering the industry of the Member State which purchases defence equipment abroad .
As such , they can lead to distortion of the internal market and imply discrimination against companies from other Member States on the basis of the nationality of the supplier .
The EC Treaty prohibits discrimination on the grounds of nationality , and a directive , as secondary law , has to abide by the Treaty .
The Legal Service of the Council confirmed in its opinion of 28 October 2008 that , and I quote , ' restrictive procurement measures designed to promote domestic industry do not comply with the general principles of the EC Treaty ' .
Consequently , offsets on defence procurement can only be permitted if they are necessary for the protection of essential security interests or justified on the basis of an overriding requirement of general interest .
Economic interests , by contrast , are not sufficient .
The vast majority of Member States and Parliament agreed with this assessment .
So there was not only a legal obligation , but also a political consensus not to accept in the directive compensations directed at fostering national industries .
Accordingly , neither the Commission in its proposal , nor the colegislators , namely the Council and the European Parliament , included specific rules on offsets in the text of the Defence Directive .
The Defence Directive does , however , offer alternatives to offsets .
Member States which are principally purchasers of defence equipment usually seek to justify their wish to have offsets either with security of supply needs or with the necessity to open up defence markets for their SMEs .
The Defence Procurement Directive will satisfy these concerns .
On the one hand , it allows the contracting authorities to ask tenderers for specific commitments to satisfy their security of supply requirements .
On the other hand , it contains provisions on subcontracting which make it possible to require tenderers to open up their supply chains to EU-wide competition and facilitate access for SMEs , as this will contribute to reconciling the legitimate security and economic interests of Member States that are purchasers and avoid the need to have recourse to compensations or offsets .
( PT ) I am grateful to the Commissioner for the very full answer that I have just received .
However , I would like to underline my concern , which is also related both to the crisis situation in which we are living today , as we all know , and to the fact that we are in election year , which may , to a great extent , contribute to some cooling of interest and loss of enthusiasm in this area .
Nevertheless , Commissioner , I am obliged to tell you that we must not lose sight of the key issue from our point of view , and the key issue from our point of view is preventing purchaser countries , such as Portugal and others , from potentially being at a disadvantage .
Member of the Commission . - I certainly can recognise political consequences , and I recognised the phrase that we are in an election year .
However , as the honourable Member will know , in this particular directive , which has gone through the system , these matters were considered and the consensus was for Member States and the European Parliament not to go down that particular route .
It was heavily debated in the various working groups , but the consensus , for the reasons I have outlined in my formal reply , was not to go down the route that the honourable Member suggested .
For the reasons I outlined earlier , I would be very positive about what we have achieved in these compromises , and they are in the best interests of all the economies in Europe .
I take the opportunity to follow up on the first part of this question and to raise the issue about public contracts generally and the issue of restricted tenders , which a lot of people would suggest represent , or result in , poor value for money .
Perhaps the Commission might at some time - perhaps not now - address this issue , particularly in the more straitened economic circumstances that many of our Member States face , and look again at the issue of contracts and tenders and , specifically , restricted tenders .
Member of the Commission . - As Mrs McGuinness would be aware , at the European Council meeting in December last , the European Heads of State agreed that a shorter period could be applied for getting tenders in 2009 and 2010 .
This is actually in conformity with the flexibility offered in the existing directives because , in the difficult economic circumstances in which all the economies of Europe find themselves , the Heads of State thought this was a proper way to go , and it is permissible under the existing directives .
I am aware of the issues that the Member raised regarding restricted tenders , but we review our public procurement directives periodically and I will make sure that Mrs McGuinness 's comments are fed into the system .
Subject : EU-Israel trade relations
In light of the ongoing military action in Gaza , the excessive and disproportionate use of force by Israel and in light of the thousands of civilian casualties and the killing of innocent Palestinian citizens , in what way does the Commission plan to reconsider its trading relations with Israel ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission has strongly condemned the violence in Gaza .
This crisis proves once more that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict does not have a military solution .
Only negotiations with the full commitment of the parties can bring about a lasting solution .
The Commission welcomes the recent cessation of hostilities in Gaza .
It is vital that all parties make the current ceasefire permanent through the full implementation of UN Security Council resolution 1860 .
A number of issues need to be addressed without delay , in particular , the reopening of all crossings into and out of Gaza , a sustained halt to rocket attacks against Israel and an effective means to prevent arms-smuggling to Gaza .
Now that the hostilities appear to have stopped , it will be important to resume talks aimed at comprehensive peace as soon as possible .
The EU has called on its partners for help in driving the peace process forward .
The immediate priority for the Commission is to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the population in Gaza .
Trading relations between the EU and Israel will continue .
Isolation , sanctions or any other forms of boycott would be harmful to talks and negotiations aimed at achieving a sustainable solution to the conflict .
Furthermore , while targeting Israeli interests , they would also prove to be detrimental to the Occupied Palestinian Territory , which is economically dependent on Israel as a main destination for its exports and employment of its labour force .
- I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response and to welcome the fact that he repeated the Commission 's condemnation of Israel 's action .
But , Commissioner , all our trade agreements have a human rights clause in them .
I , like many of my voters , fail to understand how , when a country admits it is using disproportionate military action against a civilian population - it deliberately targets schools , it deliberately targets the buildings of peaceful and neutral international organisations - we still do not believe it has breached its human rights clauses .
When will a breach of human rights occur if not in these circumstances ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I must say that our whole policy towards this particular period of conflict in Israel / Palestine is that the Commission is now focusing on humanitarian relief and helping the people in Gaza , and all other questions will be considered later .
There will be no change in our trade policy , and further developments depend on the circumstances .
I know , of course , that you can be provided with detailed information about the investigations which have been launched about the possible violation of human rights and crimes committed during this conflict .
The Commission is closely following these investigations and will , after these investigations are finished , make its mind up and will follow up on the developments and take the next decisions .
A lot of people have asked for further supplementary questions on this question .
I can take only two within our Rules and I am , therefore , bearing in mind who asked when , and political balance .
I will , therefore , take supplementary questions from Mr Allister and Mr Rack .

Commissioner , could I welcome the assurance that trade relations will continue , and could I encourage you not to be intimidated by the deluge of anti-Israel propaganda and ask the Commission to remember that , with Israel being one of very few democracies in that region , it is important not to ostracise it or alienate it , which would not promote peace at all .
Nor would such action sit comfortably with the tolerance that the EU has shown to many very despotic regimes right across the world .
( DE ) I welcome the fact that the European Union is making a humanitarian commitment to help those who are suffering in the Gaza Strip .
I also welcome the fact that we have condemned what is probably a disproportionate reaction on the part of Israel and have rightly indicated that this is not the way to secure peace because , on the contrary , it puts peace at risk .
However , we should also take the time to explain on behalf of the European Union that people within the Gaza Strip have committed illegal violent acts which have a direct and fatal impact on the residents of Israel .
I would be pleased if the European Union could provide a balanced response in this respect .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I can assure you that the Commission always tries to be balanced .
Given that my colleagues , Commissioners Michel and Ferrero-Waldner , have also condemned the attacks on Israel , they have condemned both sides for the use of violent tools and violence .
We try to be balanced and to consider all aspects of this very complex conflict .
Subject : Internet safety programme
Decision No 1351 / 2008 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 established a multiannual Community programme on protecting children using the Internet and other communications technologies .
In accordance with this decision , the Commission is required to draw up annual work programmes as part of the ' Safer Internet ' programme , which is designed to promote safer use of the Internet and new communications technologies .
Given the threats posed by unlimited access to all these technologies and data , special attention needs to be paid to children and young people .
The programme , which is to run from 1 January 2009 until 31 December 2013 , has a budget of EUR 55 million .
Will the Commission give precise details of the plan of action and the costs of implementing the ' Safer Internet ' programme in the coming years ?
Who is eligible to apply to take part in the programme ?
How , and on what activities , will funds from the ' Safer Internet ' programme be spent ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Safer Internet Programme , a predecessor of the programme which is now being launched , was considered a real success .
The Commission is convinced that the next one will also be a success .
The Safer Internet Programme is a unique pan-European initiative through which the EU helps combat illegal content and harmful conduct online and increase awareness of child safety online among the European public .
It facilitates national actions and initiatives in a coordinated fashion .
As pointed out by the honourable Member , the new Safer Internet Programme , which will run for five years from 2009 to 2013 , has a total budget of EUR 55 million and will be implemented through annual work programmes .
The 2009 work programme is currently subject to Commission inter-service consultation .
The Commission will then seek the Programme Management Committee 's favourable opinion .
Thereafter , this document will be uploaded to the comitology register in order to allow the European Parliament to exercise its 30-day right of scrutiny , which should take place between the end of March and the beginning of April .
The work programme defines the content criteria and indicative budget of the call for proposals which will be launched in 2009 .
The call for proposals will be open to all legal entities established in the Member States .
It is also open to legal entities established in EFTA states that are contracting parties to the EEA Agreement - Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein .
It is , furthermore , open to legal entities established in other countries provided that a bilateral agreement is signed .
The 2009 work programme is the first of five , and so will be a building block for the activities to be carried out over the whole lifetime of the programme .
According to the current draft , its priorities are to empower and protect children by introducing new actions and continuing actions started under the previous Safer Internet Plus Programme , ensuring coverage of awareness activities , help lines and hotlines throughout the Member States , strengthening coordination at European level , and also ensuring value for money by obtaining maximum impact with the financial resources available , namely EUR 11 million per year .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I warmly welcome this important initiative .
I would simply like to pose one question .
The programme refers to the notion of creating special contact points in each country , to deal with coordination of the programme .
Does the Commissioner have any information on this and what exactly is contemplated ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Unfortunately , I do not have any detailed information about the contact points , but I know in general that this is decided in the Member States and depends very much on the structure of the government and governance structures .
I know where this contact point will be in my own country , but at this moment , I do not have such an overview of where the contact points are in other countries .
It is , of course , possible to provide you with the necessary details if you are interested .
( DE ) The dangers represented by the Internet are constantly changing and we have seen the Internet move from version 1.0 to version 2.0 , so to speak .
In essence , this means that everything has become much more interactive .
There have been cases where young people have been driven to commit suicide by web platforms and web communities of this kind .
The question now is : Do you believe that overall , these developments are a good or a bad thing ?
Will the situation become more or less dangerous ?
If it is becoming more dangerous , what plans does the Commission have with particular regard to this change in the Internet ?
( DE ) It is a question of spending the EUR 55 million properly .
Can you imagine giving the small and medium-sized businesses small amounts simply to make better programmes , establishing programme ratings for young people , so that they can decide whether they are interested in the programme or not and , in the same way as with films , publishing an age limit which indicates whether the content is desirable and that there is a specific age limit involved ?
Can you imagine allocating programme funding in the same way as with the Eurostars programme ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The dangers of the Internet and the development of the Internet constitute a huge issue .
We all know how new the Internet is in our world and how it has developed exponentially over the last few years .
As such , both the positive and dangerous sides are very new to society and governmental structures .
Of course , governmental structures , including European institutions , must adequately assess all the possible threats , and I am sure that they are doing so .
The Safer Internet Programme is one response to threats already identified .
Another threat already identified is cyber attacks and different attempts to attack and block via the Internet .
Criminals are also using the Internet , and law-enforcement agencies are actively working on how to deal with these possible threats .
So I think that one of the main priorities for governments - and also European institutions - is to respond adequately ; and in this sense , ' adequately ' means that we should not restrict the enormous advantages which the Internet offers to all users .
However , while all the different aspects of development threats and possibilities - and adequate reactions thereto - are definitely more a question for the specialists in this area , they are also in the interest of all Internet users .
I can assure you that the Commission and its relevant services are monitoring the situation intensely .
Concerning participation in this programme , the Commission 's attitude is that applications can come from a large variety of possible applicants , including small and medium-sized enterprises , and that those enterprises are mostly the providers of these kinds of services .
Therefore , I think it would also be good for those enterprises .
If I understood correctly about the possibility for the younger generations to participate in this programme , I cannot give you a concrete answer at this moment , but the Commission is very open to involving as many participants as possible to work with this programme .
However , I cannot give a concrete answer today on the issue of young people 's participation .
Subject : Special adviser Richard Boomer and the Heysel site
Since 1 April 2006 the Belgian real estate entrepreneur , Richard Boomer , has been working as a special adviser to Commissioner Kallas on issues relating to buildings .
His contract has now been extended .
What led the Commissioner to extend this contract ?
Which decisions by the Commissioner has Mr Boomer influenced ?
Which internal meetings in the Commission has Mr Boomer attended since the extension ?
It now seems that another Belgian real estate promoter is seeking to bring pressure to bear to have some Commission offices located on the Heysel site in Brussels .
Will the Commission give its opinion on this site ?
What is the timetable for decision making ?
When will the results of the architects ' competition for the Rue de la Loi be announced ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - This question is very well known to me and has already been dealt with many times .
I must say that , first of all , Mr Richard Boomer is not a property developer , as is stated in the question .
All information about him is available on the website .
He has been my special adviser since 1 April 2006 and his mandate was renewed in 2008 for the period from 1 April 2008 to 31 March 2009 .
His mandate as special adviser is as follows : advise the Vice-President responsible for administration , audit and fraud prevention as regards property policy ; improve relations with the competent authorities in Brussels and Luxembourg ; optimise effectiveness of the investments to be made by the Commission .
I must say that he has really provided us with valuable expertise , knowing what is going on in the real estate field in Brussels or Belgium mostly , though not so much in Luxembourg .
His advice has been valuable and I must say that also the lines of command in the matter of property policy at the Commission are very clear .
The definition of property policy falls within the competence of the Personnel and Administration DG under the authority of the Vice-President in charge of administration .
This policy is implemented by the Office for Infrastructure and Logistics Brussels ( for Brussels ) and the Office for Infrastructure and Logistics Luxembourg ( for Luxembourg ) .
In his capacity as special adviser , Mr Boomer , like all special advisers at the Commission , advises on the policy and perspectives on a long-term basis in the matters laid down in his mandate .
He has no role in the process of decision making or in the underlying management procedures such as , for example , the acquisition of buildings or the suspension of a long-term lease .
On the third question , relating to an unnamed Belgian real estate entrepreneur , the Commission has no knowledge of the pressures suggested by the honourable Member .
On the last question - the big one - I am very happy to inform the honourable Member that the European Commission announced publicly , in a communication on its property policy on 5 September , its will to maintain a strong symbolic presence at the centre of the European area , while developing in parallel up to three additional sites outside this area .
This policy makes it possible to ensure the best added value for use of public money and puts downward pressure on the high level of prices within the European area .
In accordance with this policy , the Commission published in June 2008 a call for information addressed to the market in order to have better knowledge of the existing possibilities for the development of a site external to the European area from 2014 .
This call was made with full transparency , via publication in the Official Journal .
The Commission received nine offers and is currently undertaking a technical examination of them .
The Commission would reassure honourable Members that the choice of the site to be made in 2009 will be based on careful examination of the merits of each offer , pursuant to clear procedures and in the best interests of the European Commission and the taxpayers ' money .
Until this decision is taken , the Commission will not express a view on any of the offers which have been examined .
On the question of when the results of the architects ' competition for Rue de la Loi will be announced , the Commission can only state that this question does not fall within the competence of the European Commission but has to be submitted to the Brussels Capital Region , which launched this town planning competition .
According to information available to the European Commission , the final result is expected in spring 2009 .
I am sorry about the long answer but the details were also substantial .
( DE ) Commissioner , it is always a great pleasure to listen to what you have to say and to discuss issues with you .
I have produced a diagram which shows the career of your special advisor .
I would like to ask you how you ensure that no conflicts of interest come about .
One of the people who plays a role in your new offers appears on this diagram .
This is someone who has had a business relationship with your special advisor for a long time .
So how do you ensure that no conflicts of interest occur ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - As I said , he must know a lot of people .
I am absolutely sure that there is no conflict of interest .
He has not expressed any kind of suggestion concerning our future policy decisions .
I am absolutely sure you will hear when this decision is taken .
Nine sites have been suggested , but I do not know where these sites are .
I have read in newspapers about some suggestions made .
You can check it afterwards and then you will have a full picture why one or another decision was taken .
So far , nothing is clear , so I am very interested to see all these proposals .
My adviser has scrutinised this matter from all angles , and I am absolutely sure that he has no conflict of interest and especially , of course , that he has no role in this kind of decision making .
( DE ) I would like to query something again .
We understand that a search is going on for property outside the European area .
However , I think that European tax money is being used and that the European Parliament should be involved in a transparent process .
My question is as follows .
As you yourself have said , Commissioner , nine parties have already shown interest in this call for information and are currently being evaluated .
However , specific changes of use have been introduced at one site , the Heysel site .
How does the information which you have just given us fit together with what is obviously already in preparation on this site ?
We would like some more specific information , in particular , about when we will be informed about the overall status and about the procedure .
Vice-President of the Commission . - You will be clearly informed about the full procedure and it can be scrutinised .
It will be a very clear and transparent decision .
The reason behind the idea of having so-called ' other sites ' outside the European quarter is precisely because we want more efficient use of money .
If we concentrate all our services in the European Quarter , it gives real estate developers enormous opportunities to ask very high prices , which we have already seen in many cases .
So , to have other sites as well is a necessity , especially to moderate the costs .
That is the main idea .
We already have some buildings and some sites outside the European quarter .
We have buildings in Beaulieu , we have buildings on the Rue de Genève and some others also .
We are interested in looking .
We have asked for 70 000 m2 to be proposed and we will then examine all the possibilities .
You mentioned Heysel .
I read about it in the newspapers .
I do not know anything about Heysel .
Yes , since I read this , several Belgian politicians have approached me and talked both for and against the site , but it has never been considered as some kind of preferred option .
Nothing has been decided .
It is a process .
It is of big interest for Belgian and Brussels politicians , this location of the sites , and the Brussels Region is also interested in having our location outside the European Quarter , so we will make this decision .
We have an assessment committee which is examining the proposal at the moment and then it will come before the OIB board and then later to the Commission .
It will be a transparent process .
I suggest , though , that we keep out of Belgian internal debates and interests .
Subject : Euro note and coin counterfeiting
Could the Commission provide information on the current situation with regard to the counterfeiting of euro bank notes and coins as well as an analysis of what the EU is doing to combat counterfeit fraud ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The European Community has developed a number of actions to protect the euro against counterfeiting , but in response to your question about the situation with regard to the fight against counterfeiting , it is as follows :
In 2008 , according to figures published by the European Central Bank , a total of 666 000 counterfeit euro banknotes were removed from circulation - so , a little over 600 000 compared to 20 billion genuine euro banknotes : this number is not too alarming .
Historically , the 50-euro note has been the most counterfeited banknote , but in the second half of 2008 - for the first time - the most counterfeited banknote was the 20-euro banknote .
For euro coins , a total of 100 095 counterfeits were removed from circulation in 2008 , which represents a decrease of 7 % compared to 2007 , and the two-euro coin has always been by far the most counterfeited euro coin .
So it is closely monitored .
The roles are divided .
The European Central Bank is responsible for the coordination of the fight against counterfeiting of euro banknotes .
The Commission , especially its OLAF service , deals with the counterfeiting of coins .
The real law enforcement happens at Member State level , but the coordination is carried out by the European Central Bank .
We have a Technical and Scientific Centre , which carries out the analysis and classification of new stamped counterfeit coins .
It is important to mention that Europol is playing a substantial role in fighting counterfeiting .
So this is the situation with regard to the counterfeiting of euro banknotes and coins .
Commissioner , while you might indicate in your reply that this is a very small problem in the overall context of things , nonetheless , I am receiving quite a number of complaints from small businesses that it is becoming increasingly difficult for them and that they are encountering more problems .
In order to address the issue of counterfeiting , I believe it is vitally important to have the maximum cooperation between the police , the European Central Bank , which you have already referred to , and the European Commission .
Could you outline to me the current situation regarding this level of cooperation , and if you are particularly satisfied that the level of cooperation is good enough and strong enough ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I am directly responsible for OLAF , and OLAF is dealing , as I mentioned , with counterfeit coins .
I have no indication that there is bad cooperation between Member States and between European institutions , including Europol where I have been and where I have seen the technology of detecting counterfeit banknotes and coins .
Therefore , I think that the situation is more or less satisfactory , compared to several other areas where cooperation is not so good .
But in the area of counterfeiting , the Commission has no indication that there is a problem in cooperation between Europol and national law-enforcement agencies .
On the contrary , Europol has specialists from national law-enforcement agencies there , and they are working closely together to fight counterfeiting .

( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , with the euro celebrating its ten-year anniversary in this period of global economic crisis , I should like to ask the Commission if it intends to ask the Central European Bank to approve the issue of one- and two-euro bills , because these are the two main coins which we have seen counterfeited , the most recent case being the Turkish pound which , as you know , is similar in appearance to the two-euro coin and therefore keeps being forged .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his replies and to ask him whether , if there were three counterfeiters - ' A ' operating in Germany , ' B ' operating in Ireland and ' C ' operating in Slovakia - each of them would get the same sentence if they were caught counterfeiting .
Let me put it another way - is there an incentive , if you are a counterfeiter , to ply your trade in one state rather than another because the sentences there are less severe ?
In the United States , to counterfeit the currency is a serious crime .
Do we take the same attitude in the European Union ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - First , the Turkish lira is very well known to me .
This is not a question for the European Central Bank , but I have myself , during a visit to Turkey , addressed this issue with members of the Turkish Government , and they promised to gradually phase out this coin and change it so it will not be so similar to European coins .
So this has been promised at least .
That was already a couple of years ago and this has not been raised any more , so probably this process is ongoing .
Regarding cooperation , in early 2009 , there was a big operation against counterfeiters together with the Italian authorities , so cooperation is working .
About court sentences , this is , of course , a matter for national judiciaries and it is more of a question for my colleague Mr Barrot , but I have never heard of the European Union launching any initiative to harmonise these sentences .
However , I know from the country I know best , and from other countries , that counterfeiting is a severe crime everywhere .
Of course , as I said , there is quite a lot of cooperation among the law-enforcement agencies in fighting the people who are involved in these activities but , as far as I know , there is no initiative to harmonise such legislation all over Europe .
Subject : Efficient spending of the EU budget
With the coming into force of the EU budget for 2009 , how is the Commission continuing to ensure that the money of the EU taxpayer is used to its maximum efficiency and waste kept to an absolute minimum ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I could , of course , speak for at least one hour on these issues .
Our doings in this area are reflected in the ongoing discharge process and in many communications from the Commission , in many discharge resolutions and in many speeches in the Budgetary Control Committee .
So , firstly , I can assure you that we are dealing very seriously with these issues and the situation is improving .
The system is as follows .
The budgetary authority , which means Parliament , authorises the Commission to use money and which money can be used to implement Community policies .
There is a special spending programme , which has its own legal basis .
Parliament also designs this legal basis , so the rules are decided by the budgetary authority relating to the budget .
Next comes implementation , where there are different layers .
One of these is , of course , the Commission , which is the main actor responsible for implementing the budget .
Our activities in improving financial governance are reflected in our annual activity reports , and the Court of Auditors has evaluated that they are getting better and better and more adequately reflect the situation .
This is one internal part .
Another is the control and auditing systems , which have also been strengthened in recent years , for instance in internal policies in the research family , where we have increased the control and auditing staff .
What is also important in this particular part is that there is shared management .
Much also depends on the contribution of , and efforts made by , Member States to cut back their errors and to avoid the misuse of money .
There is also improvement in this area .
A completely new instrument has been introduced - the so-called annual summary of all reports of paying agencies .
These were carefully analysed for the first time last year and this is now being done again .
So the situation is improving .
The Court of Auditors ' report , which also has been greatly changed from the beginning of our period , now quantifies the changes .
This quantification of changes also shows that there has been an improvement .
So European money is quite rigidly managed - even too rigidly in some areas .
We can show what has been done .
But we can also clearly say that this is far from perfect .
This is a huge machine which must work smoothly .
According to the Court of Auditors ' estimations , in most areas , 98 % of all transactions are carried out without errors .
In the Structural Funds , this is almost 90 % , so the vast majority of transactions will not include errors , and any errors will be corrected .
The number of correction decisions relating to the Structural Funds has increased tremendously during this period .
I can , of course , provide you with a lot of numbers if needed .
These are some indications , but of course it is clear that this does not cover the whole of the answer to the simple question : ' How do you manage the European budget ? '
Is the Commissioner aware that the Court of Auditors said there were unacceptable spending errors in all but two of the seven policy areas covered under the EUR 140 billion budget ?
And , yes , there have been improvements : the auditors estimated that at least 12 % of the Cohesion Fund should not have been paid last year and it was down to 11 % this year - that is an improvement .
But 11 % represented EUR 462 million .
Does the Commissioner think that this is acceptable ?
In other policy areas - agriculture , the environment , external aid , development and enlargement , research , energy and transport , education and citizenship - the error rate ( I use the word ' error ' ) was between 2 % and 5 % and the auditors observed that there was a ' disproportionately ' ( that is their word ) large error rate for rural development , which now represents 20 % of farm spending and is increasing .
This is a mess , Commissioner !
Can we expect that this is going to be improved ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Of course it must be improved , but you must also understand that we are talking about errors .
For instance , the 12 % figure for last year is based on samples taken by the Court of Auditors , using absolutely correct methodology .
These samples amount to EUR 63 million .
All these samples have been corrected , recovered and the necessary documents provided .
Therefore , the 12 % issue from 2006 is resolved .
Errors are not a waste of money : errors are errors which are corrected .
All the figures are available , from the Committee on Budgetary Control , for what is done to recover wrongly paid money .
For instance , this year the Regional Development Fund made decisions for the recovery of almost EUR 2.3 billion from the Member States - provided there are no other corrections , but this is a process where , last year , we were much tougher than previously ; still , you must understand that we are talking about errors .
Meanwhile , the Court of Auditors has submitted this discharge , this report .
Based on this report , they have submitted all of two cases to OLAF for further investigation - one case is closed and the other is under investigation .
These are the possible fraud cases .
I must say that this situation is not so bad , though we must of course ensure that the money is properly used everywhere .
Commissioner , as a result of the financial crisis , as a sign of solidarity , salaries for ministers , MPs and also for MEPs and other officials have been cut by 10 % , 15 % or 20 % in some EU countries .
Would you support this idea ?
I know it is complicated to implement , but at least to theoretically implement such an idea in the European Commission ?
( RO ) Given that energy efficiency is one of the priority areas for the EU 's economic recovery and for combating climate change , I feel that it is necessary to set up a European fund for energy efficiency and renewable energy to raise the public and private funds for implementing specific projects across the European Union .
This would provide a model of efficiency for using European public money .
I would like to ask the Commission what its point of view is on this .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I do not know what Parliament 's position is on the issue of salaries .
It is a question of opening the Staff Regulations , which is a very complicated issue .
This Commission decided at the beginning not to open the Staff Regulations , but to make this machinery function smoothly .
Nobody has so far , bearing in mind the complexity of opening the Staff Regulations , suggested opening them again .
Of course , if we go with such a proposal , we must negotiate with our social partners , the trade unions .
We can negotiate about this or ask them these questions definitely , but there is very little chance of opening the Staff Regulations before the Parliament and Commission terms end .
Concerning the funds , I did not understand the question .
Were you suggesting that all the funds should be merged ?
Could you repeat the question ?
I propose the creation of a European fund dedicated to energy efficiency but for projects implemented within the European Union .
I think it would be very useful for the sustainable economic development of the European Union .
Vice-President of the Commission . - That is a huge question .
I can only pass this question to my colleagues .
We , together with Parliament , are asking the Member States whether this kind of money - this EUR 5 billion - can be made available solely for energy efficiency .
So far , it has been a very heated debate in the Council .
There are some opportunities to support energy efficiency through the Cohesion Funds .
But to establish some kind of new fund will probably create a lot of very long debates . I do not know how good an idea this is , because energy still does not fall within the mandate of the Community - it is strictly a national matter .
Seeing what is happening with this EUR 5 billion , I am not so enthusiastic about cooperation between the Member States in establishing different financing instruments .
The idea , of course , I can only support .
Subject : Agreements with Andean Community countries
In view of the institutional problems the Andean Community is currently facing , does the Commission believe that a joint agreement with the Andean Community is still possible , or does it think that individual agreements with one or more CAN members would be more feasible ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Thank you for this opportunity to deal with the very interesting issue of our foreign policy on the Andean Community .
Region-to-region negotiations with the Andean Community entered an impasse last summer due to the Andean Community 's inability to agree on common negotiation positions in certain trade-related areas .
These differences reflect , to a certain extent , the differing approaches of the various countries in the region on economic and trade policies .
Despite the efforts undertaken by some Andean Community countries to overcome this impasse , the Commission could only note that a consensus on moving forward with negotiations no longer existed .
Under these circumstances , and without abandoning the medium-term objective of building an association between the Andean Community and the European Union , the Commission proposed to the Council a new two-track negotiating format which was approved by the Council on 19 January .
First , and with the objective of preserving and strengthening relations between the European Union and the Andean Community , the Commission proposes to enrich and update the 2003 political dialogue and cooperation agreement .
Second , the Commission proposes to negotiate the multiparty trade agreement outside the Andean Community framework with those countries that are ready and able to commit to ambitious , comprehensive and WTO-compatible trade negotiations .
All of them are invited , of course .
Taking into account the discrepancies among the Andean Community countries on the trade part of association agreements , the Commission believes that the proposed approach is the best suited to permit us to move forward in a pragmatic and constructive way , while continuing to support the Andean Community and Andean integration .
( ES ) Mr President , I agree with your comment that this is the most appropriate way to proceed .
I have spent these last few days in the Republic of Bolivia and I have followed events on a daily basis .
The specific question I wish to ask you is as follows : when I was there , the objection was raised that these agreements might go against the Cartagena Agreement - the agreement on which the Andean Community is based - and that that Agreement might need to be amended .
At present , can the Commission tell me whether the agreements can be made without an amendment to the Andean Community 's fundamental text ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I think that this particular question is quite difficult .
From what I have read in this briefing , I think that , based on this Andean Community agreement , it is possible to go ahead with this , but I would be very happy to provide more detailed information through our services .
( DE ) The European Parliament has moved its relationship with Latin America onto a new level , because we now have mutual relationships between the European Parliament and almost all the Latin American parliaments , including the Andean Parliament , via EuroLat .
Is this enforced , pragmatic return to bilateralism really the right approach or should we attempt to have an intensive dialogue with Latin America as a whole and only take specific requirements into consideration in the context of special arrangements ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Yes , I can definitely say that this is the Commission 's approach .
We have always been in favour of agreements between multilateral organisations , and we always see the dangers of bilateral dealing , which can easily end in confusion .
I am very pleased that I was required to go to Barbados to sign a Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and 14 countries in the Caribbean region .
This was a really big achievement .
It has encouraged and boosted the trade between these countries tremendously , and has been greeted as a very positive step .
So we will try , of course , to have this multilateral approach .
Subject : The removal of the PMOI from the EU 's Terrorist List
On 4 December 2008 , the Court of First Instance ( CFI ) annulled the Council 's 15 July 2008 Decision to maintain the People 's Mujahedin ( PMOI ) on the EU terrorist list .
The verdict emphasised that the PMOI 's right of defence and effective judicial protection had been violated by the Council which had also failed to prove that the PMOI was engaged in terrorism .
The verdict added that the file submitted by the French Government was not based on ' serious and credible evidence ' and that it was in respect of individuals suspected of being members of the PMOI and not the PMOI itself .
This verdict is the last of six rulings by the High Court and the Court of Appeal in Britain , as well as the CFI , in favour of the PMOI , all of which emphasise that the PMOI is not involved in terrorism and does not plan to engage in terrorism .
What is the position of the Commission which should safeguard the rule of law in this respect ?
What role has the Commission in ensuring due process and natural justice for any organisation which finds itself in this position ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - As you all know , the European Union condemns terrorism in all its forms and firmly believes that the fight against terrorism must respect human rights in order to be effective and credible .
Sanctions against terrorists are taken in the context of the common foreign and security policy , and the Commission is associated with decisions taken unanimously by the Member States in the Council .
So the Commission has taken good note of the fact that , in its judgment of 4 December 2008 , the Court of First Instance annulled the Council Decision of 15 July 2008 that listed the People 's Mujahedin Organisation of Iran ( PMOI ) as a terrorist organisation .
The Court argued that the PMOI 's right of defence and the right to effective judicial protection had not been respected .
In particular , the reasons for the listing had not been communicated in advance of the decision .
The organisation was therefore not in a position to make its views known before a decision was taken .
In application of that judgment , the Council adopted , on 26 January 2009 , a new list of persons and entities subject to the restrictive measures applied to terrorist organisations , and the People 's Mujahedin Organisation of Iran was not included in that list .
In that respect , it is also important to note that , in an attachment of 23 October 2008 , the European Court of Justice confirmed that the current procedure for listing terrorist organisations , as applied by the Council in the case of sanctions that are not based on the United Nations sanctions , respects the human rights of the persons and organisations concerned .
This includes a procedure in which both sides are heard , the reasons for listing are given in advance and the person or entity in question can make its views known .
I should like to thank the Commissioner .
Indeed , when I tabled this question on 17 December 2008 , I was not to know the good news that would come from the Foreign Ministers ' meeting on 26 December .
Let me make it clear that I condemn terrorism in all its forms .
But , at the same time , I must ask you whether it is acceptable that any Council of Ministers can consistently refuse to uphold the rule of law and can ignore the judgments of the Court of First Instance .
Finally , has the Commission had any reaction - official or otherwise - from the present Iranian regime since the European Foreign Ministers ' decision on 26 January 2009 ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - As I said , it was a Council decision , and now the Court of Justice has shown what the deficiencies in this decision were .
I assume the Council and other European institutions will follow the Court 's decisions .
The Court of Justice said that the decision did not meet the substantive and procedural requirements , and the Council followed that decision .
This was discussed in GAERC , and the Council decided not to keep this organisation on the new terrorist list adopted on 26 January 2009 .
But I have not been informed that we have had any reaction from the Iranian Government .
On the contrary , colleagues say that there has been no reaction from the Iranian Government .
I think that these procedures will also help to deal with all the nuances of listing organisations or people as terrorist organisations and create the possibility of giving counter-arguments .
That seems to me to be a good step .
( DE ) The terror list has obviously been produced on the basis of information which is not always reliable .
Following the removal of the People 's Mujahedin of Iran ( PMOI ) from the terror list , are there any plans for a general review and update of the EU terror list ?
Member of the Commission . - This list is , of course , constantly being revised .
If a Member State suggests another approach , to remove an entity from the list or to add something , this is definitely a reason for revisiting this list .
So this is a process which is dynamic : it is not fixed forever .
There must be reasons for any new approach , but it can be revised if there are new reasons .
Subject : Future EU-Iceland relations
Iceland is a member of EFTA , most of EU-Iceland economic relations fall under the EEA , Iceland is an associate member of the Schengen agreement and has many other trade , economic and social ties to the EU .
The impacts of the financial crisis triggered some talk of Iceland , while remaining outside the EU , joining the Eurozone .
What impact would such a move have on EU-Iceland relations - notably in the fields of environmental and maritime / fisheries cooperation - and does the European Commission have in place provisions to deal with such a development ?
Is it possible that such a move , if it occurs , could be followed by similar agreements with other non-EU States ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - This has definitely become a matter for very intensive discussions which we could not have imagined a year ago .
We could not have imagined discussing the potential radical changes in EU-Iceland relations .
The question is what impact an Icelandic adoption of the euro - without Iceland joining the EU - would have on EU-Iceland relations .
Let me first stress that currently , as we speak , there is an intense debate ongoing in Iceland on its relations with the EU , including the issue of European Union membership .
The Commission is closely following this debate .
The question of Iceland applying for EU membership is entirely for the Icelandic people to decide and , should there be an application from Iceland , the Commission and the Member States will act according to the established procedures as laid down in the Treaty .
I can assure you that we will handle the application as expediently as possible .
As regards the specific question of Iceland adopting the euro without joining the EU , of course Iceland can unilaterally take such a decision but it should be clearly stated that it is the Commission 's firm view , as well as a view of the European Central Bank , that unilateral ' euro-isation ' is not a desirable political option for Iceland .
Such a move would not have a positive impact on EU-Iceland relations .
Iceland is a potential applicant for EU membership , thus Iceland should pursue long-term monetary integration with the euro area only in the context of an EU membership perspective .
This means that Iceland should adopt the euro only after accession to the EU , after fulfilling the conditions set out by the Treaty .
- ( GA ) Commissioner , in relation to your comments about a request from Iceland for membership of the European Union , if such a request were to be made - in view of the current urgency of the economic situation - would the European Union have any fast-track system or fast-track procedure to implement such a request ?
How would the Union be able to deal with such a request quickly , if this could be done ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I do not think there can be any kind of special treatment for Iceland .
In the past , we held negotiations with countries which are now Member States of the European Union , and now we are holding negotiations with countries which would like to join the European Union : the approach must be equal - it must be absolutely the same for everybody .
The negotiations will be the same as with all other candidate countries .
I do not see any possibility of having some kind of fast track for these negotiations .
Whether Iceland is , perhaps , quite well prepared for membership is another issue .
I do not know to what extent it has already adopted legislation similar to that of the European Union , because this is a major issue .
At any rate , I am sure that Member States will be of the opinion that the position must be scrupulously fair and equal for all possible applicants .
This is my opinion .
There has never been any talk in the Commission of any special treatment or fast track .
( DE ) If Iceland joins the EU or the euro area , how does the Commission intend to prevent the battered Icelandic economy and financial system from jeopardising the stability of the Euro or even rocking its foundations ?
As vice-chair of the Committee on Fisheries , could I ask the Commissioner to expand his thoughts on how membership of the EU might impact on the Iceland-EU Fisheries Cooperation Agreement ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - These are both quite specific questions .
Again , I must underline the basic position that these negotiations must be the same as has been the case with other Member States .
But , of course , Iceland has a population just under 300 000 , so it is small and would not be a big burden on the European economy .
I think that the basic idea is that it would make a contribution , so it is an economy that can overcome the current difficulties .
I think that the Member States will watch it very carefully and will ask it first to put its house in order .
That is the first requirement , and then there can be the question of the contribution Iceland can make to the Union 's economy .
Concerning the fisheries agreement , again , this is a very specific question .
However , I seem to remember that this issue was mentioned several times in previous enlargement negotiations .
I think that the fisheries question will be the most complicated in negotiating with Iceland , because it has quite big privileges which will definitely be contested by certain Member States .
I think this will be the key element in future negotiations .
I do not know to what extent the existing agreement is applicable or suitable for future relations between Iceland and other EU Member States .
Being on that committee , however , you will know that this was a very hot topic in negotiations between Norway and some Member States .
However , I think that , at least today , nobody can say exactly what promises or preoccupations there will be in this particular area .
Thank you , Commissioner , and thank you for helping us this evening with so many questions .
Subject : Demography report
In November 2008 the European Commission published its Demography Report which outlined the challenges Europe will be facing in the coming decades as a result of an ageing population .
The report recognised that such challenges will require a variety of policy responses , including the strengthening of solidarity between the generations in terms of long-term care , greater recognition of professional carers and , most importantly , greater support for family carers .
In December 2008 , the Commission published its Restructuring in Europe Report which also outlined such demographic challenges and pointed out that Europe 's potential growth rate could decline at a time when significant additional resources will be required to meet the needs of an increasing number of elderly people for whom adequate pensions and health and long-term care provision will have to be secured .
Given that family carers are , and will continue to be , an inherent and indispensable part of our social and healthcare provision , can the Commission comment on what steps it has specifically taken towards developing policy responses to such challenges , particularly with regard to greater support for family carers ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the renewed social agenda adopted in July 2008 , the Commission undertook to attend to the needs of an ageing population .
The issue of an ageing European society calls for a range of strategic measures , starting with an assessment of the necessary reforms to the health and pensions system in order to provide for the needs of an ageing population , and taking account of the sustainability of public funds for supporting research into ways in which information technology can contribute towards improving the health and living conditions of older people .
The Commission is now completing the draft Joint Report on Social Protection and Social Inclusion 2009 , which will send a clear signal on the need to ensure long-term adequacy and sustainability of incomes , make the provision of healthcare more effective , and reduce inequalities in the field of health .
It will also attend to the challenges which some Member States must tackle in the field of pensions , healthcare and long-term care .
These are described in the attached surveys of individual countries .
Decision making lies within the authority of the Member States , when it comes to policy on support for those providing care informally for family members .
However , the Commission may act as a catalyst for change , to support efforts of Member States .
Within the scope of the open method of coordination in the field of social protection and social inclusion , the Commission is endeavouring to encourage Member States to create policies which support family members .
In the joint report for 2008 , the Commission and the Member States emphasise the importance of policies on informal carers , including a set of measures such as opportunities for training and counselling , respite care , leave for care purposes , and suitable social protection for informal carers .
In addition , the Commission supports the creation of these policies at national level through its contribution in the form of studies and conferences on this issue .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
You talk about the needs of an ageing population .
Certainly care-giving is one of those .
You mentioned pension scheme reforms , and I am pleased to hear that , because people who give up work , very often to care for children or older persons , do not pay adequate social security contributions , and it is often carers who do not have adequate pensions .
You mentioned that family carers come within the remit of the Member States , and I agree with that .
You also mentioned in reply to me that the European Social Fund could be used for training .
I would like you perhaps to elaborate more on that .
Finally , carers work : they are unpaid workers .
I am interested in your views on how you regard carers from that perspective under the heading of employment and social affairs , which is your own DG .
In each case , in all Commission documents , we are working in the awareness that with an ageing population , increasing numbers of people will be engaged in caring for a dependent .
Likewise , an absolutely clear policy of gender equality is being maintained , because one of the risks of unplanned development is that it is women who take responsibility , to a far greater extent , for ailing family members who , in many cases , are very old people .
As for the funding for these people , that is a matter for the Member States .
The Member States can develop the most varied schemes for supporting those caring for dependents and most Member States have some such scheme .
Since you have mentioned the European Social Fund , I would say that understandably , the European Social Fund cannot take on the financing of care for dependents , but it can develop and help to develop a whole range of important programmes for carers .
Training , which I have mentioned , focuses especially on the fact that if we wish to care for someone who is perhaps close to us , and with whom we have an emotional bond , then despite all our efforts and goodwill , caring for another person is actually , in a sense , a specialised field .
It is therefore a very good thing for these people to gain some basic knowledge and basic experience , because the results are beneficial for them , too : not only is the standard of care greatly improved , but their task becomes considerably easier .
This is one of the reasons why we are aiming in this direction .
I would also like to emphasise something which has not been mentioned , but which we are also attending to , and that is the abuse or mistreatment of older people .
In most cases , it again becomes clear that mistreatment is not due to some general character defect in the people responsible , but is due , very often , to a situational fault .
The task is simply too difficult and they cannot cope .
We wish to take action on this issue too , through the European Social Fund .
As the author is not present , Question 51 lapses .
We move to the next question , which was put by Mr Crowley , but Mr Ryan is going to substitute for him .

Subject : Poverty in the European Union
Solidarity is a hallmark of the European Union , of which the common values include investing in people , fostering equal opportunities , and combating poverty .
To this end , can the Commission outline future ways to ensure that European-level plans to combat poverty can be integrated into national policies ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with the introduction of the Lisbon strategy , the European Union set itself an ambitious goal : to significantly reduce poverty by 2010 .
Since then , the Union has set up instruments for achieving that goal .
The open method of coordination in the field of social protection and social inclusion has helped to strengthen the fight against poverty and social exclusion , and has supported the efforts of the Member States .
This cooperation between Member States has had very good results .
I shall mention three examples : there are now 22 Member States that have set themselves a target figure for combating child poverty ; citizens and companies are now very closely involved in the national strategies to combat poverty ; and social inclusion strategies have been incorporated into many policy areas : employment , education and vocational training , health and housing .
All the relevant policies have therefore been brought to bear in the fight against social exclusion .
The renewed social agenda which the Commission adopted on 2 July 2008 sets seven priority areas of activity , including the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
The renewed social agenda also proposes strengthening the open method of coordination .
The European plan to stimulate growth and employment , which was submitted to the heads of states and governments at the European Summit in December 2008 , aims to address the impact of the financial and economic crisis and also to strengthen the reforms already under way within the scope of the Lisbon strategy for growth and employment .
The Commission has also undertaken to regularly monitor the social impact of the financial and economic crisis in the Member States and the measures taken at national level .
This tool for monitoring the social impact of the crisis should be published quarterly , and understandably it would focus mainly on the most vulnerable groups .
The Commission will also continue to cooperate with the Member States to ensure effective implementation of its recommendations adopted in October 2008 on the active inclusion of people who are furthest removed from the job market .
In particular , the aim of this recommendation is to increase the effectiveness of the minimum wage schemes , which are still insufficiently developed in many Member States .
In other words , it is essential to enable every citizen to achieve a decent standard of living , especially during the current crisis .
I would also like to remind you that 2010 will be the European Year of the Fight against Poverty and Social Exclusion .
It will focus on the following : support for observance of the rights and opportunities for socially excluded people to actively reintegrate themselves into society ; emphasis on the responsibility of each member of society in the fight against poverty ; broadening the tried and tested methods in the field of social inclusion ; strengthening the commitment of the main political actors .
I think the measures I have mentioned testify to the fact that Europe is constantly trying , in a concrete way , to address the needs of the most vulnerable groups , especially in the current economic situation .
I hope the Member States will respond positively to the Commission 's call to resolve the social consequences of the crisis .
For this purpose , they can make use of the Community instruments available to them , especially the European Social Fund and the European Fund for Adjustment to Globalisation .
author . - I would like to thank the Commissioner for his very comprehensive answer .
In talking about one of the vulnerable groups , considering the economic situation that we now face and the increase in unemployment levels , obviously one vulnerable group is young people .
Very often , in economically difficult times , young people unfortunately get into drug abuse .
Is it possible that the European Social Fund could be used in a targeted way to try and help young people , considering the problems that this causes not only to themselves as individuals , but to their families and to their communities , and given the very severe effect it can have on communities , adding to poverty and difficulties ?
I was wondering whether it would be possible to target this vulnerable group under that Fund
The Commission strategy , even in this difficult economic situation , is to deal with any discrimination , any breaches of the principle of equal opportunities .
Of course , you are well aware that European legislation allows positive action , which means action aimed at groups which are in a very difficult situation .
Generally , the Commission , in its proposals before Parliament , is facilitating or - if the proposals are approved - wants to facilitate the use of the European Social Fund and the Globalisation Fund .
Essentially , I can say that in terms of regulations , in terms of structure , there are no obstacles to directing a significant proportion of these resources towards young people .
This depends on the decisions of individual project sponsors , local communities , and decisions at national level .
It is still an open question but , in principle , there are no obstacles to the effective use of resources for the benefit of young people or other groups which are in a particularly difficult situation .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Protection of minorities in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the protection of traditional national , ethnic and immigrant minorities in Europe , by Csaba Sándor Tabajdi , Hannes Swoboda , Jan Marinus Wiersma , Véronique De Keyser , Katrin Saks and Claude Moraes , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament - B6-0005 / 2009 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are more than 300 different national and ethnic minorities and linguistic communities living on the European continent .
Of the citizens of the 27 EU Member States , some 15 % are members of a traditional national minority or immigrant community .
While the objective of the European Union is the preservation of cultural diversity , minority languages and groups face the threat of extinction or assimilation .
The steadily growing immigrant communities are dealing with a crisis of integration ; think only of the riots in the French suburbs , in the outskirts of Paris , the London terrorist attacks or the ethnic tensions in the Netherlands .
Is the European Union credible when it condemns violations of human and minority rights in third countries ?
Are the EU decision makers adequately addressing the problems of national and ethnic minorities in the potential candidate countries of the Western Balkans , when some Member States are incapable of doing so at home , and in fact their practices are diametrically opposed to this policy ?
Those who are unable and unwilling to face these questions , who stick their heads in the sand , are playing with the future of Europe .
Today 's debate was preceded by voices of concern , with certain people claiming that this issue is too sensitive .
Yes , this question is an extremely sensitive one .
What would become of the European Union if we were to debate only those questions that do not offend any interests ?
We cannot sweep these problems under the carpet !
The citizens of Europe expect us to provide genuine answers .
The European Union must guarantee the rights , at the local , regional , national and EU levels , of indigenous and traditional minorities , the Roma , and the several million people who live in minority status and have no independent State , such as the Catalans , Basques , Scots , Bretons , Alsatians , Corsicans , Welsh , the Hungarian minorities in Romania , Slovakia and Serbia and other national communities .
Subsidiarity and self-governance , power sharing and joint decision making are the fundamental values of the European Union .
It is very important that forms of joint decision making , self-governance and autonomy be set up on the basis of agreements between majorities and minorities , while fully respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member States .
As regards persons who belong to immigrant minorities within a State , we must help them integrate as fully as possible , and the immigrant minorities in turn must show the highest possible respect for the language and customs of the State in question .
If the European Parliament truly wishes to become a centre of power , then it must face these sensitive questions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Tabajdi , respect for minorities is an essential principle among the conditions to be met before a new country can accede to the Union .
The Copenhagen criteria are aimed specifically at candidates for accession to the Union .
Respect for the rights of individuals belonging to minorities , including respect for the principle of non-discrimination , is one of the Union 's founding principles .
However , the Union does not have general powers in the area of the protection of minority rights .
It is up to the national authorities to ensure such protection , in accordance with their constitutional arrangements and their international commitments .
In addition , issues of the institutional organisation or autonomy of minorities fall within the powers of the Member States .
Similarly , it is up to each Member State to decide to sign or ratify the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , which are the two major instruments introduced by the Council of Europe .
The Union has therefore no powers to adopt , as the question suggests , general legislation setting standards for the protection of minorities and inspection mechanisms .
The Union may , however , adopt measures on some issues within its powers which have a positive effect on the situation of individuals belonging to minorities .
For example , the Commission is pursuing a policy to fight discrimination on the grounds of race , ethnic origin or religion .
This will ensure the implementation of Community legislation in this area and the implementation of the directive that supplements this legislation .
The adoption of the Framework Decision against Racism and Xenophobia on 28 November is a further example .
With this Framework Decision , the Union is contributing to improving the situation of individuals from minorities when they suffer certain types of behaviour .
The Union has also acted concerning the situation of the Roma minority .
The integration of immigrants is an important and growing issue for the Member States of the European Union .
In 2005 , the Commission submitted a Common Programme for Integration that forms the framework directive for a common approach to integration in the European Union .
In addition , the Union has allocated a budget of EUR 825 million for 2007-2013 to implement the European Fund for the Integration of Third-Country Nationals .
Three new initiatives from the Commission will appear in 2009 : The third edition of the Handbook on Integration , the European Integration Forum , that will further involve civil society in the pursuit of our work , and an integration website that will act as a single portal for information about integration and promote the exchange of best practice among stakeholders in the area of integration .
The role of the European Union in the area of multilinguism is not to replace the action of Member States but rather to support and supplement such action .
The European Commission 's policy on multilinguism includes regional languages as well as the languages spoken by minorities .
Respect for linguistic and cultural diversity is one of the cornerstones of the European Union .
This respect for linguistic and cultural diversity is now part of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , which states , in Article 22 : ' The Union shall respect cultural , religious and linguistic diversity ' .
The latest Commission communication , adopted in September 2008 , also states that each of the many languages , whether national , regional or spoken by minorities or immigrants , adds something extra to our common culture .
The main tools available to the Union in this area are funding programmes , particularly the Lifelong Learning Programme 2007-2013 .
Finally , the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights is a very precious tool that we use to collect data useful in the development and implementation of all instruments and these Community policies .
Following a request from the European Parliament to the Agency for Fundamental Rights , which I remind you is located in Vienna , the Agency 's 2009 work programme includes the preparation of a comparative report on the situation concerning ethnic and racial discrimination in the European Union .
This will allow us to update the report on racism which dealt with the year 2007 .
That is what I can tell you .
In other words , we do not have a legal basis for organising the protection of minorities .
This issue really falls within the powers of the Member States , although the Union must evidently avoid any discrimination towards a citizen who belongs to a minority .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Mr Tabajdi has undertaken an enormous task - to try to formulate and classify communities of peoples that have formed in historically different ways who , in greater or lesser numbers , live in states which have at their heart a different ethnic or linguistic origin .
As we know , over the centuries in Europe the borders and names of countries have often changed , both as a result of war and when states have joined together or split apart , when empires have formed or collapsed , and very often people , without changing the places where they live , have become subjects of a different king or residents of a different country .
Likewise , migration has taken place both at the individual level and with the movement of entire ethnic communities .
We have inherited the results of all this .
Undoubtedly , today every resident in the European Union deserves a life worthy of a human being and equal opportunities .
Just what can we really call a minority though , in today 's sense , and can the states agree and draw up uniform criteria ?
That is important , for today new migration is taking shape : both internal migration within the European Union and migration from non-EU countries .
It seems to me that first of all specialists , researchers , historians , ethnographers and linguists ought to work on this , and then perhaps the politicians can have the last word .
If the politicians start things off , then we will instantly see considerable political subjectivity and selfishness , especially as the elections are approaching . Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , more than 45 million people belonging to 57 different minorities live in the European Union and in the other European countries .
Today , when the ghost of racism is haunting Europe , when the chauvinism of the majority in nation states is visibly growing to frightening dimensions throughout Central and Eastern Europe , we can no longer sweep minority policies under the carpet .
As we have heard - from the Commissioner as well - the EU does not yet have a set of regulations on the protection of the identity of minorities that applies to all Member States .
The question of minorities falls within the competence of the Member States , and therefore these communities must , for the most part , be satisfied with whatever they can negotiate with their own governments .
The total number of citizens in the Central and Eastern European Member States who belong to various national , minority communities is significantly greater than in Western Europe , and their problems are also more complex .
In order not only for national minorities but also for everyone belonging to what are effectively minority EU nations to feel truly at home in Europe , European legislation must create a legal framework with comprehensive legal norms for the protection of minorities .
We need to create the kind of political structures that do not strive for exclusivity but share areas of competence .
As this pattern becomes a reality throughout the European Union , so national minorities will gain in status and obtain new opportunities for the protection of their language and culture .
In this regard , the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty is of key importance , for two of its articles , thanks to the work of the Hungarian Government , include the rights of persons belonging to minorities .
Acceptance of the Treaty would be a great step forward in the history of the European Union .
The current economic crisis is not advantageous to minorities , for it poisons conflicts and gives ground to far-right demagoguery .
Europe cannot afford , particularly at this moment in time , to fail to listen to the voices of minorities .
It cannot abandon minorities at this time of crisis .
Mr President , Commissioner , some minority groups have been present in the Member States for centuries , whilst others are relatively recent arrivals .
The Roma are one of the traditional minority groups that have been present in Union countries essentially as long as records exist .
I am sorry to say that in my country , Poland , although the Roma are not discriminated against , the extent of their integration leaves much to be desired .
They share this view .
I believe that the Roma need more support from the state .
In particular , they need assistance with vocational training and with education in general .
Member States should play the leading role regarding the integration of this and other minority groups .
Common Union legislation would be very helpful to us in our endeavours , however .
I have in mind , in particular , defining the rights and responsibilities of new arrivals from Islamic states who find it hard to integrate into Europe .

Mr President , I would like to express my profound gratitude for Mr Tabajdi 's work in preparing and tabling this oral question that we are debating here today , and also for his tremendous work in drawing up the resolution which , regrettably , we are not debating but which we will no doubt be able to discuss in forthcoming plenary sittings .
This resolution is necessary because it is clear that we have to find a minimum level of protection for minority groups in the European Union , something that does not exist at the moment .
I do not share Commissioner Barrot 's perception , in often hiding behind the European Union 's lack of jurisdiction on this matter .
It is a patent contradiction to mention the Copenhagen criteria , to mention another type of legislation and , at the same time , - when , perhaps , it is not of interest or when , perhaps , one is not brave enough - to hide behind the lack of jurisdiction in order not to , shall we say , make progress in the protection of minority groups , because we are , ultimately , facing an eternal dilemma .
We are not facing a problem but , rather , a challenge that the European Union has to meet , and this issue should be seen as such .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , in every Member State of the EU there are groupings of people who are seen as different because of characteristics like ethnicity , language , how they dress , the music they play and how they worship .
When the people in that country are committed to respect for the innate dignity of every human person , these differences are seen as enriching , and people are valued .
In fact , when the dignity of the human person is valued , we do not view minorities in a negative way at all .
However , in many countries , this respect is weak or non-existent .
This leads to discrimination in which minorities are abused and relegated to the poorest of circumstances .
We insist in the Copenhagen Agreement that a country wishing to join the EU must have at least a minimally acceptable level of respect for everyone within its borders .
This principle falls down when we ignore these criteria and allow membership to countries where people are being marginalised and mistreated .
In Ireland , for instance , many children and adults with disabilities were institutionalised in the worst of circumstances at the time of our accession and for years after our membership .
Today , in spite of the introduction of the Copenhagen criteria , there exist similar terrible circumstances for vulnerable minorities in countries which have recently joined the EU or which plan to .
The Copenhagen criteria were clearly ignored in those cases , and the treatment of minorities was not considered an obstacle to membership .
This negates the purpose of the agreement .
If a country , in order to join the EU , must fulfil the Copenhagen criteria in respect of the treatment of its people , it should be possible to suspend membership when it does not .
( SK ) We are dealing with the problem of ethnic minorities , but this means primarily the Hungarian ethnic minority , Mr Tabajdi .
Hungary is indeed where ethnic minorities have been almost completely eliminated over the past decades .
The words of the former ombudsman for minorities in Hungary , Jenö Kaltenbacha , confirm this .
The number of Slovaks living in Hungary has fallen from more than 300 000 to 18 000 during the time in question .
For the decimated Slovak minority , Hungarian is used exclusively as the language of instruction in the ethnic minority schools in Hungary .
In those schools , Slovak is taught for four hours a week .
There is no vendetta under way in Slovakia , and for the Hungarian minority living in Slovakia , things are incomparably better .
In the Hungarian minority schools , the language of instruction is exclusively Hungarian .
Slovak is taught as a supplementary language for a few hours each week .
Religious services are conducted only in Hungarian in all Slovak communities in Hungary , and they are conducted exclusively by Hungarian priests .
On the other hand , only Hungarian priests officiate in Hungarian communities in Slovakia .
The European Parliament , however , is paradoxically not devoting any attention to the problems of the Slovak , German , Serbian and other beleaguered minorities in Hungary .
There is repeated discussion of the peripheral problems of the Hungarian minority , which the Slovak government is , in any case , currently considering .
Only today , as part of this process , it approved an amendment to the education act , guaranteeing that geographical names will be printed in Hungarian or Ukrainian in textbooks for minority schools .
It is the Hungarian politicians and MPs who , under the guise of settling ethnic problems , are constantly foisting their ideas about autonomous solutions , including territorial autonomy .
Most recently , the Hungarian President did so during a visit by his Romanian counterpart to Budapest , and met with a stern rejection .
Such attitudes need to be unmasked and vigorously condemned within the European Parliament as well .
( HU ) Whereas the interests of any other social minorities protected by anti-discrimination regulations are vigorously defended , European legal protection , not to mention political will , is reticent where traditional national minorities are concerned .
Yet the existence of these minorities within the European Union is not a political question but a matter of fact - there are millions living within the EU who are not immigrants .
They live within European Member States while never having moved from their ancestral lands .
It was just that in the course of events in the twentieth century , the boundaries of their countries have shifted around them , leaving them behind ever since facing insoluble dilemmas .
How are they to preserve their identity and community , how can they provide their children with a secure image of a twenty-first century future ?
We must at last admit that the problems of these communities cannot be resolved purely by means of universal human rights or anti-discrimination regulations .
These communities rightfully demand all those things that , in the case of similar-sized populations , the European Union deems to be the right of those who are part of a majority .
This is why EU regulation is necessary and why the assistance of the EU is necessary .
Such communities are right in thinking , for instance , that autonomy , which has brought prosperity and development to the minorities of the South Tyrol in Italy , would also bring them a desirable solution .
Certainly , forms of autonomy - including perhaps territorial autonomy - could give a positive and manageable future to such communities .
There should be no mystification surrounding such communities , but they should be discussed openly , since if such an option can be a positive solution in one Member State without harming the State 's territorial integrity , it could similarly prove to be a solution in other Member States as well .
The rightful demands of these minorities , which are based on fundamental principles and current practice in the European Union , cannot constitute taboo subjects in the EU in the twenty-first century !
( ES ) Mr President , it is curious that in every parliamentary term , we have pointed out the non-existent or fragile legal and material protection of one or another minority group within Member States .
With the recent enlargement towards the east , the situation has , unavoidably , become far more complex .
The Europe of 27 has more than 100 groups , if we add its ethnic and linguistic minorities to those resulting from more recent immigration .
Particular mention should be - and already has been - made of the Roma , an ethnic group that has lived among us for centuries .
It has its own characteristics and suffers the greatest disadvantages of all minority groups of any kind .
Doubling our efforts to achieve gradual integration , if not assimilation , of these groups and making this unity in diversity a reality is a major challenge for Europe , Commissioner .
It is not for nothing that the Treaty of Lisbon makes explicit reference , for the first time in European Union history , to the rights of people belonging to those minorities and to their own values .
Each social group is different .
Member States ' linguistic-historical minorities and their recognised and indisputable right to express themselves in their mother tongues have little or nothing to do with the new migration flows , which have their own identifying characteristics .
We are taking the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages as our starting point and asking the European Social Fund to grant attention and resources to minority groups .
We have just seen 2008 draw to a close as the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , and I believe that this dialogue has only just got under way .
I feel we should take advantage of such momentum and continue spreading this dialogue in order to create control mechanisms at European level with the aim of protecting minority groups .
I shall end on this note : we have an obligation in our Member States to protect and preserve the traditions and values of the multicultural Europe that is emerging , and the duty of this Parliament is to establish integration standards within a common European framework that facilitates peaceful coexistence .

( HU ) Mr President , One out of every ten European citizens belongs to a national minority .
Many of them feel that they are stepchildren within their own homeland .
They look to the European Union to guarantee their rights and help improve their situation .
In terms of human rights , the European Union 's greatest debt is in relation to the protection of minorities .
Although the legal grounds for effective protection of minorities exist , the political will to assert these is often insufficient .
Ratification of the Lisbon Treaty could improve the situation , but in itself , it is no magic solution .
It is important for existing institutions to work effectively and , in particular , for the minority profile of the Fundamental Rights Agency to be strengthened .
The various minorities would consider it a positive sign if the new Commission had a commissioner whose responsibility was exclusively to deal with minority affairs .
This would give a clear signal that the minorities are also full citizens of a unifying Europe .
Europe cannot have stepchildren , since in one sense or another , all of us are minorities .
( HU ) Mr President , I welcome with gratitude and appreciation the inclusion on the agenda of the protection of traditional national and ethnic minorities as well as of immigrants to Europe .
I find it painful that in the absence of the necessary support from the political groups , our joint debate today is coming to an end without a decision , and that it is still not possible to adopt the EU framework agreement on minority protection .
In the countries of the former Communist camp , the principle of non-intervention was supreme .
I consider it unacceptable that the European Union is similarly leaving the solution of the problem of minorities within the area of competence of individual Member States .
I consider President Traian Băsescu 's declarations in Budapest rejecting the rightful demands of Transylvanian Hungarians for collective rights and autonomy to be reminiscent of the dictatorial standpoint during the National Communist era .
The European Union is the joint home of national , ethnic and religious minorities as well , and precisely for this reason , the EU can no longer put off providing them with institutional , legally regulated protection .
( FR ) Mr President , our cultures include the rule of law and individual rights and so it is right and proper to defend the rights of an individual member of a minority but it would be dangerous to legislate on the rights of non-national minorities as communities in their own right .
For non-national minorities , and I am only talking about them , the community approach has to be rejected because it will inevitably destroy the coherence of many European nations .
Where there is rule of law , regulation of the way in which people live together must remain a national power .
In this matter , if the majority were the enemy of the minority , then this would seriously call democracy into question .
Faced with poverty or danger , some people flee their country of origin to seek refuge .
The right to asylum is a way for people to vote with their feet .
Fortunately , it has become a fundamental right but , as with any right , there is a concomitant duty .
In this instance , the duty is to accept the rules , languages and customs of the receiving countries .
The right of asylum is a precious right as it is a right inherent to the human being .
Even if you belong to a minority , this does not legitimise the creation of a community right .
Your ultimate allegiance must always be to the country in which you settle .
It is an illusion to believe that the juxtaposition of transitory communities , with different memories , can create a country .
Over time , this will only create either a field of indifference or a field for a battle .
You should either love your receiving country or get out .
That is the duty which is born of the freedom to come and go .
( RO ) I would like to express my support for the protection of minorities and respect for their culture , languages , traditions and customs .
I believe that all Member States should include references to the protection of minorities in their national legislation in various areas .
In this respect , I feel that Romania 's legislation in this area is particularly well drafted and can provide a model for other Member States .
The proof of this statement is even borne out by a fellow Member of this Parliament , whom I have a great deal of respect for , who was born , grew up and studied within Transylvania 's Hungarian community , and now successfully represents Hungary in this house .
However , the protection of minorities must not result in excesses such as collective rights , the promotion of autonomy and self-determination , including territorial .
I do not think that it is helpful either to divide minorities into different categories as this may give the idea that these categories must be treated in different ways .
All citizens must be treated equally and enjoy the same rights and obligations towards the communities among which they live .
Decentralisation and local autonomy under national laws very much reflect all the aspirations that citizens have , whatever their nationality or ethnic background .
It is not normal to raise for discussion concepts which are not yet enshrined in current international law and which are not accepted at Member State level .
We do not need either to adopt the provisions of the Council of Europe .
A specific mention must be made about the Roma minority .
I firmly believe that common EU programmes , especially in the area of education , would accelerate considerably the integration of the Roma .
Finally , I would like to remind you that any nation , no matter how big it might be , is a minority compared to Europe 's 500 million citizens .
( SK ) The protection of minorities is indisputably one of the most important principles , and in my country , the Slovak Republic , a really exceptionally high standard of protection is guaranteed for minorities .
If we are going to talk about ethnic minorities , one can say that this standard is also guaranteed in the form of cultural and educational autonomy , because we have a university for our largest ethnic minority
However , I fundamentally oppose opening a discussion on territorial autonomy , because I consider it to be a very important political and legal issue , and also because I consider it to be , in humanistic terms , quite heartrending ..
It could cause enormous human unhappiness .
The opening of discussions on territorial autonomy would also fundamentally threaten the unity and successful progress of the European Union .
To conclude , Commissioner , since you have spoken of respect - yes , it is entirely appropriate that the majority society should harbour the greatest respect for its minorities , but I think the minorities in a healthily functioning society should have equal respect for that society .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Tabajdi for his excellent work .
It is regrettable that we are not able to conclude our debates with a resolution .
I am firmly convinced that minority rights must become a part of the acquis communautaire .
Unfortunately , the Commission is very reluctant to suggest any measures in this field .
We should remember that minority rights are an integral part of human rights and therefore our standards must be as high as possible .
Let us not forget that respect for , and protection of , minorities is one of the Copenhagen criteria .
The Commission does not even apply the criteria properly during the accession process .
We are ready to make concessions hoping that the situation will improve afterwards , but since the accessions , there are still no tools to address the issue , as Commissioner Barrot pointed out last month .
We have elaborated a common European Union standard in the field of minority rights , and this is an absolute must .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
There are few political territories within the European Union where a double standard is in effect .
The Copenhagen criteria on minority rights apply to accession countries - as we have already heard today - but these same rights do not exist within Community law .
If Europe 's wealth lies in its diverse cultures , and no one wants to see the culture and language of small nations disappear , then ethnic minorities have an even greater need of protection , including legal protection .
In the new Member States , the apparent protection afforded by socialist internationalism has disappeared , and national sentiments have intensified .
In addition , various forms of oppressive nationalism often appear in the new Member States , especially since even the Copenhagen criteria are no longer binding .
We often witnesses the strengthening of assimilationist efforts - allegedly in the minority 's own interest .
Unfortunately , this is a political tool often used by populist parties to turn the majority against the minority .
The establishment of internal legal standards to protect the legal status of minorities is unavoidable .
These standards must follow European best practices , building on the various forms of self-governance that do not need to be unmasked as some sort of political crime , or rejected .
Rather , the principle of subsidiarity should be extended to allow minorities to make decisions with regard to their own affairs .
Perhaps the method of open coordination may be helpful in this regard , until a legal basis is created .
I would put the following question to the Commissioner : would it not be possible to use this option , this method , for providing a solution to the legal status of minorities ?
Finally , I would like to thank Mr Tabajdi for his excellent work in this area .
( RO ) We have , at European level , a coherent set of regulations , criteria and recommendations which guarantee protection for citizens belonging to national minorities and instances of their infringement are fairly rare within the European Union .
Romania has allowed its minorities to enjoy national rights which extend beyond relevant European standards .
Indeed , the presence in this Chamber of Romanian MEPs who are ethnic Hungarians is living proof of this .
It is vital for interethnic harmony in Europe that human rights are respected , but any separatist exploits triggered by the deterioration in ethnic rights must be halted .
The European project is about integration and not about creating enclaves based on ethnic criteria .
I also feel that we should focus more attention on the situation of national minorities in the EU 's neighbouring countries , all the more so when it involves citizens of the same nationality of some of the Member States .
One example of this is the Romanians in Ukraine , Serbia and the Republic of Moldova , who are deprived of basic rights and are subject to an intensive process of denationalisation .
( ES ) Mr President , in the EU there are several cases of languages spoken by historical European groups which cannot be used in debates in this Parliament since they are not recognised as state languages .
This is a loss to representative democracy .
One of these cases is the Basque language , Euskera , which is not a minority language but an official one , at least in the southern area of the Basque Country , which , in administrative terms , is classed as part of the Spanish state .
However , the same is not true - and please do not take this personally , Commissioner - in the northern part of the Basque Country , which is attached to the French state , whose President stated to the United Nations Assembly that to deny respect for national identities and languages is to sow the seeds of humiliation and that , without that respect , there will not be peace in the world .
For all that , neither Euskera nor Corsican , Breton or Occitan are given the slightest official consideration , nor are they given support to ensure their use is respected and encouraged .
That is why I ask the Agency for Fundamental Rights to keep watch and to work to ensure that within Member States , there is no violation of any European people 's right to use its mother tongue and no discrimination against its citizens , and that all native languages are considered official within their respective territories .
( The speaker continued in Basque )
Eskerrik asko jaun-andreok zuen laguntzagatik Europako hizkuntza guztien alde .
Mr President , I welcome this debate , the more so as European history shows that in times of crisis , ethnic tensions can inflame otherwise stable situations .
I would like to believe that the intent of the initiators of this debate is to emphasise the generous core values and realities of the European project , because the realities of the European Union are indeed the best standards in the world for the treatment of minorities .
Therefore , we should say out loud that this Assembly does not , and will not , accept any divisive actions or the lowering of the standards I have just mentioned .
As Commissioner Barrot has underlined , in each individual country of the Union , there is a clear and , more often than not , official legal framework that ensures the protection of our cultural diversity .
Yet , for the sustainability of our multi-ethnic society , is there any alternative to higher education ?
Real-life examples show that solving issues related to education fuels strong Community development .
Education is , by its own nature , unifying rather than divisive .
In fact , it teaches us that we are all someone else 's minority .
The Babeş-Bolyai University in Romania , in the Transylvanian city of Cluj , is an example of a multicultural university that has been cited time and again by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe as a positive example of multicultural and inter-ethnic excellence .
Where the need arises , higher-degree education in the language of minorities is part of the national educational system .
Let me give you the example of Sapientia University in Romania .
These positive examples , however , do not mean that we can take our eye off the ball , and we must be aware that maybe the most challenging issue lies ahead of us : solving the difficult situation of the Roma community throughout Europe .
It is my belief that the most effective way of solving this tremendously difficult European problem in the long term is through education .
I would very much like to see a very substantial debate on how Europe intends to take advantage of our unique educational system so that we remain united in our diversity .
( RO ) The Council of Europe is the institution which deals with respect for human rights .
The rights and protection of minorities come under the remit of Member States , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
Traditional and ethnic minorities , migrant minorities and immigrants must comply with the national legislation of the Member State where they reside .
I believe that the integration of new migrant minorities should not be part of the common policy on immigration which the EU is currently drafting .
This policy can be defined only when the current barriers to the free movement of workers from the Member States which joined the European Union after 2004 disappear within the EU .
The protection of migrant minorities is part of the principles promoted by social Europe .
Providing fair working conditions for all European citizens , no matter what their Member State of origin is , guarantees them a decent living .
As a European socialist , I support the development of a European framework for legal immigration , but I actively advocate , first and foremost , observance of the European Union 's basic principles for all European citizens .
( HU ) Unfortunately , today this draft decision is being put to the Parliament only in the form of a question .
Representatives of traditional national minorities and communities have been trying to persuade the majority through peaceful parliamentary means that what was good for the 14 Member States of the European Union will be good for the entire territory of the EU .
The traditional national minorities found themselves in a new country through no fault of their own , without ever having moved from their centuries-old homelands .
No one asked them whether they wanted to change nationalities or adopt a new official language .
These traditional national minorities are the most loyal citizens of their respective countries .
Despite wars , economic crises , internal political battles and assimilation , they did not abandon their ancestral , longstanding and yet new homeland .
Their loyalty has been unbroken .
It is precisely for this reason that it is incomprehensible that the several dozen million strong populations of large countries should fear a few hundred thousand or , at most , half a million members of a minority .
The various forms of self-governance found in the European Union , such as territorial and cultural autonomy , result from a policy of consensus on the part of the majority and minority , and have not weakened the economic , political or social power of the state in question , or that of the European Union .
My country , Romania , has been in existence in its current form since 1920 .
In 1930 , the population on this territory included 28 % non-Romanians ; today , this has fallen to 10 % .
There are several other Member States besides Romania that have similar concerns .
There are laws and rights , but their implementation cannot be guaranteed , although linguistic , ethnic and regional diversity is a European value .
Therefore , it is important for draft guidelines to be drawn up , based on existing , successful EU examples , that are acceptable to all and do not infringe on the states ' territorial integrity .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to express my pleasure at welcoming Csaba Tabajdi 's initiative intended to improve the situation of minorities living in the European Union .
Although eminent examples prove that national minorities are regarded as a value and an opportunity in the European Union , such as in South Tyrol or the Åland Islands , unfortunately , in Eastern Europe , we come across the opposite attitude as well , sometimes even in presentations by statesmen .
It is precisely for this reason that we urgently need to oppose declarations that would definitively and perpetually rule out the demands of national minorities for autonomy , by referring to the requirements set by the European Union .
We therefore need to speak with determination and declare that national minorities are entitled to autonomy as an exercise of minority rights at Community level , and that we must guarantee these fundamental rights , as well , through the legal system of the European Union .
I therefore fully support the elaboration of a comprehensive regulation for the protection of minority rights at European level . Thank you very much .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today is a very happy occasion and the credit for it , with my thanks , goes in particular to Mr Tabajdi , Chairman of the Intergroup and champion of minorities .
Today I am using the Italian language , which is the language of the State and not my mother tongue .
I do this for a specific reason : a large number of ethnic minorities from various countries and ethnic groups live in Italy .
Today , I want to use this demonstration - as well as the demonstration that an ethnic minority is not an ethnic minority merely for itself but has to experience solidarity - to give to these minorities a voice here in this House .
I also want to tell the Italian minorities who live abroad that they would otherwise not have this possibility .
Mr Barrot spoke today about non-discrimination .
I believe that nondiscrimination is not enough , because we must achieve equal rights and equal rights will come only when we have minority situations and give them considerable help in reaching a level equal to that of the majority .
For this reason , we need positive discrimination in certain situations .
This , I believe , is a new idea , an idea that needs to be pursued .
The European Union has competencies .
By making use of Articles 21 and 22 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and Article 2 of the Treaty of Lisbon - let us hope that these enter into force as soon as possible - together with the Copenhagen criteria , and a small amount of flexibility and legislative imagination , we would be able to achieve a great many things .
I want to mention , in particular , Article 2 of the Treaty of Lisbon on the protection of the rights of individuals - and here , particular thanks go to the former Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Frattini , who made a decisive contribution to its inclusion .
We hope for protection of rights for groups : that is our goal .
Since there are 168 minority groups in the European Union and about 330 on the continent of Europe , 100 million of our fellow citizens on this continent are experiencing this situation .
We in South Tyrol have reached a level that can obviously be improved on , but which is very , very good nonetheless .
When I hear from representatives in this House or Members from majority populations that their minorities are well treated , I am somewhat mistrustful .
I would be happier if the representatives of these minorities said that they were well treated .
We in the European Union need to understand that minorities represent added value , a bridge between cultures , between peoples and countries .
We must work towards unity in cultural diversity .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , the linguistic and cultural diversity that we value as an asset of the European Union often becomes a problem at the level of the Member States , especially in areas where borders have shifted due to the vicissitudes of history , or a minority has become the majority and the majority has become a minority , as in Estonia , my homeland .
In such cases , it is indeed an immense challenge for a single country .
At European Union level , however , it is very important that double standards not be applied .
The Copenhagen criteria , which the previous speakers have already mentioned in several speeches , and which the new acceding states were required to meet , have already been discussed , but we were also very well aware that those same criteria , those same requirements - for instance educational requirements - are not met in many of the old Member States .
It is crucial that all countries be treated in the same manner , and that minimal standards apply to all .
( RO ) First of all , I do not believe that the European Union needs a common policy for minorities .
We owe equal rights to all European citizens , irrespective of their ethnic background .
On the other hand , if those who asked the question being debated really want a European policy on this matter , we can assure them that Romanian legislation , for instance , may be considered as a model of good practice .
Romania perhaps has the most generous and up-to-date legislation on national minorities in Europe .
They enjoy extensive political and social rights , identical to those enjoyed by all citizens .
Minorities of significant size , such as the Hungarians , enjoy the right to education in their mother tongue at every level .
Representatives of the minorities are entitled to seats in parliament , even if they have not obtained the necessary votes .
In fact , the Hungarian minority party , which has been referred to this evening and during yesterday evening 's debates , has formed part of the Romanian Government for 12 of the 19 years since Romania has been operating as a democratic state .
( RO ) Minorities of any kind must be supported , not only in terms of preserving a unique identity , their values , traditions and language , but also for developing their culture .
In my view , Romania , which is a unitary , sovereign state , is a model country in terms of respecting the individual rights of the members of any minority .
I welcome the progress which my fellow Members have made , as well as their constant concern for the protection of ethnic , traditional or national minorities .
This is an obvious and welcome approach .
However , in terms of relations between the majority and minority , I would like to advise you of two aspects : 1 ) I feel that not only members of a minority should be involved in measures of this kind , but majorities must also deal with issues relating to minorities , to the same extent , precisely in order to support and protect what we call ' unity in diversity ' , which is taking place in Romania .
2 ) I appreciate that minorities should equally be concerned about the status of the majorities as these two entities form , but only together , this unitary whole which contributes to the natural development of any society .
( RO ) As part of this debate , I would like to make a comment stating that national minorities make a great deal of fuss because they do not have arguments to support all the rights which they claim .
I would like to launch a slogan for this : ' making a fuss does no good and good makes no fuss ' .
The European Union 's laws cannot only protect minorities and put national communities at a disadvantage because we are allowing positive discrimination .
I would like to give you an example where the reality contradicts the assertions being made .
Some people have claimed that the rights of the Hungarian minorities are not respected in the area of education in Romania and , as my background is in education , I would like to give as an example Romania 's universities , which adhere to European standards for treating minorities .
( RO ) As part of this debate , I would like to highlight the deterioration in respect for the religious rights of the Romanians living in Timoc Valley in Serbia .
We are talking here about a community of more than 100 000 Romanians .
I would like to take the opportunity to express my concern regarding the decision of the town council in the Serbian town of Negotin to demolish the foundations of a Romanian-language Orthodox church , even though the priest , Boian Alexandru , had obtained the necessary approvals .
This would be the second church for Romanians living in Serbia .
For his audacity in constructing the first one , Father Alexandru was given a two-month suspended sentence .
I would like to emphasise that Serbia has undertaken , in accordance with Article 5 of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , to respect human rights and protect ethnic and religious minorities .
I would like to end with an extract from a letter from Father Alexandru , where he expresses the hope that the Serbian authorities will not demolish this church where services will be held in Romanian .
I quote : ' ... to help us , too , to obtain these rights in our country , where we live , Serbia , so that we can at least have our own church and school and be able to speak Romanian . '
Mr President , the European Union has no jurisdiction as far as the status of national minorities in the Member States is concerned .
There is no problem , however , because all European Union Member States are also members of the Council of Europe , an organisation which is well-equipped and well-experienced to address that issue .
To duplicate the activity of the Council of Europe would be detrimental to the scope of our work on minorities and would only create confusion and frustration .
Secondly , I am concerned to see that our approach on minorities places too much emphasis on solutions that were perhaps valid decades and centuries ago .
I believe that in this field , as well , it would be better to develop our imagination more than our memory .
Finally , instead of revisiting fields already explored , the European Union would be better advised to develop a concept of transnational protection of cultural rights in a continent where each ethno-cultural community is a minority as well .
( RO ) In the current worldwide climate of globalisation and freedom of movement , I think that the ideas being expressed here this evening about territorial authority do not make any sense .
I think that there are more than one million Romanians living in Spain and Italy , but I do not see why they would ask for territorial autonomy in these countries .
I believe that setting up a committee or subcommittee at European Parliament level for monitoring the rights of minorities would be an excellent idea and would implement European policy at this level or , ultimately , certain procedures for respecting the rights of minorities .
I do not think that Romania has ever refused a visit from any president from a European state and yet , once again , this is a rumour which has been going round here .
I believe that Romania offers a model of good practice for very many countries in the European Union .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President , the national minorities living on the territory of the European Union enrich the EU .
The European Parliament must take the lead in defending ethnic minorities , by initiating a serious debate on the legal status of minorities .
Parliament must take responsibility for elaborating and adopting a framework regulation that is binding on all Member States .
Such a framework regulation will truly serve the interests of minority communities only if - bearing in mind the principle of subsidiarity - its provisions include the fact that the adoption of various forms of autonomy built on consensus between the majority and minorities is the way to endow minority communities with an appropriate status . Thank you .
( SK ) Yes , minorities must be respected and their rights must be legislatively guaranteed by the EU Member States .
Cultural and linguistic diversity must be preserved , as it is the basis for a healthily functioning Union .
However , we will not allow political groups based on a minority position to push for autonomist interests which often challenge the principle of territorial integrity of states , and which , furthermore , often stem from a sense of injustice due to decisions made in the past .
Territorial autonomy on a national basis and , furthermore , not founded on homogeneity , but often politically abusing the minority status of the majority people in a certain micro-region or in a community , is a threat to peaceful life and coexistence in the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , I have two questions for the Commissioner .
During this debate , many Members and colleagues have spoken of double standards , of unequal obligations on the old and new Member States .
What measures are you taking in respect of the old Members , in other words the 15 Member States who do not comply with the Copenhagen Agreement ?
My second question is about religious minorities , the Jews and Muslims living on our continent , in our Union : what measures are being taken by the Commission to protect their faith , their law and their way of life ?
Mr President , Commissioner , the first question that must be answered is whether or not the issue of national minorities falls exclusively within national powers .
I think not , because if the issue of human rights is not an internal issue for the Member States of the European Union , then neither is the issue of the rights of national minorities .
This , of course , requires clarification .
Yugoslavia was bombed because the rights of Kosovars were infringed , so why do we not make ourselves clear on this issue ?
Secondly , why , prior to accession , was the situation in the new Member States better than it is at present ?
Thirdly , Mr Beazley raised the question of double standards .
It is true that , despite the problems , the situation of the Hungarian community in Romania is better .
There are problems in Romania , but the situation is better than in Alsace or Brittany .
Why are there double standards ?
Fourthly , let us talk about territorial autonomy .
In the Åland Islands of Finland and in South Tyrol in Italy , regional autonomy has really stabilised the country .
In Spain , the system of autonomous regions is a very good example , despite a few Basque extremists who deserve our condemnation .
Finally , Mr President , it has to be said that non-discrimination and equal treatment are insufficient to compensate for the disadvantages of minorities .
At the end of the day , satisfied minorities are factors for stability in the countries of Europe .
As Henrik Lax always says , ' if a policy is carried out properly , it will always pay dividends ' .
That is the reality and I would like to thank you for the debate .
Mr President , I have listened very carefully to everybody 's contributions , and I am touched by the passion that underlies some of these positions .
Mr Tabajdi has just listed a whole raft of problems .
I am well aware that these problems do exist , but I must once again - regretfully , but there is nothing else I can do - remind you that the protection of groups , of national minorities as groups , does not fall within the EU 's sphere of competence , nor even within that of the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
Nevertheless , at my urging , the Agency will look into ethnic and racial discrimination when it updates its 2007 report on racism , but I would reiterate that the treaties grant no jurisdiction in this field : not to the European Union , not to the Commission and not to the Agency .
The open method of coordination has been mentioned , but this method too requires us to have competence .
It is quite clear that , were the Council to alter its position , that might open up other paths but , for the time being , we ourselves are paying special attention to the fight against the discrimination that can particularly affect people from minorities .
We need to make things quite clear here : we do have the tools , at Community level , to combat discrimination .
Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Community has formed the legal basis for two directives : the Directive of 29 June 2000 implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin , and the Directive of 27 November 2000 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation .
From that point of view , therefore , there is indeed a will to combat all forms of discrimination against citizens from minority groups .
On top of that , the Agency for Fundamental Rights is going , at my request , to undertake a very in-depth study into all of these forms of discrimination .
That is as much as I am able to say .
I cannot go any further , because we do not have the legal tools .
The Member States will not allow us to .
Having said that , the position of Roma in the European Union , for example , is indeed deplorable , and their integration is a top priority for both the Union and the Commission , as was reiterated at the first European Roma Summit on 16 September , in which I took part along with Mr Barroso and Mr Špidla .

In the wake of this summit , Mr Špidla is going to establish a European platform on the Roma .
This flexible structure will allow us to rise to the challenges at EU level .
Nevertheless , we do also need to be careful , as , in the Commission 's opinion , an ethnic approach would be counterproductive .
I would like to conclude by saying that I have been touched by what has been said here .
It is quite clear that the real strength of the European Union lies in resolving this problem of conflict between minorities and majorities in a given state , but it is also true that the European Union is currently a federation of national states , which means that it is difficult for us to go any further .
That said , there is nothing to stop countries informally exchanging good practices or best practices .
You have referred to the very good practices in certain of the newer Member States of the Union , and I do not doubt that such good practices can be taken as an inspiration for other similar examples .
That , Mr President , is what I have to say , and I regret that I cannot give you a better response , but I am , after all , obliged to toe the line of what the European Union actually is as it stands .
Even so , I would stress once again that , in the event of discrimination against individuals belonging to a minority group , you can be sure that I will stand absolutely firm , because I have every intention of ensuring respect for this non-discrimination which , I hope , the Charter of Fundamental Rights will institutionalise very strongly following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
No country in contemporary Europe denies the rights of minorities .
Under the EU 's motto ' United in Diversity ' , we are building a multicultural Europe , a Europe in which national minorities coexist with large monolithic states and enjoy their full political rights and citizens ' rights .
It appears that Europe is of one mind on this .
Nowadays , anyone who queries the rights of minorities will certainly not succeed in the world of politics .
The rights of minorities are enshrined in the legal order of individual EU Member States , and also confirmed by many international agreements .
I was therefore amazed by the ruling handed down by the Supreme Administrative Court in Lithuania on 30 January of this year .
According to the ruling , placing signs bearing street names in Polish alongside others bearing street names in Lithuanian contravened the law .
The authorities in the Vilnius region were ordered to remove the signs in the Polish language within a month .
The issue is particularly curious because ethnic Poles account for as much as 70 % of the population in the Vilnius region , and street signs in Polish are to be found almost everywhere .
This has happened despite the fact that Lithuania has committed itself to the European Charter for Local Self-Government and has ratified the 1995 European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities .
Article 11 of the latter provides for the use of minority languages , including on street signs .
It is hard to understand why Lithuania , which has now been a Member State of the EU for five years , is disregarding Union standards and failing to guarantee the rights of minorities on its territory .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I come from an area on the border between Hungary and Romania , in the county of Arad , where problems concerning minorities were overcome a long time ago .
In this area , colleagues and childhood friends who attended primary school and then went on to study at university through Hungarian are still now using Hungarian in the institutions where they work .
I have been chairman of Arad County Council and the Romania West Regional Authority .
In this region , where we have the counties of Arad , Timiş and Bihor in Romania , and Csongrád and Békés in Hungary , Romanians and Hungarians have together completed dozens of joint projects and are currently working on others , all using a single European language to resolve common European problems .
I invite anyone who would like to find out first hand about the Romanian model for resolving minority problems to take a look at the real situation first hand before they express their views at various European forums .
The rights of national minorities in EU Member States constitute an important issue in terms of human rights .
In practice , however , the issue is often exploited in actions aimed at spreading revisionism across Europe and calling borders into question .
The right to use one 's native language and the right to preserve one 's traditional culture and customs are undoubtedly two of the rights that must be protected .
In recent times , there have been frequent cases in Europe when certain minorities have expressed the wish to have specific territories returned to the country with which they have a national allegiance .
This provokes a reaction by the majority .
There have also been cases when minorities numbering several million persons have been ignored and have been refused the status of a minority .
This has happened , for example , to Poles in Germany .
Germany is thereby violating the fundamental rights of minorities .
The case of people who have arrived in our countries from outside Europe is quite different .
Clearly , these individuals have the right to their own culture and language .
They may not , however , create their own special areas to which they transfer the law of their countries of origin .
If they wish to live amongst us , they must be prepared to integrate into our countries and become responsible citizens of the country where they settle .
Voting rights for non-citizens of Latvia in local elections ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on voting rights for ' non-citizens ' of Latvia in local elections , by David Hammerstein , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , Alexandra Dobolyi , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Willy Meyer Pleite , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , and Marian Harkin , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - B6-0007 / 2009 ) .
Mr President , there is a Member State of the European Union that uses the concept of ' non-citizens ' to designate hundreds of thousands of people living in that country .
The vast majority were born in that country , work in that country but nevertheless are given the epithet ' non-citizens ' .
This is an aberration in the European Union .
This is an aberration because the European Union is based on the concept of non-discrimination , on the principle of equality , which today is being negated in that country : it is failing to recognise those people 's rights and is subjecting a group to historical discrimination purely on account of its ethnic origin .
This is not acceptable .
We have examined specific cases in the Committee on Petitions .
The first case was that of a man who came and said ' the first time I was able to vote was when I was studying in Germany .
I was able to vote in German local elections , but in my own country I have not been able to vote because they do not recognise me .
I do not have another passport .
I do not have another country .
I only have this country and I cannot vote . '
That is an aberration .
We have dealt with another case in the Committee on Petitions concerning a man who has passed the language examinations in Latvia , who knows all the laws and who , nonetheless , is not granted citizenship because the state considers that - and I repeat what the Ambassador said to us - ' this man is not loyal to the state ' .
How is that possible ?
How is it possible that this situation affects 20-25 % of the population of a member country of the European Union ?
We ask that people 's fundamental rights be respected and that everyone be made aware of the situation , given that some countries have joined the European Union without fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria .
We also ask that pressure be exerted on the Commission since , up to now , the European Commission has only shown weakness and a total lack of interest or concern .
author . - Mr President , it is sad to observe that today , almost five years after enlargement , there is little evidence of Latvia having demonstrated respect for its largest minority .
The recommendations of the European Parliament and numerous other institutional organisations have been completely ignored .
A large part of Latvia 's population has been alienated from the state and its institutions .
No wonder the naturalisation rate is slow .
Turning people into aliens and issuing them with an alien passport does not inspire in them feelings of being associated with the state .
They do not participate .
They do not take decisions .
They do not vote , not even in those cities where they represent up to 40 % of the population and where political decisions directly affect their lives .
Is this situation good or bad for the European Union ?
This is a question for the Commission and Council .
Democracy cannot flourish without civil society , and there is no civil society without participation .
Participation begins at local community level .
These people were born in the country or have spent most of their lives there , and we are talking about more than 15 % of Latvia 's population , or some 372 000 people .
The EU must take action on their behalf .
Why does the Commission not act on this ?
Citizens of other EU Member States residing in Latvia may vote and stand in municipal and European Parliament elections , but hundreds of thousands of people who were born in the country or have spent most of their lives there do not enjoy this right .
I would like to ask the Commission and the Council what they have done in order to address this issue with the Latvian authorities , and to take further action without any delay .
Mr President , my Group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , did not hesitate to submit this oral question to the Commission when , during several sessions in the Committee on Petitions , we became aware of the situation in which many citizens of Latvia find themselves .
Members of the Commission , Commissioner , it is unacceptable that we are seeing cases of segregated citizens in the European Union in the 21st century .
This does not conform to the European Union , its principles or its values .
In a state that has been part of the European Union since 2004 , with a population of barely 2.5 million inhabitants , there is currently a law in force preventing half a million people , quite simply , from exercising their rights as citizens .
These people are called non-citizens .
They have a black-coloured passport and for that reason , they are called ' blacks ' or ' aubergines ' .
They are even referred to as such by the administration itself , by the State , the government , and they are citizens who do not enjoy their legitimate right to be able to vote or be elected .
We believe , therefore , that the European Commission should exert considerable pressure on the government in order to prevent its failure to observe many recommendations that have been made by various institutions , such as the United Nations Commission on Human Rights , the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination , the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , the Council of Europe Congress of Local and Regional Authorities , the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights and the very recommendation made by this Parliament in the debate on Latvia 's accession , the Resolution of 11 March , in which it was clearly stated that a real solution had to be found to the segregation problem and the issue of those citizens who are required to prove whether they were born before 1940 .
This is , quite simply , unacceptable .
I do not believe it should be tolerated .
We cannot coexist in the European Union while this situation continues and , therefore , we believe it is very important that the Commission , the European Union authorities and all of us put forward proposals in the same vein to put an end to this situation .
To that effect , our group expects the Commission to make concrete proposals on the questions that we raise in this debate .
With regard to language , we are also concerned by the fact that , pursuant to new regulations - and there were student demonstrations last year - 60 % of the curriculum must be taught in Latvian , thereby creating clear discrimination against the Russian language .
I seem to recall that during the Franco dictatorship in my home country of Spain , it was forbidden to speak in Basque , Catalan or Galician .
Those languages were simply banned .
Today , the reality is that they are co-official .
I believe that this is a situation that should also be put in force so that , ultimately , no citizens of the European Union are prevented from expressing themselves in their mother tongue , in their own language , which should share equal official status with any other language that can be used in that state .
I therefore call on the Commission to act dynamically once and for all so as to prevent the segregation that is taking place in that member country of the European Union .

Mr President , on a point of order , Members of this House will have different points of view about the question being debated , but you , as our President , have the right , and indeed the duty , to advise colleagues as to how they may express those views which they have the right to express .
I believe that last statement contained elements which were very close to being defamatory of a government of the European Union .
I take exception to that .
I think , if we look at our Rules of Procedure , the proper conduct of debates in this House does not permit members to use the sort of language to which we have just been subjected .
As I did not interpret the Member 's speech in the manner in which you have just claimed , I did not resort to the powers which are conferred on me under the Rules of Procedure .
( ES ) Mr President , given that I have been mentioned , I stand by each and every one of the words I have spoken .
Mr President , the example of Spain was just raised , but it is , in fact , the Spanish State that has actually dealt with the problem .
The Commission is aware of the specific circumstances in which the Russian-speaking minority in Latvia find themselves .
A great deal of effort was made as part of the pre-accession strategy to promote the naturalisation and integration of these people , in line with the recommendations of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe and of the Council of Europe .
The Commission has repeatedly emphasised that all the parties involved , including the minority themselves , need to contribute to this complex process and to come up with solutions .
With regard to the specific issue of the participation of non-Latvian citizens in local elections , all that the Treaty establishing the European Community guarantees , in terms of electoral rights , is the participation of EU citizens in European and municipal elections in their Member State of residence , even if they are not nationals of that state .
The participation in elections of people who are not nationals of an EU country , and are therefore not EU citizens , is not an issue covered by Community law .
The Commission therefore cannot talk to Latvia regarding the issue of these people 's participation in local elections .
It is up to the Member States to decide such issues .
I do understand the situation depicted by the co-authors of the oral question , but unfortunately , I cannot give them any other answer , so we need to leave it to Latvia itself to take care of this problem , which the Union is not in a legal position to resolve .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , I must remind you that in my small country , Latvia , there are 2.3 million inhabitants , of whom approximately 1.6 million are of Latvian ethnic origin .
Nonetheless , in Latvia , primary education is dispensed by the state and local government in eight minority languages , some of which , such as Romany and Estonian , are very small .
When speaking about Russian-speaking non-citizens , one cannot use the concept of a ' traditional minority ' .
In the sense of Western European countries , they could be said to be newcomers or immigrants who , at the time of the Soviet occupation , arrived in Latvia and enjoyed many privileges .
Firstly , they had the privilege of not learning the language of the land and people they had come to , but of speaking only Russian .
My country has enacted one of the most generous naturalisation laws in Europe , precisely in order to meet those people halfway .
Over the ten-year period that this law has been in force , approximately 50 % of non-citizens have acquired citizenship rights .
When a survey was conducted recently , however , in late 2008 , among people who had not become naturalised , 74 % did not wish to obtain Latvian citizenship .
Secondly , only one third of non-citizens has made use of the right to register as Latvian citizens children born after Latvia regained its independence - just one third .
Why that is , I do not know .
Mrs Ždanoka , who was elected from Latvia and represents Latvian citizens of Russian origin , makes no secret of the fact that after obtaining voting rights for non-citizens , the next step would be to call for Russian to be given the status of a second state or official language .
What does that mean ?
Firstly , it means the retention of privileged status for people who came to Latvia from Russia , and secondly , it would be the signing of a [ death ] sentence for the Latvian language and culture since , behind the Russian speakers , there are 140 million more in Russia , with increasing nationalistic ambitions .
For the Latvian language , it is not possible , as small as we are , as few in number as we are .
Finally , we joined the European Union not in order to retain the divided society created by the Soviet occupation , but in order to overcome it and to retain our own identity . Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner Barrot 's response was very disappointing .
I would have expected a more positive response from him , despite the legal constraints that he operates under .
I thought he might have said that he would do what he could to encourage change in Latvia in the spirit of the European Union 's principle of diversity .
I am from Ireland ; I speak English .
English is my mother tongue , but I am not English : I am Irish .
The reality is that the European Union is made up of many states .
Virtually all our states have minorities and majorities who have histories relating to being part of an empire or to being an empire or a colony .
We have had to deal with that .
If I moved to Latvia and lived and worked there for a while , I would be able to vote in local elections .
However , there are hundreds of thousands of people in Latvia who were born in Latvia but who cannot vote in local elections .
That is an injustice , but - I would tell Mr Pīks - it is also self-destructive because , in order to overcome the difficulties and the fears , we must make all of our people welcome in our states . We must encourage them to participate politically .
Enabling people to vote in local elections would enable them to feel part of their community and part of the management of their own local communities and would help , as I say , to overcome barriers .
One of the largest migrant communities in Ireland is British .
They can all vote in local elections in Ireland .
They cannot all vote in national elections because they do not all hold Irish citizenship , but they all vote in Irish local elections and make a very important contribution to Irish political life .
So I would appeal to those in this House who are from Latvia - and indeed from any other of our Member States that have minority , or even majority , problems - to bear in mind that , in order to overcome these difficulties and to overcome fear , we have to make people welcome and incorporate them into our political process , not keep them out of it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all it must be remembered that after 1945 , as the British , French , Belgians and Dutch streamed out of their colonies , the Russians started to stream into them .
Also in 1949 , when the Geneva Convention prohibited settling civilians in occupied territories , the Russification of Latvia was intensified , and a flow of two million immigrants was organised by the Soviet authorities .
It can therefore be said that , when the Republic of Latvia regained its independence in 1991 , the Soviet-era newcomers were in Latvia illegally .
So the Russians today are being granted citizenship via naturalisation as a humanitarian act by the Latvian Government , and not as a right .
According to the Charter of the United Nations , normally citizenship laws belong to a country 's internal affairs and no other countries can meddle with them , not even the UN itself .
Therefore , the position of the Latvian authorities with regard to the possibility of granting voting rights to non-citizens is firm and unchanged : the right to vote is an integral part of citizenship .
Such a position is also in line with international law and practice .
At the same time , Latvia , with considerable financial help from other countries - with the exception of Russia - has made significant efforts to facilitate the naturalisation process and integration of non-citizens in Latvia , bringing the percentage of non-citizens down to 16 % at the end of 2008 .
Our aim is to ensure that all inhabitants of Latvia can apply for citizenship and enjoy their rights fully and effectively .
Latvia aims to have citizens with full rights , instead of having non-citizens with many rights .
I understand that this position of Latvia contradicts the policy published in the Russian Diplomatic Herald by Mr Karaganov in 1992 , as well as his supporters here in the European Parliament , but we will never give up protecting our country against these disinformation campaigns .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Latvia 's liberal law has allowed anyone to testify to their loyalty to the Latvian state and Western democratic values .
As a result , since 1993 , the number of non-citizens has fallen by 59 % .
The majority of Latvia 's businesses belong to Russian entrepreneurs .
These are arguments that permit us to reject the complaints against the Latvian state .
Additionally , it is worth pointing out the fact that there are people living in Latvia who , as members of the Interfront group , fought against Latvia 's independence , called for the preservation of the evil empire that was the USSR , still deny the fact of Latvia 's occupation , still excuse Soviet totalitarian crimes in the Baltic states , and voted against Latvia 's membership of the European Union and NATO .
It is possible that these convictions on their part are a significant obstacle to any wish to acquire Latvian citizenship .
Let us not therefore prevent them from living in their world of past values !
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , we are discussing the Latvian case precisely because it is unique .
The Latvian non-citizens are not nationals of any state and they have no right to participate in any elections .
All adult bearers of the status of non-citizens of Latvia were permanent residents of the country in the early 1990s .
The last time they had the opportunity to enjoy voting rights was 19 years ago , i.e. in March 1990 , when the Supreme Council of Latvia was elected .
One and a half years later , the very same Supreme Council deprived one third of its own voters of their voting rights .
This is a unique case in parliamentary history .
The Commissioner spoke only of the integration of non-citizens into society and their naturalisation .
However , such an approach puts things into reverse order : non-citizens are already a part of society - 32 % were born locally - and for many , the procedure of applying for citizenship of their own country is humiliating and they do not go through naturalisation on principle .
For the Latvian political elite , depriving this essential part of the minority population of their basic rights is an instrument for preserving power .
They are using the old method of divide and rule and , therefore , action on behalf of Latvia 's non-citizens must be taken by the European Union .
I am convinced that fundamental values of the EU , such as non-discrimination on the grounds of ethnic origin and participatory democracy , must take precedence over national competences .
Mr President , we have heard in this debate how Latvia 's democracy , independence and all the decent norms of society were crushed by the two criminal dictators of the last century .
Latvia was invaded by Stalin , then by Hitler , and then by Stalin again .
The Latvian population was then subjected to imprisonment , deportations and executions .
Stalin then imported not only Russian speakers , but Ukrainian speakers and Belarussian speakers .
All of us , including Mrs Ždanoka , would condemn Stalin and his works today , but what do we do about it , Commissioner ?
Would you now publicly affirm , not only that you have no juridical right to make an intervention , but that all Member States of the Union should respect their full legal requirements as far as electoral law is concerned ?
I think that is important , not just for Latvia , but for all our countries .
Surely the answer is that if you feel strongly about this , like those many Russian-speaking Latvians who have taken citizenship , you should take the citizenship of the country of which you are proud , where you were born and where you live .
Do not reject it .
Do not ask for privileges if you do not want to play your part .
You can take citizenship .
There was a Palestinian exile who took Latvian citizenship .
If he could learn the language , I am sure that those Russian-speaking Latvians can do the same .
Of course we are reminded that the great majority have taken citizenship .
If you are part of a country , I think you have rights and duties .
( HU ) I wish to congratulate Alexandra Dobolyi and her fellow authors .
This is one of the most serious human rights issues in the European Union today .
I understand all the historical injuries of our Latvian friends , since they were subjected to terrible assimilation during the Stalinist Soviet era .
I am well acquainted with the practice , but nothing can justify historical revenge .
I would advise my Latvian friends to follow the example of Finland , which was oppressed by Sweden for centuries , and yet Finland never took revenge on Swedish-speaking Finnish citizens .
It is impossible either to deport or to assimilate several hundred thousand people , and so they must be given their EU rights .
I am very much saddened by Commissioner Barrot 's words , because instead of the EU giving a clear sign that the situation is untenable and contrary to fundamental EU values , Mr Barrot throws up his hands and says that the European Union can do nothing .
Well , that is quite sad .
A historical compromise must be found between the Latvian majority and the Russian minority .
This is the only solution , there is no other . Thank you for your attention .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , last autumn I put a written question to Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , expressing fears that the privilege given by Russia to non-citizens from Latvia and Estonia of entering Russia without visas had had a negative effect on their desire to become citizens .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner agreed with me , but today certain members - authors of questions - are displaying a total lack of understanding of Latvia 's situation .
If we add yet further to the rights of non-citizens , and include the right to vote in local elections , the number of non-citizens , which has halved since 1995 , will , in all probability , not fall any more .
Latvia 's citizenship law is one of the most generous in Europe .
Any non-citizen can acquire full rights , including the right to vote , by becoming a citizen .
Latvia 's non-citizens have come about as the direct result of the 50-year-long Soviet occupation .
Certain political forces , which support the Kremlin 's so-called compatriot protection policy , are still manoeuvring , through these people , for an increase in their own political capital . Thank you .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , the extent to which this debate interests the authors of the question can be seen from the fact that not one of them is in the Chamber any more , and so they will not have heard what Inese Vaidere has just said - that Russia 's real visa policy was a weapon it used not to foster the naturalisation process in Latvia , but to achieve quite the opposite .
Unfortunately , public opinion surveys confirm that the majority of these people will never become Latvian patriots , but the majority of them are already patriots of another country .
If they were to obtain power in local government , the next step would be , of course , demands for autonomy and for official status for their language .
We can already see what the next steps could be , as shown by the development of the long-term situation in such places as Abkhazia and Southern Ossetia - Russian passports would be handed out in these self-governing areas .
Thank you .
( LT ) Under normal circumstances , it would be possible to propose that permanent residents participate in local council elections , but we know all too well that the majority of Latvia 's non-citizens could hardly be described as having arrived in the country under normal circumstances .
Their arrival is a direct consequence of the occupation of Latvia implemented by the Soviet Union .
It is also the result of the Russification process carried out over five decades , violating the norms of international law .
We all have the right to choose - to be citizens or to be loyal to our state , do we not ?
However , every choice also has its consequences and for that reason we can only blame ourselves , not the state which granted that freedom of choice .
( SV ) What are the consequences for the Latvian people of fifty years of Soviet occupation ?
Why does a large proportion of the Russian-speaking population not want to apply for citizenship ?
What is Russia 's part in all this ?
Latvia needs our support , not our condemnation , in order to be able to encourage its non-citizens to apply for citizenship .
To Mr Tabajdi , I would like to ask this question : why would Finland want revenge on Sweden and what does that have to do with this issue ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is normal for people in Europe to undergo compulsory schooling .
This involves becoming familiar with the customs and the culture of the country in which you live , so that you are able to live there .
Compulsory schooling involves learning the language of the country and possibly other languages .
It also forms the basis for vocational training and shows how the culture of the country has developed and where it is heading .
In addition , students learn about history .
Compulsory schooling , as we understand it , helps people to live together in harmony .
If you live in a country , it is clear that you must also be able to understand the language of the country .
This is the purpose served by a good compulsory schooling system .
Against this background , I would like to say that many of the problems in Europe could be solved by the efficient provision of compulsory schooling for all the residents of a country .
Mr President , I have listened carefully to both sides .
It is very difficult , in this context , for the Commission to take over from the Latvian State to deal with this problem .
All I can do in this situation is encourage them to undertake an internal dialogue , which I think would be desirable .
Unfortunately , that is all I can say .
The debate is closed .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10 : 55 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
2050 : The future begins today - Recommendations for the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change ( debate )
- The next item is the report by Mr Florenz on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change on 2050 : the future begins today - recommendations for the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would , in particular , like to say good morning to my fellow Members who have been working for months on this climate report .
I am very grateful to you for the fair and cooperative way in which you have worked with me to put together this report .
The procedure in a horizontal committee was new .
We did not have discussions with experts in a group , but with people from the transport sector , and , quite rightly , with people from the economic sector and , of course , also with people from the energy sector .
It was quite clear during this process that the first hours and days of the debate were somewhat tougher because this was new subject matter .
At this point , I would like once again to thank our Chairman and my good friend , Mr Sacconi , who always presided in an excellent and fair manner .
Today 's achievement , which we have noted , is essentially that this horizontal cooperation presents a great opportunity , and with the next composition of Parliament we ought to make sure that people talk to each other more and that we do not just have individual groups opposing each other .
That has been the greatest advantage of this committee .
We had invited quite high-level experts such as Nobel Peace Prize winner Rajendra Pachauri , and experts in science , research and , of course , politics .
Finally today we have an outcome in hand which shows us that the report has proved to be very positive .
We know very well that prohibitions , sanctions and doing without achieve very little .
Instead , we must encourage changes in awareness as well as innovation and motivation .
Our aim must be for the engineers of Europe to get up each morning and take pleasure in trying to build machines that work more efficiently in this world in order to utilise our children 's raw materials better and considerably more efficiently .
The report is also honest .
We have stated that we do not have any super weapons .
There is no switch that we can flick , not in Brussels nor in Bali nor in Poland in December ; instead we have a whole host of measures .
This is precisely where the opportunity lies : the opportunity to make it clear to the people that they themselves are responsible for a third of this climate change , for example as a result of them heating their houses .
As citizens , however , we are all responsible for a third , including as a result of mobility and all that entails , and industry is also responsible for a third .
The report is therefore directed at us all .
That is the wonderful thing about it .
We do not need to look for a villain ; we are all urged to take part in innovative discussions .
I am particularly pleased about that .
It is also clear that this report is evenly balanced , and I would like to emphasise that once again , because it does not represent any party programmes .
Nor does it disparage any area .
Instead , we point out that in certain areas there are more opportunities , whereas in other areas we have fewer opportunities .
For that reason , the report also states that it ultimately points the way and indicates the way forward - particularly for Europe , as in Europe we have a vast amount of environmental technology , the volume of which is comparable with the European car industry .
The amount will increase , and we must work on this to bring about innovation .
I just said that we should involve our citizens so that they can do something in their own houses .
In this connection , local politics , chambers of commerce and industry and trade associations can achieve a considerable amount in terms of motivation and the provision of information .
Let me conclude by saying that the many benefits that we have demonstrated in this report should make us realise that the opportunities lie in innovation and not in depression .
If we understand that , then this task has been worthwhile .
- Thank you very much for the work that you have carried out Mr Florenz , and for your report .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , it is a pleasure to be here and share with you some thoughts on the important year ahead .
Firstly , let me congratulate the Temporary Committee on Climate Change for all the work it has accomplished since its creation in April 2007 : hearings , conferences , reports , resolutions , exchanges with third parties .
Its tireless efforts have greatly contributed towards shaping the EU position on climate change .
The latest resolution , ' 2050 : The future begins today - Recommendations for the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change ' , which was adopted by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change on 2 December 2008 , and which you will adopt at this part-session , will again provide a very useful basis when discussing the options for a post-2012 climate agreement and for further deepening the EU 's climate policies .
As you know , the work during the Presidency will focus on the international negotiation process .
By the way , I am leaving Strasbourg today and flying to Delhi to have discussions with the Indian Government and Indian representatives .
Two weeks later we have an EU-Africa meeting in Nairobi , Kenya , and we have already made contact with the US Administration , which I will mention later .
By adopting the climate and environment legislative package at the end of 2008 , the EU is sending a very strong political signal to all our partners in the world .
With the adoption of this package in a few months ' time , the EU will demonstrate that its commitment , as well as its leadership , in the global fight against climate change is as strong as ever .
Indeed , the EU will be the first region in the world to commit unilaterally to a reduction of its greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % by 2020 .
As you know , the climate and energy package will , as of 2013 , enable the reform of the EU-ETS ( Emissions Trading Scheme ) , set limits for the emissions outside the Emissions Trading Scheme , stimulate CO2 capture and storage technology , as well as boost the deployment of renewables .
As far as the ETS is concerned , a single EU cap with a linear downwards trajectory will be set , auctioning will be gradually introduced as the method of allocating allowances and monitoring reporting , and verification will be strengthened .
But , of course , the EU has repeatedly said that it will not settle for 20 % - we want to go for 30 % - and , therefore , we hope for an ambitious global and comprehensive agreement in Copenhagen .
The Copenhagen Conference is now only 10 months away .
The December 2008 Poznań Climate Conference agreed on a work programme for 2009 , with clearly identified steps towards Copenhagen .
The decision in Poznań on the operationalisation of the Adaptation Fund represents an important step forward in the negotiations on the financing building block - one of the key elements of any comprehensive global agreement .
The ministerial round table in Poznań also confirmed the shared willingness of both the developed and the developing countries to find an effective globally agreed response to dangerous climate change for the post-2012 period .
This encompasses further mitigation efforts , adaptation actions and finance and technology means to make that response operational .
Poznań has also sent the message that the current financial crisis is not to be seen as an obstacle to further action on climate change , but , instead , as yet another opportunity for profoundly transforming our economic system and moving firmly towards a low-carbon economy .
The Czech Presidency intends to build on such important achievements and to pursue efforts at international level towards a successful agreement in Copenhagen in December 2009 .
On 2 March 2009 , the Environment Council , and later the ECOFIN Council and the spring European Council , will be the first opportunities for further developing the EU position in this respect , on the basis of the Commission communication towards a comprehensive climate change agreement in Copenhagen , which we received a week ago , and on the basis of your input .
In addition to the shared vision for long-term action for mitigation technology and adaptation , the identification of appropriate means for financing effective and long-term climate policies will be key in future EU deliberations .
In this context , I can only reiterate the Climate Change Committee 's call on the Commission and the Member States ' to adopt , at bilateral level in the negotiations towards a post-2012 agreement , a mediating role between the positions of developed countries , in order to ensure by means of a balance of interest the success of the climate negotiations involving all major greenhouse gas emitters ' .
The EU will also continue to engage in active outreach with key negotiating partners and main emerging economies , but also with a new US Administration .
I have spoken on the phone to Carol Browner , the President 's assistant for energy and climate change .
I have made a preliminary proposal to her for a high-level meeting with US representatives and the EU Commission - Commissioner Dimas - the Czech Presidency and the upcoming Swedish Presidency ( i.e. the Troika ) in early March , probably 2 or 6 March .
I said that the EU would like to work as closely as possible with the United States on the evolution and linkage of carbon markets .
We gather that Congressman Waxman has indicated that he will try to get the legislation from his committee on the cap-and-trade system to be implemented at the end of May .
This is quite an encouraging response from the United States as a reaction to the activities of the European Union .
We also count on the European Parliament to ensure that the EU voice is more widely heard , and we appreciate very much the outreach efforts that you have made in the past .
I can only encourage you to continue along this path and wish you all good luck for the year ahead .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , honourable members of the European Parliament , the final report by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change for which Mr Florenz acted as rapporteur has ambitious targets and covers a broad spectrum of issues , thereby confirming the considerable importance that the European Parliament attaches to the question of climate change .
I should like to congratulate the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , on their exceptional work .
Last year , our priority was the package of measures on climate change and energy .
Our efforts bore fruit and we can now be proud of this very important package of legislative acts .
This year , we shall be focusing in particular within the European Union on preparing the implementation measures for this package .
At international level , our priority will be negotiations on climate change , which will be stepped up in the run-up to the United Nations conference in Copenhagen and , as you have just heard , the Czech Presidency attaches great importance to these negotiations and has planned a series of bilateral and multilateral meetings and negotiations .
Your report has therefore come along at the right time .
In the run-up to Copenhagen we must muster all our forces and work together so that , given the particular role of Europe , we will achieve the best possible result .
I am delighted that your report , in keeping with the Commission 's analysis , emphasises that the economic and financial crisis should not be used as an excuse to delay action to deal with climate change .
We also agree that taking action to deal with climate change forms part of the solution to the economic crisis we face today .
With the package of measures on climate change and energy , Europe is now moving on the track of an economy of low carbon dioxide emissions .
At the same time , it will help to restrict Europe 's dependency on imported energy , which is an equally important benefit , as we saw recently with the natural gas crisis .
By implementing the target of reducing emissions of greenhouse gases by 20 % or by 30 % , and provided that the other developed countries accept such reductions within the framework of the international agreement , we shall without doubt be in the most ambitious position of any other country or group of countries .
We are setting an example to the rest of the world , which will give a positive dynamic to the international negotiations .
Before we focus our debate on the international negotiations , I should like to comment briefly on an issue which was very rightly highlighted in the report .
The report contains valuable proposals on what has to be done in order to make more efficient and effective use of natural resources , in order to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and save energy .
Last year , the Commission made an initial step in this direction by approving the action plan on sustainable production and consumption .
More recently , with measures to complement the package of measures on climate change and energy , it strengthened action to save and make more efficient use of energy .
Be that as it may , a great deal still needs to be done in the field of the sustainable use of natural resources and , of course , there is still huge potential for making more efficient use of energy .
One illustrative example is the proposal which the Commission tabled recently on the energy efficiency of buildings .
This is a sector for multiple targeting as it has significant benefits in terms both of energy savings and climate protection , while at the same time creating employment and contributing to the development of technological innovation .
Today , more than ever , we need to tone up and strengthen our economies by taking measures to speed up the adoption and use of clean technologies which will help to create clean jobs .
At the same time , important opportunities will be created for our foreign trade as markets for clean technologies rapidly expand .
With this in mind , last December the Commission proposed , among other things , specific actions within the framework of the European Economic Recovery Plan .
As far as international negotiations on climate change are concerned , the package of measures on climate change and energy has without doubt strengthened our arguments and efforts to persuade our international partners that taking effective measures is not only necessary but also feasible .
Of course , there is no doubt that the international negotiations will be very difficult , due in part to the fact that they are so complex .
Nonetheless , I believe that agreement will be reached in Copenhagen .
We can and must reach an agreement .
There is no time to lose .
It is a question of political will and I think that the will exists .
Now , as the international negotiations start to intensify , last week the Commission adopted a communication which includes its positions on the most important points of the negotiations .
First of all , it is the developed countries which are being called upon to continue to play a leading role .
Positive messages are coming from the United States because , as the Czech minister mentioned earlier , President Obama has promised that the USA will be actively involved in the international negotiations .
He has also announced that there will be a greenhouse gas trading scheme in the United States and that there will be reductions of 80 % by 2050 compared with 1990 .
All this is positive , but we want to see it put into practice quickly , in fact this year , because we need to reach an agreement in Copenhagen at the end of this year and the United States have a debt and , based on what President Obama has announced , they will need to make a decisive contribution , together with the European Union , so that we can all reach agreement in Copenhagen .
Of course we welcome the debate under way within the United States , which will result in various other decisive measures being taken to combat climate change .
One illustrative element is the measures announced recently for cars .
The communication by the European Commission confirms the target to reduce emissions by 30 % collectively in the developed countries and defines the concept of comparability of effort .
Comparability will be of decisive importance both in achieving the environmental targets and in safeguarding fair terms of competition .
The Commission has proposed a series of criteria for defining comparability .
As far as developing countries are concerned , although efforts of similar type and scope to those of developed countries are not required , it is nonetheless important to ensure that they will continue to take action so that the economic development which they need will be less carbon dioxide-intensive .
In order to achieve the objective of not exceeding 2 degrees Celsius in 2050 , developing countries will need to limit the rate of increase in their emissions by 15 % to 30 % below those which they would otherwise have recorded had they made no effort to reduce up to 2020 .
Of course , the effort which will need to be made by each developing country separately will depend on their level of economic development and their resources .
This means that we shall obviously be expecting more from the rapidly developing economies than from the others .
We all know that we shall not achieve the results we want in Copenhagen if we do not manage to increase investments and safeguard greater funding for reductions in emissions and adapt .
Of course , one portion of the investments needed , even in developing countries , will come from the private sector within the various countries , while approximately one-third , according to the Commission 's estimates , will come from the carbon dioxide market .
Furthermore , one part needs to be public funding and we must examine ways of securing these public funds .
Today , in the midst of a recession , this will not be an easy debate .
We must nonetheless be prepared and must put forward arguments for this debate , bearing in mind that the cost of doing nothing will be much higher than the cost of any measures .
Finally , the Commission communication stresses the importance of a global carbon dioxide market and the creation , between the countries of the OECD , of compatible trading systems by 2015 , while for the economically more advanced developing countries it is proposed that this should happen at a later date before 2020 .
These are the main messages in the Commission communication and I shall be most interested to hear your views on them .
International negotiations will proceed apace and intense diplomatic work will be needed on our part this year .
I welcome your contribution to this major effort .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SL ) Climate change is a vast field and I would agree with the rapporteur when he says that we , members of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , had to find innovative means in order to encompass the full breadth and content of this field .
However , now that our work is done , I can confirm that we have , indeed , had ample opportunity to exchange many different views and opinions and to put forward various proposals for future action .
Our discussions were quite dynamic at times , precisely because of the diversity of the views expressed .
As a result , the report represents a broad spectrum of opinion and offers many good proposals , but it also enables us to coordinate our continued work in the permanent committees , as regards formulating various sectoral policies .
Personally , I think that it would be a good idea if we pursued this particular methodology .
Certainly , the fields we mentioned previously , such as energy , transport and industry , proved to offer the greatest opportunities for action , but other fields proved important , too , and here I allude to agriculture , cattle breeding , sustainable forestry , information and communication technologies and the EU 's development policy concerning third countries .
Our transition to a low-carbon society will , of course , be possible if we continue to invest in research and to quicken the pace of development and innovation , and if we pursue the other objectives defined in the Lisbon Strategy .
However , that alone will not be enough .
We also have to change our lifestyles , but we will only be able to do so if people embrace environmental protection as a genuine value .
In this regard , we need to achieve much more when it comes to information campaigns and awareness raising .
I also agree with the comments made about the correlation between the financial crisis and climate change .
However , even this presents us with an opportunity and fears that climate change might have to take second place to the financial crisis are unjustified , because our measures for reviving the economy need to be designed in such a way as to promote sustainable development , not just consumer spending .
Since our objective is to limit global temperature increases , we also need to work internationally , of course .
Here , Europe must establish and deepen its dialogue with the developed countries , because we have to reduce and eliminate the burden of our historic emissions together , while at the same time listening to developing nations and the poorest countries and enabling them to espouse sustainable development , even if it carries a higher price tag .
In conclusion , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz , on the openness he has shown in our work .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) I should first of all like to offer Mr Florenz my heartfelt thanks for the sheer dedication and resolve with which he has written his report .
It has , in my view , become an all-encompassing report with nearly 200 recommendations , and really worthwhile .
It contains many sound recommendations that can be a source of inspiration to the next Parliament , the national parliaments and local authorities .
I would like to mention five core themes that are really essential for our group .
First of all , this report recognises that climate change is comprehensive , affecting , as it does , all sectors , not just industry , transport and energy , for which we have already established rules , but also agriculture , health , science and technology , ICT , education , soil , water and land use .
All these areas deserve our full attention and an effective solution .
Secondly , climate policy should also have a social dimension and should show solidarity .
We need to address employment , income aspects and energy poverty .
We need to know how new technology will be paid for , and who will bear that cost .
We want to know how many jobs will be created and whether any jobs will be lost .
We want retraining programmes for the new green poll workers .
Without maximum social dedication , it is extremely difficult to maintain political support for climate policy .
Our third core theme is related to the economic crisis , where we once again need a comprehensive solution .
The Green New Deal has now become a concept , and one that receives our wholehearted support .
Considerable investments are needed .
Interventions to support banks and businesses should at least have a sustainable component .
Investments in houses and blocks of flats in Eastern Europe should be given greater priority , as these will be to the benefit of employment , energy security and the climate .
Our fourth core theme is agriculture .
This is usually not something we discuss when we talk about the climate .
Today , we demonstrate that it is , in fact , necessary , and it proved to be a controversial topic .
We have long discussed the question of whether agriculture should have binding targets , and we are agreed that we should consider this seriously .
What is also clear is that agriculture does not only pose a problem , it also offers solutions .
Sound agriculture , effective land use and an appropriate use of biomass can help reduce greenhouse gases .
Our fifth core theme , finally , is about involving people .
This requires the provision of information and transparency .
If we want to change our consumption behaviour , we need to know exactly which products produce high levels of greenhouse gases and we may have to adapt our consumption patterns accordingly .
This is not easy , of course , but the problem of climate change - as Mr Florenz pointed out a moment ago - cannot be solved with a few technical tricks .
We will , at any rate , need to try our best to involve as many people as possible in the major challenges we are facing .
Local initiatives are very valuable in this regard .
Free energy audits for houses , better public transport and local and regional food production .
Together , we can achieve a great deal .
With this set of measures , there is also reason for optimism .
Greenhouse gases can be reduced , which contributes to innovation , economic growth , better energy supply , better food production , more employment and a more stable climate .
I am indebted to all fellow Members who have made a contribution to this .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , an elephant lurks in the wings of this debate that we seem reluctant to identify .
There is virtually no reference to it in this report and only a passing mention in the Commission 's comprehensive strategy for achieving a climate change agreement in Copenhagen .
It is the fact that human population is growing at unprecedented and unsustainable levels .
In the lifetimes of many of us here , population on this planet will have trebled .
It continues to grow at the rate of 200 000 every day : 80 million a year .
Why does China need a new coal-fired power station every week ?
Because its population has more than doubled in 50 years , it is continuing to grow fast , demand for energy grows with it , and Chinese people want what we have in the West , and they have every right to that .
The Minister is flying to India today .
Population growth is even faster there and again they are turning to coal for energy .
But this planet has finite resources .
We need to slow and reverse our population growth .
We must do so entirely through non-coercive means , and we must never arrogantly forget that those of us in the developed countries contribute vastly more to climate change than those in developing countries .
The UN population fund says that 380 women in the world become pregnant every minute of the day , and half of that number do not plan to do so .
Contraception must be available for all .
Women must have control over their reproductive lives : it is so preferable to the alternative of unsafe abortion .
Medical resources need improvements so that women can safely delay giving birth until a later age , but above all the issue must be on the political agenda .
Our refusal to place it there is the greatest folly .
Families everywhere should be talking about this .
Governments should be setting targets for population stability or reduction .
Admitting the central importance of population growth is key to addressing it , and we will not succeed in tackling climate change or achieving sustainable development if we fail to do so .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would also like to compliment Mr Florenz on his effort and commitment in producing this report and , of course , on his ability to listen to , and understand , the many varied and different opinions .
As legislators , it is paramount , in the midst of a massive economic downturn , that we work on results for green energy technology .
We can become world leaders in our diverse renewable energy fields , which should create a tight , effective and coordinated strategy - including governments , NGOs , academia , business , forward-thinkers - seeking not to talk but to solve .
We need to reduce bureaucracy and support SMEs and technology developers .
The market is there .
The regulatory framework is clear .
We have set the targets for renewable energy .
Although funding is scarce , it is crucial to technology development and to maintaining expertise .
Banks and funders will have to take risks on green technology start-ups .
There will be long-term gain if we step up to the mark .
The jobs and wealth will flow .
If , on the other hand , we dilly-dally during this precious time , we will lose out and other countries will be only too ready to fill the gap .
For example , Ireland could become to ocean wave technology what Finland is to mobile phone technology .
We have the undisputed potential due to weather and location in the Atlantic .
We have the technology patented .
We have the expertise in situ and we have the legal target framework .
The market is clear , so it is a magnificent opportunity for job creation , electricity price reduction , energy security and carbon emission reduction , not to mention patent revenues .
We now need to get behind our companies , who have been working for over a decade to come to this point .
They have taken the risks , and we need to support them through increased funding .
Delays at this point would be detrimental .
Green technology is our future .
We have the opportunity now , so let us use it .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would also like to thank Mr Florenz , in particular for his patience in the negotiations .
The length of the report is evidence of the huge number of issues there were to deal with .
However , I would also like to pose the question of how sustainable the agreement is that is now being signalled at the beginning of this year by this report .
I remember the International Climate Conference in Poznań very well and the very weak role that the Europeans played there , because they were preoccupied with adjusting downwards their ambitious promises and ambitious statements from the international round of negotiations in Bali and , in view of the emerging financial and economic crisis , they were busy relegating climate policy to a lower priority .
I believe that the next year will be decisive as regards the question of whether we really are prepared , as we currently keep promising , to adjust the type of economy to which we in the industrial nations have become accustomed on the basis of our knowledge of climate change .
I believe that the decision as to whether or not we will go down the road of sustainability has not yet been made .
In Poznań , Ban Ki-Moon and Achim Steiner recommended very strongly that all measures taken by the Member States in their economic stimulus plans and their bank rescue packages now be combined with programmes to combat poverty in developing countries and the dreadful consequences of climate change in developing countries , and also with measures for a really ambitious level of climate protection and a new energy policy .
I can see that any legislation at European level relating to this issue will be establishing new ground .
It is by no means certain that Europe will find its way along the road to a modern society of energy efficiency and renewable energies .
Now , as before , it all rests on the decision : do we carry on with the old mix of coal and nuclear energy or do we take ambitious new paths ?
I hope that we continue to address this issue as constructively as we have done in the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , although I am not certain that that will happen .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Finally , we are to take a decision on this climate resolution , after more than eighteen months of work .
I would like to mention three things in particular .
The long-term reduction targets : in paragraph 3 , we demand emissions reductions in the EU of between 25 % and 40 % by 2020 and at least 80 % by 2050 .
This is a good thing and it means that we are setting higher requirements than those in last year 's EU climate package .
We are also demanding measures to be taken in respect of the meat industry .
According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) report , Livestock 's long shadow , the meat industry is responsible for 18 % of the world 's emissions .
This is something we take note of in this report and we demand a reduction in the consumption of meat .
This is a bold and , to an extent , historic decision by this Parliament , which usually prefers to support subsidies for this industry , but it is a shame that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , in particular , want to vote to remove these requirements .
In the same way that we need to reduce motoring , we also ought to dare to say that the current soaring meat consumption is not sustainable .
Allow me also to remind you that the meat industry is , in fact , the primary cause of the destruction of the Amazon rainforest as a result of the creation both of grazing land for animals and land for the production of feed .
A large proportion of this feed is exported to Europe as soya .
This is not sustainable .
The car industry is another growing problem .
Between 1990 and 2005 , emissions from the European transport industry increased by 32 % .
A huge investment in public transport and other environmentally-friendly transport is needed .
Cars using fossil fuels must be replaced by electric cars and perhaps , in future , also by hydrogen-powered vehicles .
We need to ask ourselves whether the situation with all these forms of transport is sustainable .
Should we not encourage local production and consumption instead ?
Finally , I would like to issue a warning with regard to Amendments 12 and 28 , which demand an increase in nuclear energy .
If they are adopted , my group will be unable to support this resolution .
Therefore , please vote against Amendments 12 and 28 . Thank you very much .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Given that a large part of Western Europe is in the grip of a very cold spell right now , a debate on global warming is perhaps a little ill-timed .
As the title of the report suggests , however , we are looking at the long term in this debate .
We should not , therefore , get too bogged down by short-term events .
Mr Florenz 's final report has turned out to be well thought-out and sound , and sends out a strong message .
To reduce or prevent the negative effects of climate change , tough action is needed across a wide area .
We need tough goals for the period between 2020 and 2050 .
Not one section of society should escape making efforts .
In the run-up to the climate conference in Copenhagen , we will need to maintain our ambition , backed up by a wide range of measures .
This report makes a particularly valuable contribution towards this .
- Mr President , 500 years ago there was a consensus amongst learned men that the world was flat .
They were wrong .
In the 1970s , after three decades of global cooling , there was a consensus amongst scientists that we were facing a new ice age .
They were wrong .
In 1999 , everybody believed that the millennium bug would create a global disaster by closing down computer systems across the world .
Weapon systems would fail , commerce would stop , aircraft would fall out of the sky .
They were wrong .
Nothing at all happened .
Today we are told there is a consensus around catastrophic man-made global warming .
It , too , is wrong .
Nor is it a consensus .
The myth of consensus is a propaganda triumph for the alarmists , but repeated surveys both of the scientific literature and of working climate scientists show a wide range of views on both sides of the debate , with many believing that the jury is still out .
It is true that the world has warmed slightly , although slowly and intermittently , over the last 150 years , but this is entirely consistent with well-established long-term natural climate cycles that gave us the Roman Optimum , the Medieval Warm Period and the Little Ice Age .
There is clear evidence that , while the world has warmed slightly , other bodies in the solar system have also warmed .
Ice caps have shrunk on Mars , yet nobody imagines that industrial emissions or 4x4s are to blame .
We are now planning to spend unimaginable sums of money on mitigation measures which simply will not work and which , by damaging our economies , will deny us the funds we need to address real environmental problems .
As a British journalist , Christopher Booker , has remarked , global warming alarmism is the greatest collective flight from reality in human history .
( ES ) Mr President , firstly I would like to thank Mr Florenz for his work , and , of course , the chairman of the committee and all the coordinators and members of the committee as well .
This report is a further expression of what has become a permanent concern of the European Union , namely climate change and its consequences .
The latest set of measures was the recently approved energy package .
The report that we are discussing today reflects that same approach to combating climate change and that same concern shown by the European Union .
The report that we have before us is , as has already been said , a set of recommendations .
It is a comprehensive suite of different measures and recommendations which in turn contain different ' road maps ' for various sectors , including fisheries , agriculture , water , forestry and so on .
All of these ' road maps ' lead in the same direction , but measures will have to be developed for each .
However , I shall confine myself to what I think is the basic principle required in order to have an effect .
Faced with climate change , we have to improve efficiency ; this , in my view , has to be the basic principle behind all the measures that are taken .
To make improvements in efficiency means giving priority to technological innovation ; it means highlighting efficiency targets when awarding aid and subsidies ; it means emphasising efficiency targets when granting certain fiscal advantages , and so on .
The only way we can be really effective is to improve efficiency .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , those Members who have spoken before me have demonstrated well how we have managed to bring together very diverse opinions , which have been merged into a common draft .
The Florenz report , which deserves recognition for its success in achieving this consensus by listening carefully to all points of view , is ultimately about energy reconversion and general change in production systems , lifestyles and consumption .
It is more than just a philosophical statement and we know that it will not be an easy ride , but it envisages rapprochement in stages .
For example , there are indications in the legacy that we are leaving to the next Parliament of what we believe should be the priorities for action in the next parliamentary term , in the run-up to Copenhagen and beyond .
I would , however , like to focus on the content .
I feel it is my duty first and foremost to thank the key player in this work , the secretariat .
I have here some statistics on our work .
To give you an idea of how important their job was , I need only say that they organised eight thematic sessions with sixty of the world 's leading experts .
Now , most importantly , I should like to make an appeal , that is express my hopes , for the new Parliament .
President Pöttering , you yourself demonstrated your belief that the gamble of this committee would pay off - even though , if the truth be told , it did not find favour with everyone in this Parliament when it was created 18 months ago .
You appealed to the House on two separate occasions , illustrating your personal support for this subject and for our task , and so I will address you directly , if you will allow me .
It would be a shame if the next Parliament did not create a similar instrument in the next parliamentary term , not least because in the meantime many national parliaments and governments have restructured their work , with climate change as a specific field .
Therefore , I hope that the next Parliament will not go back to strict compartmentalisation , where connected areas are separated into different committees , but that , as we have recommended , it will prepare itself for the long ride to a lower carbon economy .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Florenz for his work .
At last we are to vote on this report , which represents 18 months of work by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
I personally would argue that it is a success , if only a modest one .
A success because Parliament has shown itself to be one of the most responsive institutions , equipping itself with an ad hoc instrument - the Temporary Committee - to gather data and ideas on a question that affects us all and the impact of which we must face together , both now and in the future .
A modest one because , despite all our efforts and the quality of participation and studies carried out , the result still lacks the bite that a resolution on this topic ought to have .
Climate change , as I have said many times , is an urgent and serious matter and requires targeted and effective instruments .
Our key reason for creating this committee was to obtain cross-over between policies that have always been handled too separately .
I hope that this cross-over can continue in the next Parliament and that this House will also continue to be involved in the Copenhagen negotiations .
What we need is global consensus , and for this we must have something to offer , above all to developing countries .
At present the equal conditions that will convince people in developing countries to espouse this policy are still lacking .
It is somewhat too Eurocentric and somewhat too compartmentalised as well .
We are looking at a lifestyle change .
Politically we need to make proposals that are focused firstly on this policy and then on a progressive de-materialisation of our lifestyle , since otherwise it will not be sustainable .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my compliments to President Florenz .
In calling him president , I do so out of esteem and consideration for the commitment he has always shown to our Parliament .
In adopting the climate and energy package , the European Union has equipped itself with a legislative framework that gives it the right credentials to take a leading role .
The recent open-mindedness shown by the new US administration gives us cause to hope for a future shared commitment with the United States to halt the consequences of climate change .
However , the full success of the initiative will be determined by the involvement of the economies of all the developing countries , such as China and India .
As the Chinese environment minister made clear when he met with the delegation from the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , this will only be possible with firm support from the richer countries in the form of adequate financial resources to encourage sustainable development .
Progress has been made in this area with the Poznań conference and the decision to put the adjustment fund into operation , as well as the EUR 50 million for research and technological development allocated to developing countries to support the evolution of green technologies at global level .
We must ensure that Copenhagen marks a turning point in terms of practical joint commitment by stronger economies to create a fund that will guarantee a continual flow of funding for sustainable development in emerging countries .
Only through commitments agreed at international level with the involvement of emerging countries will we succeed in safeguarding the environment from irreversible effects , while at the same time protecting the competitiveness of European businesses from the effects and socio-economic costs of environmental dumping on the world market .
- Mr President , I add my thanks to Mr Florenz for his report but I think , amidst all the congratulations to the rapporteur and to the committee for its work , we need to face some cold facts : the EU is still doing too little , too late .
I do not expect to be popular for saying so , but we need to be measuring the EU 's progress not against what other countries are doing , but against what needs to be done .
Against that measure we are still failing .
We are failing in not bringing sufficient ambition to this debate .
The latest science tells us we need to be reducing emissions by around 9 % year on year .
The targets set out in this report and in the EU 's climate package are simply not ambitious enough .
We are failing in not bringing enough urgency to this debate .
If we are not well on the way to a zero-carbon economy in the next eight to ten years we will have lost the opportunity to have halted the worst of climate change .
We are failing in not being consistent .
Today , we speak of renewables and energy efficiency .
Yesterday , a majority in this House adopted the Laperrouze report which proudly upheld the role of coal in Europe .
We are failing in giving the impression that the climate change debate is all about giving things up , about doing without things .
We need to get much better at showing real political leadership and demonstrating that action on climate change will bring us a better quality of life .
It is not about shivering around a candle in a cave : it is about a future that can be more positive and attractive than today 's .
So I commend to you the idea of adopting a green new deal for Europe , a way of addressing both the economic crisis and the climate crisis , with a major investment in energy efficiency and renewables , to create millions of new green jobs in Europe .
But that is not about kick-starting economic growth in a ' business as usual ' direction .
It is about an urgently-needed transition not to a Europe based on the ever-increasing consumption of natural resources , but to a steady-state economy for Europe ; not more aggregate quantitative growth , but real qualitative development .
That debate urgently needs to be begun , and the EU is very well placed to start it .

- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Florenz on a job well done ; this report is a tribute to his consistent presence , attention and contribution .
It reflects the input he has made to the work of the committee , which has been skilfully chaired by Mr Sacconi , and has looked at the issues in depth , debated , and above all contributed to the part this Parliament played in adopting the climate package .
President Pöttering , I too would urge you to consider how our work can and should continue in the run-up to Copenhagen .
For now , as regards the Florenz report , I think it would be a mistake to unbalance it with what are , at this point , ideological amendments on the question of nuclear power .
They are unreasonable , out of context anywhere other than in the minds of their proponents , and alter our joint position .
I would , however , ask my fellow Members to consider the inclusion of an amendment that I have tabled on the relationship between climate change and water .
I believe this to be a valuable field in light of the growing attention it is receiving from international organisations such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the United Nations Environment Programme , which have highlighted this area as decisive for the future , and also in view of the upcoming World Water Forum in Istanbul .
- Mr President , I want to raise a voice of concern and caution in this frenzied debate about climate change , particularly as it could affect food production .
We are told that the world population will spiral to nine billion by 2050 , thus food production must correspondingly increase .
Yet within this proposed climate change package we have emission-reduction demands which , if met , would reduce food production when we need it most .
I refer in particular to the targets on methane and nitrous oxide , and the assault on meat and dairy consumption .
These reduction targets cannot be met without serious diminution in food production .
Faced with the choice of feeding the world or ticking climate change correction boxes , I am afraid I am on the side of common sense and necessity .
- Mr President , we head now to Copenhagen , and my honourable friend 's excellent report is a good - if I dare say it - road map , or rail map , on how we should get there .
Twenty per cent by 2020 was a start - but only a start .
The package of climate measures that we have taken perhaps could have been better , but they were a start - they were a step forward .
Now , with the changes in administration in the United States , we can no longer hide behind the United States ' refusal to cooperate .
With the Obama presidency , we have the opportunity to stop exchanging words and start exchanging ideas .
We hear that a meeting will take place on 6 March 2009 .
The following week we are back here and I hope we will have a statement from the Council on the result of its meetings in Washington .
With the United States , we can now move to that 30 % target and beyond .
We are moving on now to ecodesign , realising here , as elsewhere , that it means tremendous new opportunities in innovation and jobs .
We need to move on to shipping and to agricultural emissions .
The Commissioner has referred to the urgent need to talk to the low-income countries in the developing world .
They will be devastated , but they did not cause this problem .
Islands will sink beneath the waves ; malaria , respiratory disease , skin cancer and eyesight problems are already happening .
Devastation will come to agriculture .
They must take action , but they need our help .
Scientists , of course , can be wrong and so can politicians , as we saw with Mbeki and AIDS .
I may be wrong about the possible flu pandemic .
I may be wrong about the probable impact of global warming .
However , the majority of scientists may be right ; the majority of politicians may be right .
I and we will be culpable on both issues if I and we fail to take action to ensure that neither happens .
- ( FI ) Madam President , the initiative by the Social Democrats to set up the Temporary Committee on Climate Change in spring 2007 is now bearing fruit .
The outcome of inter-group negotiations and discussions is an emerging , ambitious , long-term agenda for action to curb climate change .
For this I would sincerely like to thank the rapporteur , Karl-Heinz Florenz , and the shadow rapporteurs from all the groups who have collaborated excellently on this .
Many are sceptical about whether the Committee on Climate Change will bring added value to Parliament 's work .
Today we can see the benefit of having Members of Parliament , who view matters from different perspectives , working and listening together to the world 's top experts .
That leads to credible results , as we can see .
I am also sure that the very existence of the Committee and its work separately contributed to the fact that the climate package was got through so smoothly and swiftly last December .
I also strongly support the appeal made by Guido Sacconi , the Committee 's chairman , that the post-election Parliament should address this issue and ensure that there is the most robust approach here to issues concerning climate change .
The mindset in the European Union has long been that we need action to prevent climate change .
We have , however , lacked the financial instruments .
The Climate Fund , which has now been proposed and for which money would be collected from the proceeds of emissions trading auctions , is an important initiative , and I wish it every success for the future .
We need it to bring about change in our industrial structure and so that we can really get somewhere with this new green deal .
- ( SV ) This report promises a great deal .
It contains virtually every issue that has been mentioned in the climate debate over the last two years or more .
Nevertheless , I think this piece of work lacks the punch , drive and force that are actually needed to pursue the political line that we have initiated in Europe with regard to climate issues .
No measures are proposed with regard to the protection of land and soil .
As regards water resources , there is a whole package of proposals in the World Water Forum that could have been included .
When it comes to energy efficiency , there are options that have not been included in areas where we have the opportunity for decision-making in Parliament .
Alternative fuels are also treated with far too much restraint .
In the very important area of health , the report focuses on the collection of facts and the control of mosquito bites , where , instead , we need major strategic decisions in Europe to cope with the effects of climate change on human health .
There are options here , too .
In this regard , we needed to come up with more with regard to growth and jobs .
It is , of course , possible to create jobs in Europe .
They are needed here .
We need to anchor the measures in economic policy .
In a few weeks ' time , the Council of Ministers will meet to discuss the funding of the decisions that are to be made in Copenhagen - extremely important decisions , which we in Parliament could have had a great deal of influence over .
Without this anchoring in economic policy and in a policy for work and growth , there is a risk of this report becoming ' like a candle in the wind ' , a nice document , but one lacking the drive and decisiveness that we need when it comes to these issues .
- ( PL ) Madam President , I feel as if I am at the inaugural conference of a newly-founded religion , a false religion , teeming with false prophets and ideas .
The very political powers which are trying to drastically reduce carbon dioxide emissions , a move which has no scientific basis and comes at the price of restricted human development , are the ones responsible for this crisis .
The blame for this situation lies with those who , along society 's path towards progress , aim to build a global government which includes the very bodies which will make an enormous profit from carbon trading whilst simultaneously brainwashing the little people with threats of climate change .
We must create a basis for development in the field of energy .
In order to survive and develop , mankind needs new , powerful sources of energy , and Europe needs balance and self-sufficiency in terms of its energy supplies .
Do you not understand this ?
If you create that which has been approved today , you reduce Europe 's chances of competing with the rest of the world .
- ( EL ) Madam President , the Florenz report backs up the evaluations made by scientists and , to a large extent , shares citizens ' concerns .
It is a step ahead of the energy package approved by the Council in December , but we need to go beyond evaluations to specific measures , to regulations , to timetables , because climate change and its consequences are here and there is no time for further delay .
We must be careful not to allow the issue of nuclear energy , which is irrelevant to this report , to get into the report through the back door with cunning amendments , which is what some governments are seeking .
We must ensure that this report , without changes that alter its balance , convinces the Council and the Commission to go one step further and not to use the economic crisis as an excuse to undermine the efforts made so far .
Economic crisis and environment policy can go hand in hand to give us a positive result both for the environment and in creating jobs .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the main aim of environmental protection policies , much like the package of energy and climate policies involving dramatic cuts in greenhouse gas emissions , is to control and change the national economies into what we recognise from past experience as a centrally planned economy .
The abstract concept of human influence on our climate is set to restrict development , including the use of fossil fuels , and introduce dangerous CCS technology which , in Poland 's case , will make it difficult to exploit our natural resources , including rich geothermal energy sources .
Now that Poland 's industry has been shut down as part of its efforts to meet European Union requirements , attempts are being made to not only force Poles to emigrate , but also to ensure that those who remain become paupers by imposing the highest energy prices of all of the Member States .
One rhetorical question remains : is the main aim of the European Union 's policy to bankrupt my countrymen and wipe Poland from the map of Europe ?
- ( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur Mr Florenz for an excellent and extensive report .
It covers all major areas of social life that have a bearing on the dramatic increase in climate change .
It is high time for us to prepare necessary measures within an EU context .
As a doctor I am interested particularly in health-related changes such as increases in diseases typically associated with tropical areas .
We should bear this fact in mind when supporting the pharmaceutical industry , planning hospitals and in-patient facilities , training health professionals and , above all , systematically raising public awareness .
As these diseases are rare in our part of the world , we can presume that they will take a much more dramatic course .
The situation in agriculture and in securing sufficient food for human consumption will also become very serious .
I firmly believe that this report is far more important than other own-initiative reports and that it will provide a good basis for future Parliaments which will have to tackle the actual impact of climate change .
- Madam President , the time for talking is over and we know what needs to be done - at least those of us who accept the peer-reviewed science on the causes of the unprecedented rate of global warming and its critical impacts on all aspects of biodiversity , particularly on the poorest and most populated regions of our world .
To my climate-sceptic friends , could I say that the precautionary principle should be considered .
I would recommend it to them .
I should like to thank Karl-Heinz Florenz for his report .
It adds to our sum of knowledge , representing , as it does , the horizontal views across a range of committees in this House , with one serious omission - that of the Committee on Fisheries , given the critical importance of the increasing acidification of our seas and oceans from increased CO2 emissions in the atmosphere .
I have one question for Commissioner Dimas : following our first-reading agreement on my report on the revised EU-ETS six weeks ago , could the Commissioner put on record today exactly what work programme is in train for preparing the comitology decisions , particularly the timing and involvement of this Parliament and the stakeholders ?
In conclusion , our target must be at least a 30 % decrease in CO2 emissions by 2020 as part of a post-2012 global agreement , with at least an 80 % decrease by 2050 - and that is the more important target .
The result of the next eight months of climate diplomacy will write the text of our history books for generations and , as political leaders in our own communities and collectively , we cannot renege on our responsibility .
Commissioner , our climate and energy package must be accompanied by realistic funds , and we look to the summit in March - in six weeks ' time - for our 27 leaders of state and government to be on-message and not to let us , the citizens of the EU , and the poorest and most climate-vulnerable communities in our world , down .
- Madam President , as this is the end of the work by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , I want to thank , firstly , Karl-Heinz Florenz for his work , but also - from my own group , the Socialist Group - Riitta Myller , Dorette Corbey and our Chair , Guido Sacconi .
They have all done an excellent job and provided a good basis for the work in the future Parliament .
The report before us is long ; it makes many points .
I would just like to highlight one point , which some people have already touched upon , and that is the important link that we need to make between jobs and tackling climate change , and between getting out of the economic crisis and tackling climate change .
Because , if we do not make that link and we do not get the economic recovery programmes right , people will start to say - and they are already saying it - that this climate change stuff was all very well when there was economic growth but we cannot afford to make all these investments now .
We have to argue very strongly , as people have here , that we cannot afford not to make those investments .
I think those who talked about bankrupting their countries by doing this are very wrong .
Their countries will become bankrupt unless we invest in renewable energies and unless we reduce our energy dependency on insecure sources of fossil fuels .
So we have to get this package of measures right .
President Obama has already made this link in his talk about the economic recovery programme for the United States , and we need to do it here .
Dorette Corbey talked about what can be done in the way of energy efficiency measures .
If I look around my own constituency , Yorkshire , I can already see considerable investments in renewable technologies , in energy-efficiency measures in different companies .
Now we have plans to develop carbon capture and storage in many of our power plants and major industries .
This will create jobs and it will also help us cut our emissions , which of course is the object of all the work we have been doing .
- ( DA ) Madam President , as also envisaged in the report , the prevention of climate change must permeate our whole way of thinking when we are working in relevant legislative areas such as agriculture , fisheries , construction , development and foreign policy .
Climate policy cannot stand alone , but needs to be incorporated into all of our legislation .
The EU 's Heads of State or Government decided nearly two years ago that the EU should take the lead in order to secure a global climate agreement in Copenhagen .
There is not much time left .
We have now adopted our climate package within the EU here in Parliament .
It could have been more ambitious , but it is in place , and we must now support the European negotiators to enable them to achieve an ambitious goal in Copenhagen .
The package takes us up to 2020 , but in this report we emphasise the need to start planning now what will happen after 2020 .
This is something that the governments of the EU need to take note of .
We need to think long term .
The financial crisis is not making things any easier , but we must view this crisis as a dynamic challenge .
Let us use the crisis as an opportunity to get the badly needed development of renewable energy and energy-saving technologies off the ground .
Let us create new jobs in the green industries of the future , rather than protecting jobs in the old industries of the past .
Finally , I am pleased to see that the need to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon is emphasised , as the EU must make it a specific objective to tackle climate change at international level in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon .
- ( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , drawing up a climate policy is very important both from the environmental viewpoint and also in view of the need to modernise the energy sector .
We should welcome the way in which account has been taken of Kyoto progress for those countries that have reduced emissions by more than 20 % since 1990 , as well as the effect of the closure of Ignalina on Lithuania 's and Latvia 's energy supplies , by providing for the possibility of compensation , but each Member State must prepare a clear energy efficiency strategy .
Extra quotas for industry , while fostering its competitiveness , nonetheless make it difficult to obtain funding .
I welcome the plan to simplify the procedures for obtaining European Union funding , and to increase the extent of lending by the European Investment Bank , especially to small- and medium-sized enterprises .
In order for the 2020 targets to be achieved , we must create an EU-wide effective incentive system , supporting businesses and individuals that use or introduce renewable energy resources .
This could be done by centrally covering part of the costs of making the changes .
The Commission must work actively to ensure that the rest of the world follows our example , and to make our technologies accessible to developing countries . Thank you .
- ( GA ) Madam President , I welcome the definitive and thorough report from Mr Florenz and from the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
Climate change is challenging our views on transport , land use , waste management , building work and energy use .
The developing world did not create the conditions that are leading us toward irreversible damage , but they are the ones suffering the most .
Europe must act as a pioneer and take charge of realistic , necessary measures on an international basis .
Forces which are not so progressive have attempted to use the economic downturn as an excuse not to fulfil the necessary climate commitments .
This is completely short-sighted .
Unfortunately , in my own constituency , the Minister of the Environment , Sammy Wilson , is one of these short-sighted politicians who does not understand the scientific and practical realities of climate change .
I hope that the Minister will come to his senses and address the question , something which is already being prioritised by the rest of Europe .
- Madam President , we have here an ambitious plan .
A plan to do nothing less than save the world : a big job at the best of times .
When the draft report was first presented by Mr Florenz to the committee , its first call to action was that we bear in mind that we humans are protectors of creation .
This simple statement was the first to be attacked and removed .
What was so objectionable to the committee ?
The word ' creation ' .
Why ?
Because creation has a creator .
It does not matter to me how the universe was created , or in what time frame .
What is important to me is that there is a God and that we are stewards who must , as Amendment 22 puts it , safeguard creation .
So , as I say , we are here today setting ourselves the task of saving the world , setting a course of action that will require the cooperation and sacrifice of everyone everywhere , a task which , to be successful , will also require the cooperation of the winds , water and the sun .
But , even knowing this , we are at the same time making it clear , as we have done in the past with other great challenges , that we think we can take on the enormous and urgent challenges that face mankind without help from above .
Well , all I can say is : good luck with it , and may God spare us .
- ( PL ) Madam President , I would also like to congratulate and thank Mr Florenz for his excellent report .
I do not want discuss the details of this report .
In my opinion , it should simply be adopted .
I would just like to return to the subject of the package on climate change , which was adopted in December , and to stress that the European Union really does have a very well-balanced package , which poses no threat to the economy .
During numerous months of discussions on the subject , far-reaching amendments were made to this package .
This has been our great achievement .
I would now like to state what , in my opinion , are the biggest challenges facing the European Union .
The first task that lies before us is providing adequate funding for the package we have approved , as well as the funding mentioned in Mr Florenz 's report .
I was the rapporteur for the SET-Plan last year and we primarily discussed the fact that new technologies , which could introduce innovation and a new economic stimulus to the European economy , first need to be funded at European Union level .
That is why I wanted to sincerely congratulate Commissioner Dimas , on behalf of the Commission , on the decision to earmark EUR 3.5 billion from unused funds for investment in research in the field of energy technology , which would also help to protect the environment .
Commissioner , it is an excellent decision .
We must now speedily examine it in Parliament .
I would now like to turn to Minister Bursik : the Council also needs to speedily examine this initial decision of the European Commission .
Another very important issue is the fact that we need to base our work on a global agreement .
That is the assumption behind Mr Florenz 's report .
Bilateral negotiations between two countries - Poland and Denmark - the hosts of COP 14 and COP 15 , are not enough .
We all have to contribute , and this includes European diplomats as well as the representatives of the Czech Presidency .
Our diplomats should be involved in negotiations throughout the world , as without this global agreement , our package and Mr Florenz 's report will have little meaning .
That is what is most important to us today .
- ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the report by our fellow member , Mr Florenz , perfectly sums up the results of our long deliberations on this major problem of global warming .
We all know that the plans to be implemented are huge and that , above all , we must give ourselves the means to change our culture of unbridled development by promoting changes in our economy .
The problem now is to find out how we can implement all the report 's recommendations .
We must urgently find means of fighting global warming .
The European Union 's current budget is insufficient to achieve the related objectives ; neither will we be able to resolve this major funding problem by calling on national budgets or private funds .
The European Commission estimates that an annual investment of EUR 175 billion is required to fight global warming .
With a budget of EUR 76 billion , we are wide of the mark .
The Commission will therefore draw up an inventory of all the existing instruments , but drafting proposals for the future financial framework will be a considerable undertaking .
To optimise all our actions regarding this climate crisis , we need new resources to create a European Fund on Climate Change , which can be funded by the emission quota exchange system and which will be used to support adaptation , alleviation , sustainable consumption and energy efficiency , and therefore a large part must be devoted to the poorest countries .
That requires political courage on the part of the Council , the Commission and members of this Parliament , but it is a necessary condition , essential if the planet is to take up this challenge .
There will be no future for our civilisation if we , as Europeans , do not take measures to impose self-discipline in order to preserve our climate .
It is a major political act , a political act which is vital to give our continent and others a stable future ....
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Florenz very much for his report , which , unfortunately , has not been a great success , probably partly as a result of the fact that it has been discussed very much in the shadow of the legislative package on climate change .
We must face up to the consequences of climate change ; there is no question about that .
It is only the means for doing so chosen by the report that I cannot fully support .
Firstly , it is right that the EU should take the first steps to protect the climate , but it is not beneficial to rush on ahead alone without the involvement of partners .
Europe leading the way is not enough to convince the rest of the world .
A more viable approach must involve the industrial nations and at least China , India and Brazil , otherwise Europe 's economy will remain unfairly burdened without there being any measureable effects on global CO2 emissions .
Secondly , with our current level of knowledge , renewable energies cannot completely replace fossil energy sources .
It may be motivating on a political level to demand that , but it is not realistic .
The political will , as great as that may be , will not nullify any physical laws .
Thirdly , biofuels are hailed as environmentally-friendly alternatives .
Their negative side effects on food prices , which are rising as a result of these biofuels , and rainforests , which are being deforested , are not as yet under control .
Fourthly , a means of mobility that protects resources in the long term is a reasonable goal .
Providing incentives may help to achieve this goal .
However , we should consider at what point state intervention is going too far and at what stage we can claim to have knowledge that we do not have today .
No one currently knows which technologies will best meet the mobility needs of individuals in 50 years ' time and politicians certainly do not have any better idea of this than engineers do .
Although it started with good intentions , what remains , unfortunately , is a report full of wishful thinking in written form , with moral appeals and pointing fingers .
Unfortunately , the German liberals cannot give their support to this .
- ( PL ) Madam President , it will take a good while yet until the politicians understand that it is not the burning of coal , but solar activity , which causes the phenomenon of climate change .
It will take even longer to convince societies , which have been brainwashed by aggressive environmental propaganda , of this truth .
In view of the fact that the earth 's climate is influenced by events which take place in space , we have to agree that human attempts to influence the climate are doomed to fail .
The earth has experienced periods of global warming , and an increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the air , on numerous occasions .
However , global warming has always started a dozen or so centuries before any increase in carbon dioxide levels .
During a period involving dramatic drops in temperature , the cooling of the climate was never prevented by the fact that , at that point , the air contained up to 10 % , or more , carbon dioxide , in comparison to today .
If we acknowledged this fact , mankind would save billions of dollars by giving up pointless activities .
The money saved could be spent on the fight against poverty and on new technologies .
If we do not know what the deal is , then the deal is money , and emissions trading .
Bravo .
What a climatic masterstroke .
- Madam President , a mystique bordering on a religious creed has grown up around this alleged global warming .
The environmental scientist has had a field day , but the natural world obeys the laws of physics and chemistry , subjects which I taught for 39 years .
The global warming theory has cast CO2 , a natural constituent of the atmosphere , as a demon gas .
It does have the effect - slightly - of trapping heat around the world , but how ?
You need to draw a graph showing how CO2 perhaps causes warming .
Is it an arithmetic graph - I must become technical - where equal rises in CO2 cause equal rises in warming ?
Is it an exponential graph - a runaway - where CO2 in extra amounts causes an ever-increasing rise in global warming ?
Or is it a logarithmic graph , where extra amounts of CO2 cause less and less extra warming , eventually becoming a flat line ?
I suspected it to be the last , and the Hadley Centre , the UK 's leading authority on this subject , confirmed that it is the last graph .
We are nearly on the flat line , if not already there .
Extra CO2 will have no more effect .
There is no problem .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Florenz .
This is a rich report with a great number of concrete proposals .
A specific call is made to use the stimulus packages all over the world to promote clean energy and green technologies , stressing thereby that the financial crisis and the climate crisis have the same roots - unsustainable use of resources .
While I support the report , like Caroline Lucas I would have liked to see more attention paid to the most recent signs , which tell us that climate change is both more rapid and serious than we thought just a couple of years ago - contrary to what some colleagues here have said , in particular Mr Helmer .
By the way , a recent screening of more than 900 climate articles in scientific journals - peer review - showed that not one of them questioned the main thrust of the IPCC .
What I am particularly concerned about is not CO2 emissions per se , but the positive feedback mechanisms that are now happening in the planetary system , like the acidification of the oceans , reduced albedo and the possible leaking of methane from thawing tundra .
All these factors will accelerate warming .
We can control emissions but we cannot control these factors .
This is the main reason why , in my opinion , emission reductions have to be much more ambitious in the near future than what is currently being discussed in the EU and by the UN .
This means , by the way , that the 2 ° C target has to be revisited and that greenhouse gas concentrations have to be lowered , rather than continuing to increase .
That is why some of us advocate very strongly the 350 ppm target .
This dimension of the problem is referred to in the report but only in passing .
I would have liked it to be at the core of the report .
My guess is that , only a few years from now , the feedbacks I mentioned will be at the centre of the debate .
Finally , let me just endorse what Guido Sacconi said .
In spite of its shortcomings , a temporary committee has been the right way to deal with a horizontal issue like this .
I hope the next Parliament will build on our experience and deal with climate change and sustainability in a similar way .
- ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , we all agree that Copenhagen must be crowned with success , because both the credibility of the political world and the survival of future generations are at stake .
Our proposals must be targeted on development , employment and solidarity : the three watchwords which will mark the future of coming generations .
What is needed from us today ?
Responsibility and decisiveness are needed to ensure adequate funding for this major climate change development plan and new dynamic development agreements over and above and separately from restrictive trade agreements .
However , there is one concern about our tactics and we need , first of all , to convince society at large and then proceed dynamically to integrate certain productive sectors into the quantum leap by agriculture : that is why we need to remember that agriculture has already been included in the national commitments to reduce emissions by 10 % by 2020 , that there are already important proposals from the CAP for environmentally-friendly agricultural practices and that international agreements on agriculture must be reciprocal for all international partners .
Commissioner , the food model is directly connected to the climate model and all we have to do is conscientiously convince society itself .
Climate change is bringing about broader democratic participation by society , a society which lives with different cultural values .
- ( NL ) It is with a great deal of pleasure that I worked with Mr Florenz and all the others in the temporary committee .
We have laid the desperately needed foundation for a policy that will be more integrated and ambitious in future , and can count on widespread support , even here in Parliament in the framework of the 20-20-20 objective .
The answer lies in making the economy green and making businesses , households and the government sustainable .
Entrepreneurs canvassing support for such an approach - the development of sustainable initiatives for this green technology - are still running into a huge number of obstacles .
If they want qualifications for workers , they are up against policy that is very compartmentalised .
This report calls for an integrated approach that also hangs together territorially .
If you do not do this , you will lose out in the end .
Fortunately , my amendment on the use of regions and cities has been adopted .
Next week , in the buildings of Parliament , 150 cities will be signing a mayors ' covenant with the Commission .
They will be following the conclusions of this report , close to the citizens and close to business .
This is the right approach , in my view .
As such , this approach can count on my backing .
I am opposed to the over-simplified approach towards the agricultural sector in Paragraph 189 , though .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is not against the consumption of meat , and rightly so .
As such , we will oppose this paragraph .
Finally , I would ask the Commission , in future , to adopt a more integrated approach and reduce compartmentalisation to a minimum .
In tandem with Parliament , a significant milestone could be achieved , in the combination of legislation , stimulating policy and activation at the decentralised level .
A great deal can be done there .
( ES ) Madam President , firstly I would like to thank Mr Florenz for his generosity and open-mindedness as well as all the groups that participated in this political exercise and debate on both background issues and the future .
This has had the benefit of providing us with information and clarification and given us the necessary courage twinned with prudence to address other important , parallel legislative actions , also of high risk , such as the climate change package , the policy on vehicles , the Lisbon Strategy and sectors such as energy , transport , industry and tourism .
I think that this has been a good exercise and , more importantly , a way of irreversibly embracing the 21st century and , as the Commissioner said , of showing the example that we want to set for the future .
This exercise has been an example of comparison and generosity that has come at the right time , at a moment of crisis with significant social risks and the possibility of protectionism and a step backwards .
There is also massive uncertainty which means that security is so important .
However , we must also look to the future .
This is a new era for the United States , as has been said , and we hope for the European Union too after ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , which we expect soon .
It is also a new era , and this is important , in which there are risks but also immense opportunities in huge new areas and policies .
This is the case in Brazil , China and Russia , the great emerging powers , and also in major regions such as Latin America and developing countries , in Africa in particular .
I think that this is a decisive step towards a new model for development and economic and social growth , but there is a need for sustainability and reduction of impacts .
However , Commissioner , Madam President , we still have the challenge of putting it across to our citizens .
I would just like to end by emphasising the advances made in introducing adaptations regarding water supply and drought as well as in sustainable mobility that I think we have ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , the Florenz report actually contains a lot of good suggestions .
One good thing about the climate debate is that it will act as a catalyst for the transition into the age of renewable energies .
This is shown very clearly in the report along with many opportunities for new technologies and economic development .
However , I think it is a shame that we have excluded large areas of science .
Studies and scientists that approach the subject of climate change with less gloomy scenarios or perhaps even positively , have simply been ignored .
Corresponding applications were rejected by the majority , and that was that .
Science is only what fits into the political concept .
This will not work , because science does not allow itself to be manipulated .
Thus , the report will , unfortunately , hit rocky ground in the end .
Anyone who , on this basis , demands a reduction in CO2 of 80 % or more is jeopardising the economy and social achievement .
Anyone who , at the same time , demands the abandonment of nuclear power is consciously closing his eyes to reality .
Anyone who demands accounting standards for all areas of human life is at odds with the fundamental idea of freedom .
Anyone who demands new laws for soil and agriculture is abusing the climate debate for the purposes of implementing sanctions that he or she wanted to implement anyway but which have nothing to do with climate change .
And anyone who demands protective clothing against the effects of the climate is deliberately stirring up anxiety .
I hope that these radical and misplaced ideologies will not be included in the report .
I will then be able to support the report , as protection of the environment is very important to me , particularly when it can be combined with social achievement and economic competitiveness .
- ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Temporary Committee on Climate Change has done a very good job .
Today we have in front of us the final report to be put to the vote .
It indicates how we , as the European Parliament , envisage future climate policy and what measures need to be taken as regards adaptation to climate change .
I hope that , when the next legislative process is due , we in Parliament also reach such a high level of agreement so that what we have documented in this report will be put into practice .
Through the committee 's method of working , this report has also succeeded in achieving a horizontal viewpoint .
I have to say that we ought to maintain this committee 's method of working in the next parliamentary term , too , as Mr Sacconi has just suggested .
The fight against climate change cannot be waged by Europe alone .
We must also get other continents and countries on board .
The committee has also done a good job in this regard , because we , as Parliament , have for the first time become visible in matters of climate diplomacy and I would like to emphasise this once again in this House .
When we talk about adaptation measures then we are also talking about funding .
In this regard , I would like , once again , to call on the other two institutions , the Commission and the Council , to give this matter top priority in the next Financial Perspective .
We can adopt the most wonderful reports here , but if there is no money available for the measures then the report will come to nothing .
We should also look once more at the extent to which the financial measures that we are already taking are having an effect , and let us please have this summarised in an audit .
- ( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , as the European Union has ambitions of becoming the leader in the international fight against global warming , it must not only formulate climate protection targets but it must also implement them through political measures .
The cross-sectional report of Mr Florenz confirms that the fight against climate change must be based on a horizontal approach and it must be taken into account in all legal regulations .
Water plays a central role in climate change .
We must realize that the consequences of climate change on the water regime may cause a domino effect and may impact on many sectors of the economy .
The ever-increasing worldwide problems with water require a coordinated water management policy from the Member States and the introduction of environmental principles into an integrated management of water resources .
We must initiate programmes for creating surface storage facilities for rain water in forested , agricultural and urban areas through legislative instruments and through non-investment and investment measures which will make a fundamental contribution to rainwater storage in the countryside .
Until now rainwater has been regarded as waste water which had to be disposed of as quickly as possible .
The new approach for water is based on the principle that rainwater is the key to life .
I am delighted that it will be introduced by an expert group of Czech and Slovak scientists .
This is an interesting approach , Minister Bursík .
I believe that it will win your support .
It is not possible to have a sustainable way of life without contributions from the economy , science , the media , voluntary sector and private citizens .
It is important not to give up on such a complex problem .
We face a challenge and we must act now because our actions today will determine our future .
Our central aim must be not to deprive future generations of the basics of life which we have received from God .
We will prevail in global competition only if we can bring efficient , innovative and intelligent technologies to the market in a transparent manner and without bureaucratic obstacles .
We will prevail only if we give the ' green light ' to all progressive solutions in Europe .
- ( LT ) I congratulate the rapporteur and all like-minded people , who are challenging the threat posed by climate change .
Residents of Lithuania and the other Baltic countries really thirst for a European electric energy network .
If it is not created within a few years , talk of energy security will remain nothing more than talk .
The call to increase Structural Fund money , used to heat multi-apartment dwellings , is very important .
Miracles rarely happen .
However , the extension of Ignalina NPP 's working life , a miracle still hoped for in Lithuania , would reduce pollution and would allow GDP to remain at 4-5 % annually , which is particularly necessary for a state affected and damaged so much by the economic crisis .
Confronted with the crisis , an increasing number of EU citizens are thinking more about survival than about halting climate change , but if we are able to give up our wasteful way of life and become thriftier , not only will we save the environment and stop the planet from overheating , we will replenish our pockets .
By making strict savings in everyday life , when using resources , and by giving up short car journeys , it is possible to save as much as EUR 1 000 a year .
- ( FR ) Madam President , one might have said that this report was redundant , following the vote on the energy and climate change package last December .
However , this report has the merit that it is a very good summary of what we must consider for the fight against climate change , and I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur , Karl-Heinz Florenz , who demonstrated such vision in drafting this report .
Let us go beyond discussion .
Let us make sure that the Member States make a solid commitment .
I agree with my fellow Members who pointed out the need for a budget which is in keeping with our ambitions .
After the success story of the energy and climate change package , under the French Presidency , we must do all we can to reach a satisfactory international agreement in Copenhagen .
Yet , there is something we should be worried about .
2009 is a European election year , when the European Commission will change .
We are most concerned when we read the statements by the President of the Czech Republic , who maintains that global warming does not exist .
Even if he is right , our whole plan to fight climate change is a response to the serious economic crisis we are now experiencing .
The decline in energy resources , the need for energy security , deforestation , the suffocation of our great cities which are home to the majority of the population , the necessity , therefore , to use sustainable transport , the endless famine throughout the world and the need to nourish the planet ; everything supports the solutions proposed to fight climate change .
We are entering the era of sustainable growth , this third industrial revolution which is a great asset for research , innovation , employment and competitiveness in our businesses .
As for energy efficiency , it should already be part of all the recovery plans , because it relies on innovative technologies .
It is a way of reducing energy bills , which will please consumers .
By reducing fossil energy consumption , the European Union regains more independence and emits less carbon , and there are thousands of new jobs at stake .
Yes , the fight against climate change is one of the responses to the economic crisis .
It will become this through the development of a low-carbon economy , with the support of local communities , business , scientists and all citizens .
( RO ) The report presents both scientific data and recommendations for combating climate change , referring both to adaptation and the reduction in the causes of this problem .
Combating climate change is not only an obligation so that we can guarantee the future for the generations to come , but it is also an opportunity for reviving the global economy .
I urge the importance of energy efficiency to be reflected in both the Community budget and in the financial instruments available .
Making transport more efficient through the use of intelligent transport systems , promoting transport by rail and ship , ensuring intermodal development and investments in greener cars are measures which will help cut the emissions generated by this sector .
I have recommended the development of greener forms of tourism such as sports tourism or cultural tourism .
I would also like to stress that the tourist destinations of excellence should be those which respect and protect the environment .
I feel that we must consider creating an international fund for planting trees on unused landmass .
I would like to end by saying that we need to carry out research in the field of medical science and in the pharmaceutical industry aimed at producing medicines and vaccines which will be available to the entire population affected by certain illnesses at an affordable price .

- ( HU ) Madam President , today , climate change and transport are inseparable while , at the same time , our hard-won and closely guarded mobility , the free movement of people , goods and capital , can only be continued in future if we make changes and resolve to take firm steps in this regard .
As theme leader for the fifth key theme , transport , on the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , I encourage the adoption and simultaneous implementation of a comprehensive package .
What is needed ?
First , the economic environment must be transformed , with a two-fold goal : first , to support eco-innovation by means of taxes and public procurement , and secondly , to actually apply the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Eco-innovation is needed in motor vehicle technology to develop alternative fuels for that sector , for intelligent transport solutions and logistics management systems .
The ' polluter pays ' principle must be applied to all vehicles as well as in emissions trading and the incorporation of external costs .
Every initiative we have launched must be speeded up .
It is not enough to talk about these things : we must make them a reality .
What sort of things , for example ?
A common European airspace , a single European sky and our management systems .
These must be effectively implemented because we will be able to regulate industry and consumption successfully once we have completed our own tasks .
Above all , we must deal with our cities and other difficult areas .
Ultimately , this is perhaps the most difficult task .
We must foster a new transport culture and strive for a much more effective use of the tools currently at our disposal .
We would like to thank Karl-Heinz Florenz because with this report we now have a credible , multi-layered roadmap , providing the basis on which we can begin implementing our goals and sit boldly at the negotiating table in Copenhagen , asking everyone to join us .
- ( PL ) Madam President , in the preamble to Mr Florenz 's report , which we are discussing today , he refers to his earlier report on the scientific facts behind climate change .
Unfortunately , I found no facts in that report , only a belief in the infallibility of IPCC reports .
Neither the present resolution nor the one of May 2008 can thus , in any way , legitimise the political decisions of the European Commission , as they lack an objective , scientific approach .
Only a cohesive model of climate change , which takes into account all variables , such as the impact of greenhouse gases , suspended particles and , above all , solar activity , could provide a justification for these decisions .
The report , which contains one-sided information highlighting the hypothetical mechanisms behind global warming , such as CO2 emissions , ignores the need for an international fight against the real impact of climate change .
The Temporary Committee on Climate Change has focused , in a biased manner , on the problem of reducing greenhouse gas emissions , and has only mentioned in passing the fight against the real impact of climate change .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur , who has indeed tried to achieve as much as possible for all of us .
Agriculture is particularly affected by climate change , as its products are produced in the open air .
We think of droughts and desertification , as we are seeing in southern Italy , for example , or of other extreme weather phenomena , such as unexpected rain and hail showers or floods , which often affect the livelihoods of our farmers .
Agriculture is often depicted as the big cause of climate change .
Around 10 % of global greenhouse gases are produced in agriculture , most of which , however , are gases of natural origin , such as methane .
In my opinion , agriculture is , on the contrary , leading the way in the fight against climate change .
I would like to document the following with a study from Austria from 2008 : through plants such as grass , maize and cereals and the soil , agriculture and forestry consume and bind considerably more greenhouse gases than they generate .
According to the study from 2008 , the emissions from agriculture and forestry of approximately 8 million tonnes CO2 equivalent per year compare in total with a binding effect of 58 million tonnes CO2 or CO2 equivalents .
This shows that agriculture should not be depicted as an environmental villain .
Quite the opposite .
Here are some more figures : since 1990 , agriculture in Austria has reduced its CO2 emissions by 1.3 million tonnes .
Energy is another important area in which agriculture contributes to the fight against climate change .
For example , agriculture in Austria consumes approximately 2.2 % of the energy generated .
The proportion of renewable energy is 23 % , a large share of which again belongs to agriculture .
Finally , I would like to say the following .
Great importance must ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Florenz sincerely for the excellent work he has done as rapporteur .
Our greatest challenge now is to establish the next international climate treaty .
The two most awkward issues for the treaty are the emission reduction targets of different countries and how the industrialised countries will contribute to the financing of investments in climate mitigation in the developing countries .
In both these matters the EU needs to raise its sights , although in theory we can be proud of the fact that we have always been leading on global climate protection .
The latest research suggests that a 30 % reduction in emissions by 2020 will not be enough - the targets need to be made more stringent .
As for financing climate measures in the developing countries , I regret that in its new communication the Commission still made very general observations and did not propose sufficiently concrete models .
In different contexts , including the debate on the climate package , we in Parliament have shown we are prepared to contribute significantly to the effort to reduce emissions in the developing countries .
This is one of those areas where the EU should also encourage the new President of the United States to adopt a new line .
Up till now , the United States has not said anything about how prepared it is to support emission reduction targets in the developing countries .
Climate protection can be accomplished , but the measures need to be swift and consistent .
- Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur .
I shall be very specific in relation to agriculture and to two paragraphs in the report which I think are not necessary .
The report would perhaps be better without them .
They are very specific in relation to meat consumption and I do not think there is a place for these paragraphs in the report .
The following paragraph on feed rations ignores the reality of research that has been going on for a long number of years in many Member States seeking to do exactly what it says in this paragraph , which is therefore out of date with reality .
One of the areas that I think needs to be enhanced is the communication of how farmers and those who use the land can farm in a way that is more ' climatically friendly ' .
I think there has been a failure of the researchers to work with the farmers , and we need more effort in relation to extension services to get the message across , to encourage and not to coerce .
- ( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , obviously climate change is much the focus of European , and not just European , policy .
Neither one country , nor a union can separately and independently handle the challenges of climate change .
Therefore we need to integrate policies on a horizontal and vertical plane .
Policy , legislation and finances must work together .
The report provides a fantastic platform for this .
I would like to shift focus to two facts , without which we are not able to do our work in benefit for the battle against climate change .
Science : in the report special attention is made to new technologies , but we must talk more about science and target investments in science , through which solutions must be sought .
Without this we are left to triviality and the mundane .
Scientific research is our basis .
New technologies , developed by business and science in tandem , are our future .
I appeal for investing in science and designating climate change as an important priority for all EU scientific programmes .
- ( LT ) In the fight against climate change we must attach great importance to the transport sector which at present emits almost a third of the EU 's CO2 emissions .
The transport sector must reduce CO2 emissions by 20 % by 2020 .
In striving for these goals it is essential to implement a stable package of transport policy measures , which would include ecological innovations , the taxing of CO2 emissions , changes in driving and car use habits and other measures .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that in some Member States VAT is being increased due to the financial crisis and the economic recession , and a situation has arisen where people find it cheaper to travel by car because of high public transport fares .
Therefore , I would like to urge states to apply tax incentives and encourage people to use public transport .
It is also important to encourage the use of trains , by investing in the development of rail infrastructure .
Let me remind you that over a kilometre a train emits on average 3 times less CO2 than a car and as much as 8 times less than a plane .
- ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we can congratulate ourselves on the broad consensus here , but we nevertheless remain in isolation : Commissioner for the Environment , Ministers for the Environment , how important is the environment for the Commission and for the Councils and governments ?
We know how important .
I myself was not at all in favour of setting up this committee because I think that nothing is better at isolating something than creating a new committee .
In France , we speak of a ' Théodule committee ' .
I wonder about the future of this report from the point of view of its integration into European policies .
I would just like to remind those Members who were there in 1992 that there was an excellent report on sustainable development .
No sooner had it been adopted - what is more , unanimously - this excellent report was buried completely .
Perhaps if we had introduced it into European policies , we would not be here now .
I would like to speak to the rapporteur , who denies that he is presenting a political project .
Mr Florenz , it is a political project you are presenting , because it is a complete reorientation of European policies , in terms of agriculture , fishing and transport .
So , yes , we must be more ambitious and we await the results .
( DE ) Madam President , taking the consequences of climate change seriously means listening to all of the various sides of the debate , including that of science .
We had a lot of experts in the committee , that is true .
Unfortunately , however , they represented only one view .
We did not get the chance to hear all sides of the debate .
I think this was a mistake .
We had an initial draft of Mr Florenz 's report , which was considerably better than the one we have before us today on which we are to base our decision .
Many of the suggestions that are currently included are fine , but , in my opinion , a lot of them are wrong .
It makes no sense constantly to resort to new regulations and new measures .
The only solution can be to say ' yes ' to innovation and ' yes ' to research .
The solution lies in assuming individual responsibility and not in ever increasing state regulations .
There are numerous nonsensical regulations , such as the accounting obligation , prevention of and sanctions on the consumption of meat , calumnies on agriculture and many others .
In my opinion , this is the wrong way to go and I therefore find this report problematic as it currently stands .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I have realised that the distinguished Members of the Parliament are using their native languages .
I have no doubt that the interpreters speak one thousand per cent better English than me , so , if you will allow me , I will speak Czech and try to react to this debate in the European Parliament .
( CS ) I would like to express my appreciation for the depth of the discussion in the European Parliament , for its businesslike approach and also for the responsible attitude of the MEPs .
There are about seven points from the discussion which I would like to pick up on .
Firstly , I would like to underline the role of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change since in some of the speeches the IPCC findings have been called into question .
In my opinion , it is to some extent a disadvantage that the quarterly reports issued by the IPCC on material facts relating to climate change and on adaptations and mitigations are around 1200 to 1400 pages long , comprising a highly detailed scientific work complete with references to relevant scientific literature .
However , a summary is later compiled from these reports and it ends as a ' summary for policy makers ' which is about 20 pages long and no longer includes any references .
In my opinion , many misunderstandings arise from the fact that we , as policy makers , do not have the time - and I apologise if this does not apply to you - to read those 1200 or 1500 pages .
It is important to emphasise that the IPCC has not only been awarded a Nobel Prize , but at the Bali climate conference it was agreed by the 192 participating states that this was the most comprehensive and highest quality scientific resource , the most consistent information at our disposal for deciding on whether and how to react to climate change .
This was the view of the 192 national representatives and this is also my response to some of the suggestions of alarmism , an argument I have become used to in my own country .
In my opinion , we have a very good starting point in 2009 .
On the one hand , we are speaking with one voice again as the European Union .
The enormous value of this was brought home to me in Bali .
We managed to achieve considerable progress in the negotiations with our G77 partners and other economies and we were in fact the only major global economy to press for the adoption of a target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30 % by 2020 .
The second hope at the start of this year is the change in the United States as many of you here have mentioned .
The way I see the problem is that somewhere in Copenhagen is a room with around 200 locks to its door .
If we manage to open all those locks then we will conclude a new global agreement on climate protection to run from 2013 .
In my opinion , we have now opened the first lock , which is the European Union .
The second lock in the series is the United States and that is why we are putting so much emphasis on making contact as quickly as possible with the new US administration and why we are planning a joint visit in the Troika together with the upcoming Swedish presidency and the Commissioner for Environment Stavros Dimas .
And that is my response to the comment from Jerzy Buzek , in other words we are definitely not intending to lead the international negotiations by ourselves .
Not at all . We intend to coordinate the negotiations .
Denmark obviously has an enormous interest in the success of the Copenhagen conference .
In the closed ministerial sessions of the informal Spring European Council we intend to report on the progress of bilateral negotiations over the international climate change agreement .
We will also jointly try to define a future strategy on how to coordinate international negotiations with , of course , the involvement of diplomats .
In addition to this , we will negotiate the adaptations , which will be the main theme of the informal Spring Council in Prague .
The next item in my response relates to the fact that we have arrived at an interesting juncture , as EU efforts towards an ambitious and active climate change policy have suddenly come up against the effects of the financial and economic crisis .
In this context , I consider it very positive that the voices calling for a postponement of our long-term climate change targets are few and far between .
On the contrary , the great majority of voices - here in the European Parliament too , for which I am very grateful - are calling for us to use this coincidence and treat it as an opportunity , since that would offer a ' six-win ' strategy , in other words a ' win , win , win , win , win , win ' strategy , because if individual economies are prepared to respond to the financial and economic crisis by investing - and even the most conservative economists are prepared to allow exceptions - then this represents an opportunity to transform our current economy into a low-carbon economy and to support modern environmental technologies .
Why the six ' wins ' ?
Because we will save money on energy through energy-saving measures .
Because we will reduce our dependency on imported energy , because we will reduce our consumption of non-renewable natural resources , because we will create new jobs - and do not forget that the various plans within Europe for responding to the financial and economic crisis will create new employment opportunities right in the area of ' green jobs ' and around new environmental technologies for renewable energy sources and energy saving - and at the same time we shall reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
The Czech Presidency therefore views this situation as an exceptional opportunity for changing paradigms of behaviour and for directing our economy towards greater sustainability .
The greatest opportunity for changing the economy is in the global market for carbon .
Compared to the environmental policy in the 1970s , when we relied on banning and injunctions and mainly employed a so-called ' end of pipe ' policy , we find ourselves in 2009 making far greater use of financial instruments to help the environment .
In my opinion , the fact that the climate-energy package includes a new emissions trading system based on auctions provides an excellent foundation for creating a global market in carbon .
Let us consider the ambition .
In 2013 , electrical energy auctions will gradually take place and by 2015 , we want to see a global market in carbon at an OECD level .
We are therefore very closely monitoring developments in the US and how the process for adopting the ' Cap and Trade ' system will look in the US Congress .
Another point I would like to mention is the role of renewable energy sources and also energy saving .
In our negotiations with developing countries we must offer something , we must offer these countries economic development but at the same time we must offer the sort of development that will ensure the fulfilment of the targets identified by the IPCC and adopted by us as politicians .
And here renewable energy sources will play an absolutely key role as we basically have two possible options .
There are billions of people without access to electricity but with a desperate wish for electricity simply because it is such an attractive prospect for consumers and an aspiration nobody can be blamed for .
The fact is that these people will either have to go to the cities for electricity that is distributed in the current conventional manner - large centralised sources , distribution grids , a burden on the environment - or electricity will come to them in the places where they have lived for generations and where they can continue their traditional way of life in harmony with nature .
The second option will be possible only through decentralised renewable electricity .
In other words , we who are developing the technology for renewable energy sources in Europe are doing so not only for the developed countries but also in order to increase the number of installations worldwide , to reduce investment and operating costs and to make these technologies accessible to people in developing countries .
This is an enormous political task facing us in relation to developing countries .
I would like to end by assuring you that the Czech Presidency has truly extensive ambitions for achieving progress in the climate change negotiations .
We will be taking a very intensive lead in international negotiations .
I would also like to assure you about the consistency of the Czech Presidency and if the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic defended the Czech President Klaus here in the debate in the European Parliament , then in the area of climate change and climate change policy I must distance myself from these statements and the position of the Czech President .
I want and to assure that the position of the Czech Presidency is determined by the Czech Government .
I ask you to bear in mind that in spite of whatever statements you might still hear over the course of the Czech Presidency - as our president is also preparing to visit the US - that the climate policy is formulated by the Czech Government and we are united in our view and we are working together with the Commission and the upcoming Swedish Presidency in the Troika .
This concludes my statement .
I would like to thank you very much once again for a highly productive , businesslike and , above all , responsible discussion at this honourable assembly .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , we are also looking forward to continuing to work closely with the Czech Presidency , the Czech Government and specifically with Minister Martin Bursík .
I am sure that during the first semester of 2009 we will advance the negotiations considerably .
I would like to thank all the speakers in today 's discussion for their positive contributions .
As the title of your report indicates , what happens to the world 's climate in 2015 and beyond will depend on what action the international community decides now .
Building on the solid scientific advice at our disposal , and insisting that negotiations must be guided by science , remains vital .
We need to communicate the scientific findings to a broader public , and enhance consumer awareness of greenhouse gas impacts on lifestyles and consumption patterns .
Such increased awareness , however , needs to be accompanied by strong economic incentives for business to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the goods and services they provide .
A transition to a low-carbon economy is needed at a global scale , and can only be achieved through comprehensive and integrated action to address emissions in all sectors .
Only by being ambitious now can we keep the door open to stabilising concentrations of greenhouse gases at lower levels , should the IPCC in future indicate that this is necessary .
Together with the Commission , I am convinced that you also have an important role in echoing these important messages .
2009 will be a crucial year for the global climate change negotiations .
For the Commission , 2009 will be a year of implementation : we are working on an implementation road map .
There are about 15 measures that we need to take through comitology ; there is a list of deadlines in the revised ETS that we are going to meet : for example , the list of sectors for carbon leakage should be ready by December 2009 .
There will be a big stakeholders ' meeting on 30 March 2009 .
The bulk of the work will be done during the summer and , by the end of 2009 , we shall have this list dealt with .
The harmonised rules on auctioning should be ready by June 2010 .
There will be a big stakeholders ' meeting in February , and all these deadlines and work programmes are available to you .
But 2009 , as I said , is going to be a crucial year for the global climate change negotiations .
The world is expected to agree on further international action to tackle climate change at the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference in December .
However , a deal in Copenhagen is by no means a given : much work remains to be done .
The climate change and energy package gave us a head start in this transition and provided an excellent basis to prove that ambitious climate policy is not only possible but also broadly beneficial to our economies and societies .
The Copenhagen Communication is the basis for further elaborating the European Union 's positions on those key elements , enabling us to maintain our leadership and help lead the negotiations to a success in Copenhagen .
It is clear that the climate change challenge cannot be solved without significantly stepping up the financing of , and investment in , clean technology , as well as measures to adapt to the inevitable climate change impacts .
Required amounts for developing countries are estimated to go up to EUR 120-150 billion annually in 2020 .
Until 2020 , this financing can , for a large part , come from the private-sector households in developing countries .
For instance , the major part of reductions in the energy sector will come from efficiency improvements that will pay for themselves .
These may partly be supported by international loan arrangements in order to mobilise international private finance .
Another significant part of additional financing and investment will be mobilised through the carbon market , both from the proceeds of the future auctioning of carbon allowances and via carbon credits under the CDM .
The European Union in its climate and energy package has created significant demand for CDM credits until 2020 .
This is likely to spur the deployment of clean technologies in developing countries .
However , the poorer the developing countries are , the more they will require further public financial assistance from developed countries .
Without this assistance they will not be able to sufficiently reduce their greenhouse gas emissions .
Without this assistance the poorest and most vulnerable will suffer the consequences of climate change .
Without this assistance there will be no deal in Copenhagen .
The question is : how can we make sure that these additional public financial flows will be predictable , be spent transparently and effectively , and that the contributions to those flows will be shared internationally ?
In addition to our contributions to the United Nations negotiations , we see that , following the success of the European Union 's emissions trading system , carbon markets are being established in many parts of the world .
Australia has announced the core elements of its system .
In autumn 2008 , shortly after his election , US President Obama reaffirmed his goal to create a US-wide carbon market .
Together , these trading systems could form the nucleus of an evolving future global carbon market .
As I have already stressed , the European Union 's challenge now is to facilitate the development of such linked carbon markets , in particular among OECD countries by 2015 .
In the Copenhagen Communication , the Commission has addressed these questions by putting forward concrete proposals - proposals that are not only ambitious but also realistic , and will make a significant contribution to the success in Copenhagen that our planet so desperately needs .
Let me conclude by taking this opportunity to thank the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , Mr Florenz and Parliament for their strong support for our proposals and for the seriousness and speed with which they have handled the package .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , I am very pleased that , in the closing stages of this Temporary Committee , this issue has been met with such strong interest , and for that I am most warmly appreciative .
I would also like to thank all those who have contributed to this debate and all those who have worked with us .
We have produced a roadmap to take us to Copenhagen , which naturally contains signposts as well as stop signs and unrestricted travel signs , but also signs that indicate that there are difficult roads ahead .
We have discussed this here today .
I am pleased that there have been critical comments , some of which we can take on board .
The suggestion from Mr Holm for the citizens of Europe to stop eating meat is , I am sorry to say , quite ludicrous , but we all have our own opinions .
There will be a successful outcome in the end and everyone will have contributed to this .
Once again , you have my sincere thanks .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Ladies and gentlemen , during the last few months we have seen what the credit crunch means , as the global economy is affected by an unprecedented crisis .
However , climate , food and social crises are also making their impact felt just as much .
In Romania , we have faced falls in production in recent years due to external causes such as floods , drought and bird flu , with problems of an economic nature coming on top of this over the last few months .
During the current financial crisis , it is going to be increasingly difficult for us to cover losses triggered by floods and drought using the state budget .
During the whole time I have been on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I have supported the idea of creating standalone intervention mechanisms at Community level , regardless of the value of the national ceilings .
I also believe that , faced with a challenge of this magnitude , we need to give priority to investments in clean technologies and renewable energy .
These provide a solution to the climate crisis , while also revitalising the economy through creating new jobs .
As part of our European mandate , it is our duty to persuade our governments to invest more in innovation and new environment-related technologies .
in writing . - Tackling climate change at this moment of deep financial turmoil and decreased confidence in economic systems may seem for many a mistake in terms of priorities .
Going ' green ' is costly , and the efforts necessary for the fundamental restructuring of many sectors in order to achieve ambitious targets are tremendous .
Nevertheless , there are many opportunities to be seized in ' green ' investments and policies as elements favouring economic recovery and stability .
The development of a low-emission economy is a genuine challenge we cannot afford not to deal with .
We need ambitious but still feasible targets and we need not be afraid to walk the path of an inevitable industrial revolution .
In order to secure economic recovery and better living conditions for our citizens , a complex and ambitious approach is required , fostering innovation and the development of new jobs and businesses in the framework of ' green ' technologies .
Finally , sufficient financial means are of course necessary to make the required investments in ' green ' innovation and , obviously , these costs cannot simply be made at the expense of other vital Community policies which cannot bear the burden of climate change without additional financial resources .
One of the most serious long-term consequences of climate change is the decrease in fresh water sources and the increasing scarcity of clean drinking water .
It is no exaggeration to say that water will be the most important strategic asset of the 21st century .
Europe 's environmental protection policy must therefore be applied more rigorously than it has been until now to protect water tables , prevent water and soil pollution and support appropriate handling of natural and artificial water habitats .
Alternating periods of flood and drought , as well as extreme weather conditions , demand better management of rainwater .
There is no such thing as superfluous water , only poorly managed water .
In the next parliamentary cycle and the new budget , the European Union must ensure that significant funds are available for flood prevention , protection of water tables , increasing urban bodies of fresh water and waste water treatment programmes .
Hungary 's water resources are excellent and Hungarian hydraulic engineers have been doing a wonderful job for nearly 200 years .
Therefore , I am certain that our country will play an active and constructive role in drafting a unified European water policy .
in writing . - ( PL ) In taking the floor during this debate on climate protection policy up to 2050 , I would like to draw your attention to the following points .
Firstly , if the United States and the South-East Asian countries do not join the programme aimed at reducing carbon dioxide emissions , showing as much commitment as the European Union , then the enormous financial effort involved and the inevitable consequence of a slower rate of economic growth in the European Union will be a very high price to pay for a slight reduction in carbon dioxide emissions .
The European Union is responsible for barely 14 % of global emissions , while the USA and the countries of South-East Asia produce nearly 80 % .
Secondly , the commitments of individuals countries to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 20 % by 2020 , along with the need to buy emission permits , will result in a significant increase in the price of electricity and heating for individuals and even higher costs for the industrial sector , especially in the new Member States , such as Poland , where the energy sector relies on coal .
As a result , many industrial sectors which have a high level of energy consumption may be shut down in those countries , entailing a range of negative social repercussions .
Finally , the reductions in carbon dioxide emissions achieved by the new Member States , and by Poland in particular , should be taken into account .
In Poland , the far-reaching restructuring of the economy between 1990 and 2005 , resulted in reductions in carbon dioxide emissions of around 30 % .
This came at a very high social cost and unemployment remained at over 20 % for many years during this period .
I think that Mr Florenz 's report ' 2050 : The future begins today - Recommendations for the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change ' was timely and necessary , given the effects already observed and those expected as a result of climate change .
Romania was one of the first countries in Europe to have signed the Kyoto Protocol , which meant that it assumed its commitment to support the battle against climate change through reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 8 % by 2012 .
I am convinced that we need these measures , although , compared with many other European countries , Romania 's level of greenhouse gas emissions is low .
Agriculture and Romanian forestry can play an important role in combating climate change , whose impact has been strongly felt in recent years , especially through flooding , high temperatures and prolonged droughts .
These natural phenomena affect not only agricultural and forest productivity , but also precious habitats and ecosystems .
Agriculture and forestry are expected to continue making an important contribution to the battle against the effects caused by climate change through forestation , with the aim of absorbing and retaining greenhouse gases , and the use of biomass as a renewable source of energy .
The European Union has taken on a major role in the effort to find a compromise for adopting a global post-Kyoto agreement .
It is possible that cooperation with the new US administration will enable it to come up with a specific way to implement this agreement .
Specific measures for combating the effects of climate change also offer opportunities for sustainable socio-economic development and for creating new jobs .
They are targeted in particular at the new , dynamic sectors , offering major growth potential , where the level of investment made so far has been inadequate .
These measures will have , apart from the beneficial effect of combating climate change , a positive impact and alleviate the effects of the economic and financial crisis and may contribute , in the long term , to reducing the European Union 's dependency on energy imports .
We are talking in this instance about new , intensive investments in transport infrastructures , renewable energy sources , biotechnologies , waste collection and recycling , nuclear energy and the renovation of residential heating systems .
Reforestation and measures preventing desertification can also produce spectacular results in the medium term .
in writing . - I welcome the Florenz Report on climate change which aims to formulate policies for keeping global warming below 2 ° compared to pre-industrial times .
I particularly welcome the call for a 20 % improvement in energy efficiency , the call for binding targets for agriculture and the demand for the creation of a European Climate Fund .
These proposals plus the measures already adopted by the EU put us in a strong position to argue for global action on climate change at the Copenhagen summit .
I wish to congratulate Mr Florenz on his report , which is excellent material in preparation for the Copenhagen Conference to be held at the end of the year .
I consider very important the observation that the economic and financial crisis and the climate change crisis have the same roots .
Therefore , the way out of these crises is also the same .
To mitigate and halt the consequences of these crises , comprehensive innovation and a paradigm shift are needed in all areas of life .
I agree with Commissioner Dimas that the costs must be covered first of all from carbon dioxide trading , secondly from investments by private companies and thirdly from state incentives .
Everyone is looking for breakthroughs , for ways of stimulating employment , kick-starting the engine of the global economy as soon as possible and halting climate change .
The concept known as the ' Green New Deal ' was articulated by the UN Secretary-General , Mr Ban Ki-moon .
What it means , in essence , is that global economic incentives must become part of the investment in environmentally-friendly technologies .
The new logic of economic organisation based on innovations in environmental technology , which has the support of international capital markets , is also a fundamental feature of the US President Barack Obama 's programme .
Innovations in green and future industrial technology would boost the effectiveness of the state and economy , heighten the interest of economic players , and increase consumers ' price and cost sensitivity with regard to the products and services being offered .
The 12 points set out in the report provide a clear action plan for the future .
However , to be able to implement it at a local , national , regional and global level , we need the support of well-informed citizens .
According to a special Eurobarometer survey in spring 2008 on ' climate change ' , approximately 41 % of Europeans stated that they were poorly informed about the causes , consequences and ways to combat climate change .
In Romania , over 65 % of citizens said they had no information about this .
Raising the profile of this issue among the public through education and awareness campaigns implemented in areas of everyday life is a vital step in this direction .
The Commission and Member States must finance public awareness campaigns and create conditions for training people for new careers adapted to the specific challenges of the labour market brought about by structural economic changes , which are accelerated by climate change and its effects .
In the current economic crisis , the EU must commit itself politically and financially in the key areas of maintaining and developing ' clean ' technologies for combating climate change , supporting cross-border adaptation measures , boosting energy efficiency and providing assistance in the event of disasters , according to the EU 's principle of solidarity .
The upshot of all this is the creation of ' green ' jobs in new , competitive enterprises .
Ladies and gentlemen , any debate about climate , ecosystems and energy is vitally important because any major change to these can affect life on this planet .
Regardless of the types of causes or the scientific arguments put forward by various groups of researchers , one thing for certain is that we are facing global warming .
This comprehensive , well-written report , apart from all the useful , valuable information it provides us with , also encourages us to ask the following question : What are we going to do for ourselves and for future generations ?
Against this background of climate change , I feel that there are three kinds of projects which EU Member States should be working on and supporting , as a priority :
1 . Projects involving standard policies for managing energy resources as efficiently as possible and finding solutions aimed at reducing pollution , especially in industrial areas and business parks .
2 . Projects involving funding for scientific research aimed at developing clean technologies .
3 . Projects which support immediate specific action aimed at recreating the ecosystem at both European level and in any other region of the world .
The European Union has assumed the leading role in the battle against climate change .
Devising a long-term strategy for the effective management of the world 's natural resources will help achieve a global economy with reduced carbon dioxide emissions .
This strategy must be based on the principle of solidarity aimed at reaching a balance between rich countries and developing countries , which need assistance in reducing their vulnerability to the adverse effects of climate change .
The signs of global warming are evident in poverty , shortages of food products and limited energy resources .
It is a well-known fact that oil is no longer a sufficiently powerful source of energy to meet the level of demand , which is estimated to grow by at least 60 % by 2030 .
Finding alternative sources and using existing resources sensibly are challenges which will face the EU in the future .
Agriculture is one of the areas most vulnerable to climate change because of its dependency on meteorological conditions .
Bearing in mind that this sector provides the food resources for the world 's population , sustainable management of soil and water resources , combined with protection of forests and biodiversity , will need to feature on the agenda of the long-term strategy for tackling the effects of global warming .
in writing . - ( DE ) Europe and the world are currently facing considerable challenges .
The capital market crisis is not the only pressing problem .
We must also initiate a sustainable programme to combat climate change as quickly as possible .
As large an economic and political association as the European Union is able to establish itself as the leading partner in the fight against climate change .
The first step has already been taken in this regard - the Union has agreed binding climate targets and , with the adoption of the climate change package in December 2008 , it has got many appropriate measures for protecting the climate underway .
The top priority must now be the conclusion of the international agreement in Copenhagen , whilst avoiding de-industrialisation and unnecessary burdens on the European economy .
We should instead increase our investment in , and research into , green technology .
In this way , Europe can move forward , not only in the area of the environment , but also in the area of the economy .
The European Union has become the main actor taking specific measures by adopting policies which tackle head on the global challenge triggered by climate change .
European policy in this area can become more effective at a global level and within the EU if : a ) the European effort is supported by the efforts of the other powerful industrialised countries outside the EU , along with countries such as China , India , Brazil , Russia and so on ; b ) the development of nuclear energy is encouraged and not discouraged , at least in the next 30-40 years , until technology capable of using renewable resources has been developed and the costs make it affordable to market without providing grants ; c ) the European Commission will give stronger support to projects aimed at saving energy and extracting energy from biomass , including the transfer of technology , in less developed EU Member States with a high agricultural potential .
Romania will continue to develop its nuclear programme for generating electricity .
At the same time , it will modernise its coal-powered plants and will step up its efforts to produce energy from biomass .
With this in mind , we need partnerships with Member States and we urge the European Commission to speed up the process of simplifying the procedures for committing European funds .
in writing . - ( HU ) Green investments must play a key role in state economic stimulus packages intended to counteract the negative effects of the international economic crisis .
These investments , which will be used to exploit renewable energy sources more effectively , moderate energy consumption and reduce the emission of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases offer not only economic advantages but significant social benefits as well .
It is in Hungary 's interest for EU Member States to coordinate and mutually reinforce their efforts in this regard .
When setting environmental goals , we also need to be attentive to the economic and social capacities of EU Member States .
We must set only attainable goals , taking into consideration their effects on the economic crisis .
These goals can only be attained if society shows solidarity .
Government activity is not enough for this to happen ; a gradual shift in attitude is necessary within society as well .
The concrete recommendations for action in the Florenz report , such as support for the construction of zero energy , ' passive ' houses , the creation of a European fund to support research into renewable energy sources , linking up energy networks at European level and raising awareness among EU citizens and children in particular , all contribute to this shift in social attitude .
Moreover , we need to strive to ensure that that we preserve Europe 's technological edge in environmental protection developments in the 21st century and that we turn this into an economic and social advantage .
Given Hungary 's outstanding agricultural assets , serious opportunities may open up in energy generation from biomass or in the reuse of plant and animal by-products , waste products unsuited to other commercial uses , in the form of biogas .
Priorities in the fight against Alzheimer 's disease ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
- ( SV ) I hope now that the whole of Parliament will listen .
During the part-session in January , we unanimously adopted a resolution on the Horn of Africa .
It contained a specific paragraph stating that Dawit Isaak should be released .
Dawit Isaak is now extremely sick and I would like to ask the President to write to the Eritrean authorities .
The news of his illness has been confirmed by several sources and has been mentioned in the Swedish media today .
The situation is extremely serious and desperate and I would just like to remind you that Dawit Isaak is a Swedish-Eritrean journalist who has been imprisoned without trial since 2001 .
His health problems are so serious now that he is being kept in a military hospital , and I fear for his life .
I would appeal for support for the release of Dawit Isaak .
( Applause )
- Mrs Svensson , I can confirm that the President will write accordingly .
1 .
2050 : The future begins today - Recommendations for the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change (
Voting time
- The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes . )
Formal sitting - Palestinian Authority
Ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased and moved to welcome here today Mahmud Abbas , the President of the Palestinian National Authority .
A very warm welcome to the European Parliament , Mr President .
( Applause )
We also invited the Israeli President , Shimon Peres .
Unfortunately , due to Israel 's celebrations marking 60 years as a nation , the agreed appointment could not be kept .
We hope that the visit by President Peres can take place soon .
Mr President , this is not the first time that you have visited the European Parliament .
As I welcome you here in Strasbourg at an extremely difficult time for the Middle East and in particular for your people , the Palestinian people , I remember our last meeting in the Middle East , which took place almost two years ago - at the end of May 2007 - in Gaza .
You received me at the official headquarters of the Palestinian National Authority .
I will never forget our meeting , as the situation was extremely tense .
At that time , you were leading delicate talks with the aim of rescuing the government of national unity , which you had formed with energy and foresight .
Ten days later , an inglorious coup regrettably put an end to these efforts .
Today , you have come direct from Cairo following a stopover in Paris to meet the French President .
In the last few days , some very promising talks have been held in Cairo on the formation of a Palestinian Government of national consensus .
With regard to the tragedy in the Gaza Strip , it is not without concern that the European Parliament has observed the suffering of the Palestinian people .
The European Parliament has not remained silent .
We demanded an immediate ceasefire .
We denounced the disproportionate response taken , not only by the armed forces of Hamas , but also by civilians and international humanitarian organisations .
We also decided to denounce the provocations and the rocket fire by Hamas , which regrettably - and we denounce that - continued to be aimed at Israel despite the ceasefire .
This has to stop .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to pay tribute to the staff of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency ( UNRWA ) for the exemplary courage and sacrifice with which they have carried out their task and with which they continue to do so .
On behalf of the European Parliament , we thank these men and women of the United Nations most sincerely .
( Applause )
We are calling for the peace negotiations to be resumed as soon as possible , as we are convinced that there cannot merely be a military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
As a political actor , we are now under obligation and have a responsibility to do everything we can to enable the people in the Middle East to live together in peace .
A prerequisite for peace between Israel and Palestine is intra-Palestinian reconciliation .
The European Parliament unreservedly supports the ongoing talks , led in particular by Egypt , to smooth the way to the formation of a Palestinian government of national consensus .
Only this type of government will be in a position to ensure the required unity of the Palestinian people .
( Applause )
We urge and expect such a government to observe the fundamental principles of the peace process , to refrain from violence and to conduct peace negotiations with Israel with commitment .
The European Union is prepared to work together with such a government .
The commitment of the new US President , Barack Obama , and the appointment of George Mitchell as special envoy to the Middle East are positive signs .
The determination of the European Union - and I am pleased that the competent Commissioner , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , is with us here , together with her colleague - to place all of its political and economic weight in the balance as well as the political will of numerous Arab partners indicate that a resumption and successful conclusion of the peace process on the basis of the resolutions of the United Nations and the Arab peace initiative should be possible .
President Abbas , we are grateful to you for being here today , and I say this on behalf of the European Parliament , but more particularly for myself .
We have a great deal of respect and recognition for what you are doing under the most difficult of circumstances .
We trust you , because you are a man of mediation , reconciliation and therefore also of peace .
We wish you success .
I now invite you to take the floor and give your message to the European Parliament .
A very warm welcome to the European Parliament , President Mahmud Abbas .
( Applause )
President of the Palestinian Authority ( transcription of the English interpretation from the original Arabic ) . - In the name of God , most gracious , most merciful .
Your Excellency , Mr Pöttering , President of the European Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , Members of the European Parliament , first and foremost I should like to extend my thanks to His Excellency Mr Pöttering , President of the European Parliament , and to you for giving me this opportunity to speak before this august Assembly .
I have come to you from Palestine , whose people are suffering from one of the longest military occupations in modern history .
Palestine has been deeply wounded by the most violent , dire and horrific military aggression , an aggression that has targeted the lives of children , women and the elderly , as well as their houses , livelihoods , farms , plants and schools .
It has targeted drinking water , sewage systems and electricity , as well as hospitals , facilities , roads and bridges .
Yes , the Israeli war has targeted first and foremost the livelihoods of my people , its infrastructure and its future , as well as the future of its Palestinian state for which we have long worked together and for the establishment of which we are still working .
You have witnessed , along with the rest of the world , the burnt and scattered remains of children .
You have heard the calls of men , the appeals of children and women who lost most of their family members .
Yes , you have seen the mother who was murdered while holding her babies in her arms .
You have seen the father who lost the lives of his five children because of rocket attacks , and the girl Balousha who slept next to her sisters and woke to the sound of explosions that killed them all , and the hundreds of children whose houses collapsed and fell on their heads .
You have also seen the Al-Fahura school , which was considered to be safe by the people of Jabalia , who took refuge in it , and how bombshells claimed the lives of those innocent refugees , with the result that over 40 people perished .
These people had families , they had names , they had stories , ambitions and hopes .
In addition , over 100 people were wounded .
Along with those innocent victims fell the values of human conscience , the principles of the United Nations and its duties to protect international peace and security .
You may also recall that the headquarters of the United Nations , its schools , clinics , food and medical warehouses were not spared this insane war against our peaceful and resilient people in Gaza .
I have come to you , ladies and gentlemen , from Palestine bearing a question by a boy named Luay who lost his eyesight because of bombs .
He asked me who would give back to his eyes the light of hope , the light of life and to his people the light of freedom and peace .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , those were terrible scenes and pictures .
This was the aftermath of this war which led to the deaths of over 1 400 martyrs , with over 5 000 injured , the majority of whom were innocent civilians , and a high percentage of whom were children , women and the elderly .
About 500 of the wounded are still in a critical condition and are dying by the day , in addition to a total destruction of over 4 000 homes , buildings , and about 20 000 other homes .
This means that about 90 000 people became homeless and were displaced .
In addition to wide-ranging destruction of electricity systems , water systems , sewage systems , in addition to roads and vital facilities , public and private buildings , this Israeli war has claimed the fruit of the blood and sweat of our Palestinian people , hundreds of thousands of Palestinian people who worked all their lives and lost the fruit of this work .
It has also destroyed what the Palestinian National Authority has established over 15 years .
Much of this infrastructure and many of these facilities were thanks to the contributions of your countries and other friendly countries .
This is the scene of the aftermath of this war .
This is in parallel to another type of aggression against our lands , our farmers and our national economy that happens on a daily basis in the West Bank .
The Israeli settlement has not stopped at all .
The policies of settlement led to the continuation in building the wall of separation , as well as to an increase in roadblocks , checkpoints and barriers besieging the cities , villages and little towns and refugee camps in the West Bank , including Jerusalem .
On the contrary , bids for settlement units have increased 17-fold in the last year in comparison with the year that preceded Anapolis .
The checkpoints have increased from 580 to 660 .
Military incursions have not stopped , nor have the daily arrests and sometimes assassinations of citizens ; the bullying by settlers and their armed incursions and burning of homes which happened in Hebron , Nablus and other areas ; and the terrorist attacks conducted by settlers against farmers in the olive season , which is considered by our people the symbol of peace and life , and not just the livelihood for tens of thousands of Palestinian families .
This tragic scene of Israeli incursions and aggressions in the West Bank , including Eastern Jerusalem , confirms to us and to the world that what is going on is an aggression against the entire Palestinian people , its future and its legitimate national rights .
It is an aggression and a war against the future of peace and dedicated international efforts that have been deployed for its establishment .
This unjust embargo on our people in Gaza and the war against it was but an episode in a continuous series of measures aiming at separating Gaza from the rest of the Occupied Palestinian lands , and also at marginalising Gaza and marginalising all of our people , and preventing our people from attaining their ultimate goal : an end to occupation , gaining freedom and the right to self-determination and the establishment of an independent Palestinian state on the lands that were occupied in 1967 , with Eastern Jerusalem as its capital .
This is confirmed by the escalating settlement policies , despite all the efforts and agreements , including the George Mitchell report in 2001 , the last of which was the Anapolis Agreement , which promised the Palestinian people a state at the end of 2008 .
However , the culmination of this Anapolis Agreement was a destructive war in Gaza and a settlement war in the West Bank , including Jerusalem .
The world declared in Anapolis the failure of unilateral and military solutions .
We also declared that Israel should be committed to putting an end to settlement activities in order to pave the way towards a political process that will put an end to occupation and will be the fulfilment of the right of a two-state solution - a Palestinian state and an Israeli state .
However , reality proves to us that Israel is still governed by a military and settlement mentality , even though its leaders speak about the two-state solution .
We must not deal with Israel as if it were a state above accountability , above international law .
We must put an end to such practices and we must hold the leaders of Israel accountable for their violations of international and humanitarian law .
( Applause )
At the same time , we should like to stress that the success of relief and aid operations , as well as resettling families whose homes were destroyed , necessitates the lifting of embargoes , opening checkpoints and crossings , as well as holding Israel accountable to its commitment in the Agreement on Movement and Crossing of 2005 , which would lead to the flow of aid , equipment and materials necessary for reconstruction and the normal movement of goods and individuals .
This applies to all crossings in Gaza - not just the Rafah crossing - and also applies to the freedom of movement in the West Bank and the security corridors between the West Bank and Gaza to stress the unity of the Palestinian land and its economy .
Here I should like to commend the efforts of UNRWA for its continuous work , in spite of all obstructions and obstacles , to help our people .
I call upon your organisation and other organisations to support its efforts in all fields .
National reconciliation and the establishment of a national reconciliation government constitute one of our priorities .
We have opened the door for this reconciliation that will put an end to divisions and upheaval , and also to calls for separation between Gaza and the West Bank .
We warned against falling into this trap that Israel wants us to fall into .
Therefore , at the beginning of June we called for an unconditional dialogue .
We accepted the Egyptian working paper .
Our doors are still open ; we will not allow the division of our people and of its geographical unity ; we shall continue our dedicated efforts to deal with any attempt at separation .
We know the intentions and the plans of the regional forces and tendencies which support separation and encourage it .
These forces obstruct the Egyptian solution that will put an end to internal disputes and divisions .
This solution is seconded at an Arab level by the Arab League and by Security Council resolution 1860 , in the drafting of which I personally participated , together with Arab and European ministers .
I should like to stress that we shall continue deploying our efforts towards reaching our most noble aim , which is to find a solution for the Arab-Palestinian cause , because the status quo leaves the future unknown and leaves our people victims of the policies of war , aggression and extremism .
Once we achieve a government of national reconciliation , based on a programme that is supported by Arab and international parties , that will allow us to oversee crossings , as well as reconstruction efforts , to the benefit of our people and of preparations for presidential and legislative elections .
I hope that will receive your support , and I also hope you will help us in organising such elections and overseeing them , as was the case in 1996 and 2006 .
We also hope to be able to count on your support in order to release the President of the Palestinian Legislative Council and all MPs who were arrested and are still prisoners of Israel .
( Applause )
The essence of the conflict in our region is the Israeli occupation .
It is a conflict between the hopes and aspirations of our people to rid themselves of this occupation and the attempt by Israel to destroy these aspirations , as well as obstructing international efforts that aim towards establishing a Palestinian state by peaceful means .
Our people look to you and to all peace- and justice-loving nations and call upon you : the time has come for the international community to assume its legal , political and moral responsibilities in order to provide adequate international protection for it and enable it to get rid of this occupation and to live in peace and freedom .
Here I should like to stress again our request and your request to send international forces in order to protect our people .
We have heard about international and Arab efforts to reconstruct Gaza .
It is true that these efforts should be deployed as soon as possible in order for our people to regain hope and trust , but we wonder how long Israel will be given a free hand to destroy the assets and infrastructure of Arab people .
Therefore the international community must prevent the repetition of those past events , and should also call on Israel to stop its destructive policies .
I should like to repeat my thanks to the European Commission for its help in reconstructing the establishments and the institutions of the Palestinian Authority .
I should like to stress that serious and comprehensive negotiations cannot be continued without a complete halt to settlement - including what is known as natural extension - and to all settlement blocks and all types of embargo .
I should like to confirm to you that the achievements of the Palestinian Government with regard to strengthening peace , public order and stability cannot be ignored by any party .
Israel should be committed to its deadlines and also should stop undermining the efforts of the Palestinian Government by means of incursions and arrests .
It should also respect the legal and security status of the Palestinian authority , in addition to enabling the Government to implement its vital economic projects , without using pretexts such as the G areas and other examples .
We can no longer negotiate about the end of occupation .
What we need is a complete end to occupation - i.e. of the land that has been occupied since 5 June 1967 , as was stated by the road map .
We cannot go back to negotiating over partial and ancillary issues , while a solution to the main cause - the end of occupation - remains absent and there is an escalation in settlement seeking to strengthen and deepen this occupation , as well as the arrest of 11 000 Palestinians prisoners .
This , and only this , will enable the peace process to regain its credibility with regard to our people and the people of the area as a whole .
What we need , ladies and gentlemen , is the reconstruction of Gaza , but also the reconstruction of the peace process .
This is our collective responsibility .
Europe , which upheld in the past - and is still upholding - the principles of security and justice in our region and in the world , must stress today , more than at any time , its role in a comprehensive and clear partnership with President Obama 's Administration , the Quartet and the international community .
The election of President Obama and his declared stances , in addition to his initiative in appointing Mr George Mitchell as his special envoy , are encouraging initiatives that will smooth the path of negotiations and the entire political process .
I should like to say , in all honesty , that our Arab decision is to implement the Arab peace initiative - the Arab peace initiative which is part of the road map , and has become an Islamic peace initiative including 57 Muslim countries .
This initiative should be fully complemented .
As I said before , this initiative is part of the road map that was adopted in the Security Council , according to resolution 1515 .
We cannot pick and choose and negotiate about its foundations that are based on international law .
This is the last opportunity we have for true and just peace in our region .
All parties , especially Israel , and the Quartet , should be loud and honest about this .
We must point out that the Arab peace initiative has become an Islamic initiative as well .
It is an initiative that calls for land for peace .
As soon as Israel withdraws from all occupied territories , 57 Arab and Muslim countries will be willing to normalise their relationships with Israel .
This is an historic opportunity that must not be wasted .
Ladies and gentlemen , the scenes of death and destruction shook the conscience and the feelings of millions of people around the world , including European friendly countries .
Our people appreciate this lively human conscience , but we must stress in this regard that the people of Palestine will not lose its will for freedom and life .
They look forward to your support in their struggle to achieve their right to freedom and independence , to be able to build their future and to be able to give to their children their right to a safe life , a developed school and a bright future in their homeland - this homeland that deserves life and security .
Ladies and gentlemen , our great Palestinian poet , Mahmoud Darwish , said time and again , ' This land is worth living for ' .
In this regard , I should like to extend my deep thanks and gratitude to you , on behalf of the people of this great poet , for hosting the activities of his commemoration .
This poet is the symbol of Palestinian patriotism .
He is the poet of humanity .
To Mahmoud Darwish I say : ' Your poem , that has yet to be written , about the children of Gaza , their suffering and their hopes , will be written by a poet from among those children who upheld your spirit , just as you upheld their cause and their little dreams ' . Thank you for listening .
( Sustained applause )
President Abbas , I would like to thank you very much on behalf of the European Parliament for coming here to Strasbourg and speaking to us .
We now have the joint task of working for peace .
We in the European Union and the European Parliament want to be honest brokers of peace .
We want the people of Israel to live within secure borders and we want the people of Palestine to live within secure borders .
Our starting point is human dignity .
Palestinian girls work just as hard in school as Israeli girls .
Israeli boys love playing football just as much as Palestinian boys .
The time must come for peaceful co-existence of the kind which we have in Europe .
That is our wish for the Middle East .
We wish you , President Abbas , every success in all your efforts to bring about peace .
A secure Palestinian state and also a secure Israeli state , and this comment is addressed to Israel , must not remain a future vision .
This must become reality and it must happen within our lifetime .
If we really want this to come about , then we will be able to achieve it .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to thank you .
If circumstances permit , we will meet again on 23 and 24 February .
The Bureau of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly has asked me to visit Palestine and Israel .
I will head a delegation which will travel to Gaza and we will also visit areas of southern Israel .
If your diary allows , and I hope that this will be possible , we will meet in Ramallah .
I will , of course , also be visiting Jerusalem .
We want to help - and this comes both from our head and from our heart - to make peace possible between Israel and Palestine , between Palestine and Israel in the Middle East .
President Abbas , we would like to thank you for your hard work and to encourage you to continue on the road of reconciliation , compromise and peace .
We would like to thank you for your visit to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
- Madam President , four months ago a Polish engineer was kidnapped in Pakistan .
He is being held by his Taliban captors , who threaten to execute him today if their demands are not met .
I appeal to this House to support the Governments of Poland and Pakistan in their efforts to secure the release of my countryman .
1 .
Sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals (
Before the vote :
Madam President , with your permission I would like to ask the Council , with support from the other groups , to annex the following formal declaration to the directive and therefore to postpone the vote on the legislative resolution .
I shall read the declaration that I hope will be annexed :
' The European Parliament and the Council state that the rules on subcontracting agreed upon in Article 9 of this Directive shall be without prejudice to other provisions on this issue to be adopted in future legislative instruments . '
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , the Presidency takes note of the proposed declaration .
However , it has to inform the Members of the European Parliament that it cannot make commitments on behalf of the Council without consulting it .
Madam President , I understand that the Council must meet formally with the Permanent Representatives Committee .
I ask the Presidency to propose officially that this declaration be added and for this reason I am requesting that the vote on the resolution be postponed until the next plenary session , in order to give the Council time to carry out its formal consultation .
2 .
Challenge of energy efficiency through information and communications technologies ( vote )
3 .
Resettlement of Guantánamo prisoners ( vote )
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
( DE ) Madam President , during the last formal sitting , I asked if the use of the camera could not be made easier by leaving one seat empty .
Today that was once again not the case .
The camera was not on me , but on General Morillon and then on Mr Grosch .
Perhaps it would be possible to ensure that both the cameraman 's job and our job are made easier .
- Thank you Mr. Rack , we will remind the services .
Oral explanations of vote
- Madam President , I did , in the end , vote for this report because , as a whole , we are all in favour of preserving our environment .
That is a noble tradition of my party - the Conservative Party in Britain - but I think I have to put two riders to it .
The first rider is that we can only have a proper policy on climate change if everybody joins in .
It is simply a waste of time for the European Union , or an individual country , to have a policy .
So we have to involve the countries of Asia .
The second rider is that , in the uncertain times in which we live , a policy of climate change has to be tempered with the need for energy security .
We face a situation in the world today where all of our countries need a ready supply of energy .
That must be predominant because , without it , the economies and the welfare and the well-being of our people will not be sustained .
- ( PL ) Madam President , I would also like to speak on the subject of this directive .
I voted against the directive , as I am utterly convinced that it is extremely dangerous and poses a threat to Europe 's development .
It combines the obvious issue of the need to sensibly protect the environment with an utterly hypocritical idea , namely that humans can influence the cyclical changes in our climate .
It is precisely this part , that is , the issue of reducing carbon dioxide emissions , that makes up the most important section of this document .
The enormous sums of money , estimated at hundreds of billions , that are to be spent on this objective , will be utterly wasted , when they could be used to create real environmental and energy security in the European Union instead .
This is a very poor and tragically unfortunate solution .
- Madam President , several paragraphs and sections of the Florenz report , especially paragraph 190 , relate to agriculture 's contribution to climate change .
While low or conservation tillage is an option in most EU states and has economic as well as climate change benefits - and deserves far more support , in my view - the agricultural debate and research concentrate largely on the methane and nitrous oxide contributions of ruminant livestock .
While progress is being made , I do not support Member States having to meet their non-trading sectors ' targets for emissions reductions by the compulsory reduction of Europe 's cattle herds .
Let us not forget that what we do not produce here in Europe we will import .
One kilo of beef produced in Brazil results in six times the carbon dioxide emissions of one kilo of beef produced in Ireland .
( PL ) Madam President , the European economy is the largest importer of fossil fuels .
An increase in the price of these fuels , due to greater demand and higher extraction costs , may have a significant , negative impact on the quality of life of our citizens and make the European Union 's economy less competitive .
Efforts to save energy and introduce clean energy sources , which produce energy at a stable and relatively low price , could counteract this trend .
Making use of scientific research and using it to develop technological solutions will automatically reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
However , spreading controversial theories and scaring us with information on carbon dioxide has no added value and makes the technical and material process of reducing carbon dioxide emissions , and restricting the use of fossil fuels to produce energy , more difficult .
I support all technical and scientific activities aimed at reducing the use of fossil fuels .
Unfortunately , however , I cannot agree with the theories expressed in Mr Florenz 's report .
I do not support the report .
- ( CS ) Madam President , I would like to thank Karl Florenz for his efforts and for the democratic way in which he has managed the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
Although his original report was better than this compromise I have voted for it none-the-less .
A very wide range of views was expressed in today 's matter-of-fact businesslike discussion , some of them critical but all sharing the view that climate change is now under way and there is no doubt that with today 's level of civilisation we can manage to influence it and our responsibility to future generations is to reach agreement on effective measures .
None of them are panaceas and all of them must apply to all continents .
I believe that the Czech Presidency , despite the extreme views of the Czech president , will manage to extract fresh undertakings from the US .
- ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted against the Florenz report .
The adoption of this report is bad news for EU citizens .
The Earth 's climate has changed , is changing and will change regardless of whether or not we want it to .
This will not be influenced in any way by the absurd undertakings which the EU is imposing on itself in this area .
The Florenz report asserts that the climate undertakings adopted by the EU in 2007 are insufficient and that they must be increased .
I do not agree with this .
As long as the EU is the only part of the world reducing its emissions then the target of reducing global emissions will never be achieved .
All we will achieve will be that a large proportion of European businesses will relocate and jobs will be lost .
The report 's authors want to change everything in Europe , from food menus to tourism , where social tourism is to become the official aim .
Even Mao-Tse-Tung would feel proud of such a cultural revolution where everything old is chucked out and replaced with the new .
No rational man could agree to such an approach and I have therefore voted against it .
- ( PL ) Madam President , although 70 % of the earth 's surface is made up of water , our water reserves , especially of drinking water , are shrinking at a frightening rate .
Ever greater areas of our planet face the threat of water poverty .
The faster the rate of development , the greater the demand for water .
Research has shown that , as societies become wealthier , the demand for water increases .
There is no progress without water .
Many regions of the world are teetering on the brink of disaster .
Maintaining the status quo in terms of water management could lead to a situation where access to water will not only cause disputes , but will lead to wars .
The material situation of countries , rather than the military capabilities they might possess , will determine their success .
Water shortages will , in a very short space of time , lead to a food crisis .
We need a suitable , integrated policy , which will help to preserve and rebuild our water reserves .
We need to rationalise water usage .
- Madam President , allow me to explain why I voted against the Florenz report on climate change .
Policies relating to climate change are based to a large extent on alarmist ideologies .
The evidence for climate change is controversial .
Hypotheses blaming man for this change are also , to say the least , disputable .
Man is seen as a creature who is harmful to the environment without making a beneficial contribution .
I do not share this view .
The content of the report is a direct consequence of an ongoing fashionable green ideology stating that we must put nature and the planet first , that we cannot take care of people , their needs and interests .
The few amendments to the report calling for further progress on nuclear energy , and supporting headway on nuclear fusion , can hardly mitigate its negative impact on the whole European economy and agriculture .
I voted against the report because it is a blueprint for substantial political problems .
Instead of bringing forward ideas that nobody is interested in , we should take care of people and their needs .
- Madam President , I supported this report mainly because the paragraphs I had some concern about were either deleted or modified in a way which I felt was appropriate .
They related specifically to agriculture livestock production .
I would reinforce the point that the European Union has considerably reduced its livestock production due to CAP reforms in the past , that we are now net importers of beef and that beef is produced elsewhere with the climate change concerns attached to it .
This really shows us how important it is that there is global consensus on it and that , while Europe might lead the way , we must try to insist that others follow us because we will only do ourselves harm if we are seen to be the only ones stepping up to the mark .
Finally I support the idea in this report of a specific year targeted towards providing information and dealing with the issue of climate change in a way which brings people along with us .
There is already good work being done in this area .
- Madam President , I voted for this report because I feel , for the first time , that the European Union is in synchronisation with the United States .
President Obama has been elected to office saying that he is going to put the environment first in his programmes .
But I do not know whether my constituents will accept that we are actually going to make any difference .
Even if the United States and the European Union act in concert to limit the emission of carbon , we must consider what will happen if we do not do enough to encourage the emerging India and China to do the same - by transfer of technology and by helping the Chinese and the Indians to find the most modern low-carbon technology that we can export and help them to partner .
The fact is that , as we speak , China is making the production of carbon-intensive coal-fired power stations come on stream every two weeks .
So how are we helping ourselves limit this thing without helping the transfer of technology ?
Madam President , once again we see the European Union inhabiting a virtual world - a world that exists only in Parliament resolutions , in Commission communiqués and in Council press releases .
We condemn global warming , yet our monthly peregrination between Brussels and Strasbourg generates hundreds of thousands of tons of greenhouse gases .
We cant about sustainable land use , yet the common agricultural policy encourages the felling of hedgerows , the use of chemical-based fertilisers and the dumping of surpluses on vulnerable Third World markets .
We preach conservation , yet the common fisheries policy has created an ecological calamity , wiping out what ought to have been a great , renewable resource .
Colleagues , do you not think our voters have noticed ?
Do you imagine that , like Descartes 's malicious demon , you can manipulate their reality by controlling their perception ?
The fact is that our voters saw through us long ago , which is why , at every opportunity , they vote ' no ' .
If you think I am wrong , prove me wrong .
Put the Lisbon Treaty to a referendum : Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est .
- ( CS ) Although I have voted for the Fava report , I have fundamental reservations over the title of the directive providing for sanctions against employers of illegally-staying third-country nationals .
This is hypocritical when the black economy also includes millions of European workers , tradesmen , domestic servants and others and the harmonisation of sanctions must apply to work on the black market irrespective of where the employee comes from .
- ( NL ) The delegation from the PvdA ( Dutch Labour Party ) supports this directive 's objective , namely to penalise the employment of illegal immigrants with a view to discouraging working illegally as one of the factors attracting illegal migrants , whilst at the same time aiming to prevent and control the exploitation of migrants .
Despite a number of positive elements in this compromise , we felt compelled to vote against it for a number of reasons .
Initially , there was liability covering the entire chain right up to the main contractor .
Unfortunately , this clause did not make it into the compromise between the Council and Parliament , which is now restricted to the first stage in outsourcing or subcontracting .
This is counterproductive and encourages more outsourcing in order to avoid social liability .
Furthermore , there are insufficient guarantees that migrants will be protected and employers punished for breaking the rules .
Migrants will not be entitled to receive any outstanding wages before they are deported , nor will they be allowed to wait for their pay in the European Union .
The chances of them getting their money after they have been deported are non-existent .
This means that illegal immigrants who become the victims of exploitation and want to fight for their rights hardly stand any chance at all .
Madam President , I abstained on this important vote in this Parliament .
I am , of course , not in favour of illegal immigrants coming into our countries and taking the jobs of those who have paid their taxes and paid their way over time , but I think the responsibility here should rest not principally with employers but with the national governments of the individual countries .
It gives me the chance , by that abstention , to put on record my view that our present British Government has failed lamentably to have a proper immigration policy in our country - an immigration policy that tracks those coming in as well as those going out , that ensures there is fairness between those who are entitled to come in and those who are not , and , above all , a policy which will maintain good race and community relations , based on the fact that the people of Britain feel there is a right and proper balance between those who come in , those who are here and those who go out .
( IT ) Madam President , I wanted to raise a point of order , because as far as I understand , we have not voted on the Fava report .
I do not see how we can give explanations of vote when the vote has not taken place .
We voted on the report , we did not take the final vote , so people may well wish to express themselves on the earlier votes .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the demographic crisis is one of the most important challenges facing the European Union in the near future .
A low birth rate and longer average life expectancy mean that our society is ageing .
In the meantime , an ever smaller group of citizens will have to pay the associated costs .
A shortage of applicants for certain jobs means that illegal immigrants are being employed , as the cost of their labour is significantly lower .
Illegal employment should be punished , and its negative consequences should , first and foremost , be felt by employers , and only later affect the workers themselves .
The Directive sets out appropriate administrative requirements to be met by employers .
However , these requirements should not be excessive , as they might have a negative impact on the situation of people who have entered the European Union legally and hold valid work permits .
Being obliged to examine the applicants ' papers might discourage employers from employing foreigners and , as a result , lead to a drop in the employment rate and undermine the labour market .
- ( NL ) I am going to vote in favour of the Fava report , though it is , of course , far from perfect .
I would in any event like to express my support for the directive , which seeks to address the employment of illegal immigrants .
This is , of course , just the tip of the iceberg , because we should also address human traffickers , networks that provide support to illegal immigrants and also , of course , Member State governments that legalise illegal aliens on a massive scale .
After all , it is precisely this impunity that is one of the major draws in this whole issue of illegal immigration .
Illegal aliens can organise whatever protests they please , make demands , set up petitions , without running the risk of being caught or of being returned to their countries of origin .
A return policy should be adopted that is effective and that does exactly what it says on the tin .
Madam President , the right to determine who may cross your borders and settle on your territory is a defining attribute of statehood .
For years this Parliament has been seeking to bestow that attribute of statehood on the European Union , doing so without the consent of the voters and , in so far as one can judge from the results of the French , Dutch and Irish referendums , in the face of active opposition from the voters .
The question of illicit migration ought to be a national prerogative and the question of sanctions against employers of illicit entrants ought certainly to be reserved to the Member States .
If the European Union wants to extend its jurisdiction into this field it ought first to secure the wholehearted consent of the people for the legal basis on which it intends to do so .
That means putting the Lisbon Treaty to a referendum .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est .
- Madam President , this is a dreadful piece of legislation .
It is dreadful , because it criminalises the employer and does not criminalise the illicit immigrant .
It is nonsense .
This will create a sense of foreboding among all employers whenever they have to employ somebody .
Can you imagine what will happen when a potential employer looks at a potential employee and starts asking questions which are of a very intrusive nature ?
In addition , this has nothing at all to do with the European Union .
This ought to be a matter for national legislation and national governments - for the national parliaments of individual Member States to decide whom they want and do not want in their countries .
To criminalise national employers at a time of deepening recession is absurd .
This piece of legislation should never see the light of day .
- ( CS ) The European Union can now see the first results of the common energy policy .
The ETS auctions will begin in 2015 and the renewable energy programmes have started .
Only the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty will enable the more effective management of European priorities in the energy sphere and these are now changing .
Most important of all is political independence .
Energy supply must not be a source of political blackmail .
The second priority is to increase the share of clean energy and renewable energy .
This is the reason why these technologies , as well as nuclear energy and its operational safety and waste issues must also be targeted in research funding .
The most fundamental thing this discussion has shown is that we must also look for ways to limit consumption and show respect for natural resources .
However , this starts with the education of our children .
- Madam President , I remember a lecturer once saying to me , when I was a young master 's student , that technology offers many solutions , but , if you want to achieve things , you often need political and managerial will to achieve your goals .
Here it is once again in the European Parliament .
We talk about climate change .
We talk about energy efficiency .
Yet , let us remember that 12 times a year we move this House from Brussels to Strasbourg , not to mention the extra buildings that we have in Luxembourg .
Not only does that cost the taxpayers of Europe an extra EUR 200 million a year , but it emits 192 000 tonnes of CO2 - equivalent to 49 000 hot air balloons .
So it is time for politicians in this Chamber to stop emitting their own hot air over energy efficiency and climate change , cut out the hypocrisy and close down the Strasbourg Parliament .
( IT ) Madam President , I drive a car , and as a driver I am constantly fed up with all the persecution we face .
Some of the proposals made in this report are typical examples of this , which is why I voted against it .
Madam President , I reluctantly supported this , though I would have preferred not to have voted for it .
The reason is that we cannot create efficiency without competition .
Competition is the prime driver of efficiency in any market - energy or whatever - and here we are using a tool - technology - across the European Union to drive an energy efficiency market .
Surely we should drive energy efficiency through competition in the European Union .
Had we done so and had we looked at how we can compete with each other to increase our energy efficiency , we would have the best efficient energy market in the world .
That is why I said I voted for this reluctantly .
- Madam President , before we bid goodbye to Guantánamo by a combination of a resolution of this Parliament and the executive decision of the President of the United States - a wicked combination of naked power - let me just put on record two facts .
First of all , Guantánamo was set up in order to protect all of our citizens .
As far as the United States was concerned , it worked .
Since 9 / 11 there has not been one single act of terrorism on the United States mainland .
As he goes into retirement , let us salute the record of President George W. Bush as far as that is concerned .
I realise I have spoken the ultimate heresy in this House by saying it , but it is true .
Secondly , let us remember too that , although we have been pretty free with our advice to the Americans , let us see what Europe does now to take the burden-sharing of some of these prisoners and protecting our people from future terrorist attack .
I will not be holding my breath .
Madam President , ever eager to jump on any passing bandwagon , today the European Parliament demanded that Member States throw open their doors to Guantánamo detainees , on the very day when security services reveal that Mullah Sakir , who was released last year , is now in the high command of al-Qaeda and directing attacks on British and NATO troops in Afghanistan .
On that very day , we declare the EU is an open house for such terrorist activists .
Are we mad ?
Remember , once admitted and regularised as citizens , such people can move freely through every Member State in the EU .
I trust those who voted for this madness will stand over it when it all goes wrong .
- ( CS ) Madam President , allow me to explain why I abstained from voting on the resolution concerning the closure of the Guantánamo prison .
Yesterday 's discussion showed that everyone welcomes this popular or populist plan of the US President , but that is all we can do .
The resolution contains assessments for which we do not have sufficient verified evaluations or verified data .
We devoted three hours of heated debate yesterday to the question of where to put the prisoners and those whose crimes have not been proven .
Of course , the solution lies with the US Congress and with the individual governments of some European countries , but not with the European Parliament .
Therefore I did not vote for the resolution .
- ( NL ) Whilst the resolution on Guantánamo contains a number of elements that confirm the very foundations of the rule of law , I am not happy , of course , with the underlying tenor of this text , namely that the detainees of Guantánamo would be victims of some sort that deserve our sympathy .
They are not exactly squeaky clean .
They are people who are suspected of committing acts of terrorism but for whom conclusive evidence is lacking .
The Member States should make the necessary arrangements for the acceptance of Guantánamo inmates , or so the resolution claims .
This is problematic , to say the least .
The problem of radical Islamic fundamentalism is , in my view , considerable enough in Europe , and it bears witness to a certain level of short-sightedness to want to fight terrorism but at the same time open the floodgates to people who are suspected of having ties with al-Qaeda , the Taliban and related groupings .
- Madam President , for years this House has criticised the United States over the suspension of civic freedoms inherent in the maintenance of the secure facility at Guantánamo .
Mine was among the voices raised in concern .
I accepted - unlike some in this Chamber - that these were difficult and sensitive issues .
A number of detainees were released only to be recaptured on the battlefields of Afghanistan .
One blew himself up in a market in Iraq , killing dozens of people .
Nonetheless , some principles are absolute and ought not to be sacrificed to expediency .
One such is the principle that no one should be detained without being accused of an offence .
Colleagues , we prefaced each of our resolutions on Guantánamo with protestations of goodwill .
We spoke , we insisted , as friends of the United States .
Well , here is our chance to vindicate that boast .
The US Administration , in doing what we have long urged , asks our assistance .
Not to tender it would be mean , inconsistent , hypocritical and self-defeating .
- Madam President , those of us who believe in freedom , individual liberty and the rule of law have for years sought to persuade our American friends to close Guantánamo Bay , or the detention there .
So the country that calls itself the leader of the free world cannot put aside those values for its convenience , albeit understandable security concerns .
Now that President Obama has announced the closure of Guantánamo Bay , we should be helpful in any way we can .
However , it is not for the European Union to determine who enters the European Union countries .
It should be for Member States , and let us call upon the Member States of the European Union to do their bit to help our American friends at this time .
They have shown the will .
They have listened to us .
It is about time we listened to them , just as the European political élite should listen to the voters when , in referendum after referendum , they have rejected the Lisbon Treaty .
It is time for us to listen to the voices that count .
- Madam President , Magna Carta and habeas corpus are the bedrocks upon which the American Constitution was written .
They are also the bedrock upon which the laws of my country have been written .
You cannot charge someone and lock him up without accusing him and having a trial .
However , year after year in this Parliament , we condemned President Bush for what he did with Guantánamo Bay .
Now we have a situation where President Obama has , quite correctly , decided to do away with it .
When the American executive President has listened to what we have had to say , surely it is up to us to encourage Member States to take on the burden of our American allies .
However , that is not a matter that this Parliament can dictate to other parliaments .
It is for the national parliaments to decide that it is in their interests to help the Americans in their time of need .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( LT ) Europe needs a single strategic energy policy , which would ensure the efficient use of resources and minimize environmental impact .
The EU and Member States must ensure the development of Europe 's energy infrastructure , which is imperative as we strive to diversify the EU 's energy sources and reduce dependency on fossil fuels .
Today in the EU , the heating of buildings accounts for the highest amount of energy used and the most CO2 emitted - about 40 % of all CO2 emitted .
In this area in particular there are many opportunities to save energy .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to organise an information campaign for citizens at a national level , aimed at increasing efficient energy use , during which home and flat owners would have thermal images taken of their property and would be given information on their energy efficiency and offered recommendations on the funding of possible modernization works by requesting microcredits .
Poor energy efficiency is a sore point with post-Soviet era buildings and many owners do not know how and by what means they can save energy .
I believe it is necessary to increase aid from the Structural Funds by up to 15 % ( currently 3 % ) for dwelling renovation .
in writing . - British Conservatives welcome the broad thrust of the report of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
We believe that the report offers a significant contribution to the debate , which will lead to an effective international agreement on climate change in Copenhagen in 2009 .
We support in particular the aim of ambitious medium and long-term emission reduction targets , the promotion of renewable energy and increased energy efficiency , and the call for a sustainable approach to forestry , rainforests and deforestation .
We also believe that a low-carbon economy will trigger greater innovation , which will create new and competitive businesses and new jobs in the fields of clean technology , renewable energies and green enterprises .
However , we cannot support the concept that the European Security Strategy and the European Security and Defence Policy have a role to play in tackling the effects of climate change .
We also strongly oppose references to the Lisbon Treaty , in particular those which suggest that the competences of the European Union in the field of climate change are not already sufficient .
We believe that the EU has all the powers that it needs to help the peoples of Europe work together to succeed and lead by example on climate change .
I voted in favour of the Florenz report because I agree with the recommendations made with regard to the future integrated policy on climate change .
This report calls on the Commission to monitor closely and analyse the very latest scientific research findings in order to assess in particular whether the EU 's 2ºC target would really achieve the aim of preventing dangerous climate change effects .
At the same time , it emphasises the importance of the EU and other industrialised nations setting , as a group , a medium-term target for cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 25-40 % by 2020 , as well as a long-term target for cutting emissions by at least 80 % by 2050 , compared to 1990 , while continuing to focus on the target of limiting the rise in the average global temperature to 2ºC above pre-industrial levels , thereby giving a 50 % probability of achieving this objective .
in writing . - This is a report that shows the way forward and sends a clear message to all to take action now , before it is too late .
We cannot take risks where the prevention of nature and humanity is concerned .
We need an integrated police so as to avoid overlaps in work and we need to harmonize our aims and strategies .
The European Union should take the leading role in the battle against climate change and this report is a huge step towards that direction .
The rights to life , security , health , education and environmental protection are fundamental and it is our duty to safeguard them for the generations to come .
We are already aware of the huge damage that climate change is causing and we are duty bound to minimize this damage as much as possible .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have , today , voted in favour of the report on the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change .
In this connection , we would , however , like to emphasise that the revenues from the trade in emissions allowances should accrue to the Member States .
I voted in favour of the report ' 2050 : The future begins today - Recommendations for the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change ' because climate change may result in irreversible disasters and the era of cheap fossil energy is about to come to an end .
This is why the EU needs to join forces with its strategic partners in making every effort to reduce its current dependency on fossil fuels and increase significantly the proportion of renewable energy used .
With the appropriate investments , the European economy 's energy efficiency must grow , while polluting greenhouse gases must be cut by more than 25 % in the next 12 years .
The EU must take the necessary firm action to achieve the following objectives by 2050 : a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , a 60 % level of renewable energy use and energy efficiency .
The European Year of Creativity and Innovation can be a major benchmark in this respect , highlighting the fundamental importance of investments in scientific research and new technologies .
in writing . - ( EL ) Climate change is the result of the irresponsible exploitation of natural resources by capital for the sake of profit .
The EU considers the workers , their way of life and their consumption habits to be at fault .
It wants to put the wolf to guard the sheep , by placing responsibility for moderating climate change with precisely those who are causing it : the monopolies and the multinationals .
Energy , water , forests , waste and agricultural production are being privatised and concentrated in the hands of a few multinationals , now in the name of the environment .
The unimpeded operation of the ' free market ' , the liberalisation of markets and capitalist restructurings form the core of the measures proposed in the European Parliament report .
EU agreements with third countries demand the liberalisation of markets and public services in all these sectors .
Targets are included such as , for example , for biofuels , which destroy huge forests .
Mutations are being promoted and support is given to single crops , thereby destroying biodiversity .
Environmental protection is even being used as a pretext for imperialist interventions in accordance with the ' Solana doctrine ' .
The green economy being promoted by the EU and the USA offers a way out for the purpose of over-accumulating capital , safeguarding profits for the monopolies and increasing the exploitation of workers and natural resources .
Not only does it not solve anything ; on the contrary , it exacerbates the problem of climate change .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Florenz report on the subject ' 2050 : The future begins today - Recommendations for the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change ' because it presents the European Union , the Member States and their citizens with a number of proposals for meeting ambitious greenhouse gas reduction targets in the European Union .
I would like to stress that the climate change issue requires a cross-cutting approach at all levels of public policy making , and that investment in ' green ' technologies is also a requirement of the current economic crisis , in that it will help create more jobs .
I believe the final report by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , of which I was a member , is a highly positive contribution to the fight against climate change and clearly demonstrates the need to reach international agreement at the Copenhagen conference at the end of the year .
The report does not tackle the core issue regarding the causes of environmental abuse , which is the predatory nature of capitalism .
It just tries to share out the responsibility among all parties so as to justify proposals that are essentially based on the liberalisation of markets , with users and workers bearing the costs .
Although the final text approved in plenary is more restrained than the original proposal and does have some positive aspects , we do not agree with other points , namely when environmental protection is used as an excuse for yet another opportunity to step up the ideological offensive , to lay the responsibility on ordinary people and workers , and to commercialise all environmental activity and make it profitable .
Thus we voted for certain proposals , including those tabled by our group , which sought to improve the report 's content , but we had to show our disagreement with the attempts to commercialise everything that is essential to human life , including the air we breathe .
in writing . - Climate change is one of the biggest challenges facing the world today .
I am in favour of energy-efficient light bulbs , but frankly it is not enough .
We will all have to make and put up with changes to our lifestyle and lives that are far more drastic and dramatic .
I was recently asked at a public meeting in Cheltenham in my constituency what I thought was the most important thing that could be done to combat global warming and climate change .
My response was clear : ratify the Lisbon Treaty .
Without a strong powerful EU with competence in Common Foreign and Security Policy I do not believe we will get the US and Japan , China and India , to take the necessary measures .
The backing and encouragement of a powerful EU speaking with a single voice will do more to combat climate change than millions of energy-efficient light bulbs .
This report brings together the positions of several political groups and sectoral interests on the basis of the most recent and reliable scientific data .
This document is therefore undeniably thorough , wide-reaching , up to the minute and relevant .
I agree with the report overall , but I voted against the more direct references to the impact of livestock farming on climate change , since I felt they were excessive Agriculture must not be ostracised .
Instead , the production and consumption of local products must be emphasised , since transporting them results in lower greenhouse gas emissions .
On the other hand , I voted in favour of the references to the problems faced by agriculture as a result of climate change , as I believe that the most severely affected regions should be duly compensated .
Still on the subject of adapting to climate change , I agree that there is an urgent need to implement the new framework directive on soil protection , and that cohesion policy , water protection policy and the Natura 2000 network need to be adapted to cope with the expected impacts .
Lastly , I voted in favour of the references to the need to avoid overusing the Kyoto Protocol flexibility mechanisms , since Europe must actually reduce its emissions if it wants to retain its leading role in international negotiations and secure a global agreement in Copenhagen .
Climate change is a fact .
Some scientists nevertheless express qualified doubts over it .
Similarly , the effect of human activities , considered even by this report to be the main cause for climate change , is also questioned by some scientists .
Either way , the 22 chapters of the report provide a good problem summary from the perspective of the majority opinion of experts worldwide .
As far as the individual chapters are concerned , the Energy chapter is rather incomplete .
It states quite correctly that fossil fuels are a finite resource while completely failing to deal with the key question of securing sufficient amounts of energy in the event that by the year 2030 the global consumption does indeed increase by 60 % .
It is therefore clear that an intensive effort to construct nuclear power stations will be necessitated in the very near future .
At present this is the only recognised source of clean energy producible on a large-scale but it has its ideological opponents even in the EP .
Until thermo-nuclear fusion has been mastered there will be no alternative to nuclear energy when seeking a clean energy source .
With this provision I agree with the report .
The Florenz report establishes a very detailed list of the actions to be taken to combat climate change and to develop support policies .
However , it suffers from structural weaknesses with regard to the vital and desirable reorientation of the European Union .
The major defects are financial .
Although the creation of a carbon tax is envisaged , the analysis and implementation of this and also of the systematic carbon offset per product are not included in the 2009-2014 Action Plan .
Nevertheless , this is an essential element .
No budgetary figure has been mentioned for the definitive targeted activities and projects , for public infrastructure or innovative industrial policies , for regional development , for aid to local authorities or for research and development .
With regard to industry , the reference to ' legislative instruments ' will not suffice .
Likewise , the setting-up of a European Climate Fund is subject to the requirement ' of allowing the market to determine which technologies should be used ... '
Therefore , it will favour neither a long-term vision nor the general interest .
This is absurd .
Therefore , it is imperative that the EU very quickly looks into the question of a carbon tax , public aid to support a green New Deal and the Community budget for the prevention of climate change .
in writing . - ( SV ) There is no doubt that the climate is changing .
However , it not clear whether this is mainly or largely due to human activity or if it is mainly or largely part of a natural process .
There is considerable uncertainty with regard to what is happening and as regards what should be done about it .
Yet it is precisely this uncertainty that indicates , for example , that we should take the first steps towards slowing down our carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere .
That explains why , on a previous occasion , I voted in favour of the proposal to reduce these by 20 % by 2020 .
The European Parliament 's Temporary Committee on Climate Change has now submitted a report on how the EU should act in connection with climate change .
The report is very sprawling .
It seems as if the Members involved are engaged in appeasing particular interests , such as agriculture and tourism .
At the same time , the report demands more funding and new mechanisms , and in practice is proposing major steps towards a centralised planned economy with propaganda campaigns in schools and after-school recreation centres controlled from Brussels .
The report is so far removed from the key issues that I found myself forced to vote against it .
We cannot carry on saying ' yes ' to everything that is tabled in order to demonstrate our justified concern , uncertainty and willingness to act with regard to the issue of climate change .
in writing . - I support this report which reinstates the EU 's short-term commitment of reducing emissions by 30 % by 2020 if there is an international agreement .
It also reinstates the target included in the Bali roadmap , that industrialised countries should reduce emissions by 80 % by 2050 .
I welcome this report which urges the Commission and Council to adopt a leadership role in the upcoming post-Kyoto talks in Copenhagen and calls for minimum EU energy-efficiency standards for new and refurbished buildings .
The report calls on ECONFIN to introduce reduced VAT rates for renewable energy and energy-saving products .
I support the call for economic incentives such as a carbon trading system for countries to protect their tropic rainforests , and a call for energy efficiency measures to be adopted at local and regional level to combat energy poverty .
The European Union 's adoption of this report proves that it is actively involved in combating the adverse effects triggered by climate change .
Global warming is one of the most complicated issues which the whole planet is facing .
This is why a joint effort is required involving all countries .
The more than 150 recommendations included in this report cover most of the areas where improvements can be made to achieve the European objective of reducing the rise in temperature to 2ºC .
To ensure that this objective is achieved , every single person needs to be actively involved and properly informed about how to protect the environment and assume their responsibility towards future generations .
The European Economic Recovery Plan supports the battle against global warming not only by allocating funds for the development of innovative technology , but also by using ways which will boost energy efficiency .
Investment in research and innovation will enable the development of clean technologies in response to the challenges posed by climate change .
I feel that the measures being proposed are achievable and can be implemented in the medium and long term .
Even though most countries are facing a number of economic and financial problems , particular attention must be focused on halting the adverse effects of climate change .
in writing . - I was happy to support the final report from the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
Today 's report from Mr Florenz is based on scientific principles and maps out the challenges that face our society in various fields like transport , land-use , energy and waste management .
The current economic crisis should not be used as an excuse to row back on our climate commitments .
Some less progressive forces have tried to use the economic downturn as an excuse to renege on the necessary climate commitments .
This should be seen not only as the cynical ploy it is , coming from forces not in the least bit interested in facing up to the realities of climate change , but also as short-sighted in the extreme .
I specifically reject the notion that nuclear power has any role to play in the green economy of tomorrow and beyond .
Ireland must remain a nuclear-free island .
Clean and renewable energy sources should be the basis of our energy supply , not the dangerous short-term folly of nuclear power .
I wish you all a good day .
I give my full backing to the report and I would like to thank you , Mr Florenz , for a detailed report on the European Union 's future policy on climate change .
It is terrible that global climate change is influencing and will influence our environment and thereby our health and our society .
We therefore have a duty to progress towards agreement on a policy that will help reduce the factors contributing to a future catastrophe .
Since the decision of Parliament in April to set up the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , the negotiations on assistance in integrating European responses within a global context have been successful .
However , we must continually reassess our concerns with respect to reduction targets , energy consumption and the role of agriculture .
Through cooperation we will perhaps be able to reduce carbon emissions and slow down the process of global warming in Europe and throughout the world .
As Mr Florenz has said , there is more than one way to tackle climate change but we know that it is right to begin with improvements in efficiency and in the management of resources .
Global climate change is damaging to our environment , to our current way of life and to the opportunities of future generations .
We must do our best to slow down this process if not to halt it . I thank you all .
in writing . - ( NL ) Although this report received my backing during the final vote , this does not stop me from expressing serious objections to certain sections of it .
I do not think that the cultivation of feed crops for intense livestock breeding adversely affects the climate .
Nor do I believe that a European soil directive should be introduced to address the problem of climate change .
In the current economic climate , it is becoming increasingly difficult to finance investments in clean technology and green energy , which are so necessary in the battle against global warming .
This is why I would like to join with my fellow Members who support this report and propose measures aimed at increasing ' intelligent ' investments , which is a solution not only for the climate crisis , but also for the credit crunch because it has the potential to generate new jobs .
One such measure is the Commission 's draft regulation , being debated in Parliament , which stipulates that Member States may finance , from structural and cohesion funds , large-scale public work programmes for residential renovation .
This can bring numerous benefits .
For instance , low-income families can receive financial assistance to help them modernise their heating systems and can enjoy substantial savings on their maintenance bills .
In addition , this measure will also help reduce Europe 's energy dependency , which is a priority in light of the recent energy crisis Europe experienced .
in writing . - This report tackles key issues relating to climate change , such as a call to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions , promote renewable energy sources and improve energy efficiency .
We are currently facing a situation where the effects of climate change and global warming are creeping up on us faster than we had previously imagined .
For this reason , it is imperative that environmental policy remains a top priority for the EU and individual Member States .
Along with the Climate and Energy Package adopted in December , the EU clearly now leads the way in terms of environmental legislation and is in a position to encourage countries outside of Europe to follow suit and promote policies which seek to tackle climate change .
We simply cannot afford to ignore this issue and wait fifty years to see what the consequences may be .
I voted in favour of this report because it provides a ' roadmap in 12 action points ' of the future integrated policy on climate change .
The report emphasises the importance of the EU and other industrialised nations setting , as a group , a medium-term target for cutting greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions by 25-40 % by 2020 , as well as a long-term target of an 80 % cut by 2050 , compared to 1990 .
In order to achieve these objectives and adapt to climate change , funds amounting to approximately EUR 175 million per annum must be provided at EU level .
This involves the creation of a climate fund , financed by the revenue from the emission trading scheme and / or equivalent private funds in Member States , in order to provide the investments and solidarity required for financing a future climate policy .
Particular attention must be focused on research to ensure scientific support for the development and implementation of ' clean ' technologies .
The environmental policy must be used as an opportunity for the strategy to adapt to the effects of climate change .
It must also be applied correctly and across sectors in tackling the effects of the crisis through creating new ' green ' jobs in competitive enterprises .
in writing . - ( PL ) So far , during various legislative periods , thirteen European Parliament resolutions have been tabled on the subject of climate change .
In spite of the efforts of both the Commission and Parliament , this matter continues to spark controversy .
Mr Florenz 's report does not change the position of those who are not convinced of the decisive influence of human activity on climate change which has , for millions of years , only ever been subject to the laws of nature .
A further problem involves the very idea of an integrated policy for all European countries .
Bearing in mind that the report makes no reference to the specific circumstances of the new Member States or , more importantly , to the efforts they have made since 1989 to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions , there can be no talk of an integrated approach .
Different countries have the right to set different objectives .
Countries must have the right to choose the technology they use to obtain energy .
With regard to the recommendations to the Commission on establishing a binding 20 % target for improving energy efficiency , it seems that the suspicion that expensive , foreign energy technology is being surreptitiously promoted is not unfounded .
I voted for the Florenz Report .
It is an excellent piece of work because this report details a wide range of measures to be taken in areas as diverse as energy , biofuels , energy efficiency , mobility , tourism , agriculture and livestock breeding , soil protection and water management , and also waste and resource management , future themes , education and training .
The excellent work of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change set up on 25 April 2007 is visionary and its proposals against climate change deserve to be supported by all those involved in political , economic and social life .
A huge range of subjects is covered in the debate on Europe 's future integrated policy on climate change and should guide us in the search for reasonable , feasible , science-based solutions .
A bigoted debate , rejecting any science other than the official version , ignoring the need for research and forgoing the uncertainties of scientific research , turns science into dogma , and dogma is of little use to political decision makers .
Our priority must therefore be to focus on diversified and efficient energy production and consumption that can reduce our dependency and guarantee the quality of life that we want for everyone , Europeans and non-Europeans alike .
We are therefore faced with a huge scientific challenge , in which the public authorities have a duty to prioritise investment in research and development and also , in particular , insofar as they are market operators themselves , to foster the creation of profitable markets for more energy-efficient products .
Climate change calls for us to take a step forward in development , not a step back .
Let us make the effort .
in writing . - The targets set by the EU to reach a coordinated reduction are vital if there is to be corresponding change for the better in our environment .
I voted to improve the structure of this coordination by use of a variety of sources - including the beneficial effects of safe nuclear energy production - all of which needs to be reviewed in the light of advice from national inspectorates and changes in technology .
Given that funding is necessary I voted too in favour of ETS auctioning revenue to be used to meet the costs of any changes needed .
This includes investment in new technology .
An Emissions Trading Scheme for aviation , whilst it may have only a marginal effect , is still an appropriate way ahead .
in writing . - The debate on an integrated policy on climate change is vital if we want a 50 % cut in carbon emissions by 2050 .
I voted to adopt Mr Florenz 's report entitled ' 2050 : the future begins today - Recommendations for the EU 's future integrated policy on climate change ' .
This report was drawn up by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , which was appointed in June 2007 .
The report is a specific list of recommendations concerning reductions in carbon dioxide emissions , to be implemented by the Community bodies ( mainly the European Commission ) and the Member States .
In order to achieve these objectives , it will also be necessary to take action at local level .
Changes in our climate are sudden and have serious negative consequences .
The EU and the industrialised nations should adopt the target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by between 25 % and 40 % by 2020 and , in the long term , aim to reduce emissions by 80 % by 2050 , in comparison to 1990 levels .
The remaining recommendations contained in the report include partnership and cooperation , in the field of solar energy production , with third countries in the Mediterranean basin , achieving zero net energy consumption in new residential buildings by 2015 , and in all new buildings by 2020 , with the option of expanding this target in the long term and including renovated buildings .
The plans also include the creation of a European renewable energy community , with the aim of supporting research and development activities to develop groundbreaking new technologies .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have abstained from voting on the climate change report .
This does not mean that I believe the entire report to be bad .
However , it did combine correct scientific data and false polemics .
All the work done by the committee was one-sided and the wide range of scientific opinion was not reflected .
It is not possible to produce a balanced report on this basis .
Unfortunately this type of approach has become more common in the run-up to the European elections .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Fava report on the draft directive on sanctions against employers of illegal immigrants .
According to the Commission 's figures , between 4.5 and 8 million third-party nationals are living illegally within the European Union and are therefore the favoured targets of unscrupulous employers benefiting from illegal labour .
It is imperative for us to highlight these practices , which are unworthy of a Europe where respect for basic human rights should apply to everyone .
The time has finally come to emphasise the responsibility of those who profit from these particularly vulnerable people .
We must stop criminalising these victims by stigmatising illegal immigrants .
With regard to the measures we are advocating here , it is not only a question of penalising dishonest bosses but also of defending a specific number of social rights such as the right to be represented by a trade union .
However , we should not cry victory too soon because the threat of sanctions is not enough , rather we must have the necessary legal control instruments in place .
Only then will we be able to implement an effective common immigration policy .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament has today voted on the report by Mr Fava ( Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Italy ) relating to the consequences for employers of illegally staying third-country nationals in the EU .
Since the report charges Member States with the responsibility of imposing sanctions under criminal law , we Swedish Conservatives have chosen not to give it our support .
I support the Fava report , which we will use to impose harsher punishments on employers using illegal labour .
Fines should henceforth include costs of returning workers to their country of origin and payment of arrears ( salaries , taxes and social security contributions ) .
Other proposed sanctions range from exclusion from public grants to temporary or permanent closure .
Let us emphasise three key points in the system : firstly , the signal sent to unscrupulous or dishonest employers by imposing criminal sanctions in the most serious cases of exploitation of illegal labour , such as the employment of minors in particularly unsuitable working conditions or where the worker is a victim of people trafficking .
Next , the possibility of less stringent provisions for private individuals if the private employment conditions are in order .
Finally , the liability of companies involved in the subcontracting chain , if it can be proven that they knew about the employment of illegal immigrants by the subcontractor .
Finally , let us not forget that it is a matter of minimum standards ( every State is free to increase sanctions against employers and protection for illegal immigrants ) and that there is a clause for revision every three years enabling us to adjust our aim based on experience .
The report drafted by our fellow Member is a first step towards combating illegal employment and reducing one of the most serious aspects of cross-border crime .
Whereas until now , countries ' policies have focused more on how to prevent illegal immigrants gaining access to the labour market , from now on , we are tackling the problem at its root by punishing employers who profit from the vulnerability of illegal immigrants .
The majority of these employees work in the agricultural sector and there are countless cases where the conditions that these people have to put up with are inhumane , very often without being paid .
The regulations we are proposing will not only punish the employers , but will also ensure that workers receive any pay owing to them .
We needed provisions of this kind to set out standard regulations at Community level for punishing employers as , in the majority of cases , a steady stream of people is supplied by transnational human trafficking networks .
We must not interpret this report as meaning that the EU 's borders are going to be closed , but as a reinforcement of the Community preference principle .
Bearing in mind the demographic profile of the majority of Member States , we need to keep the labour market borders open , but with the proviso that the flow of workers is legal and suited to the Community 's needs .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am delighted with the adoption , by a very large majority , of the draft directive , which is of fundamental importance in the fight against illegal immigration and is essential for the implementation of a common global immigration policy .
Illegal employment is the principal source of attraction for those thousands of men and women crossing our borders every day imagining they will find a decent job to feed their families .
In reality , they only become the slaves of certain employers who use and abuse their situation of vulnerability and ignorance of their rights in order to exploit them and use them as cheap labour .
This directive sends a double signal : one with regard to fraudulent employers who will no longer be able to abuse the situation with impunity , and the other with regard to potential illegal immigrants who will be discouraged by stricter conditions of access to legal employment .
The compromise negotiated with the Council is satisfactory and we can only hope for the rapid implementation of this directive by the Member States in order to put an end to this situation of vulnerability suffered by thousands of people in Europe .
We can only endorse the general ban on the employment of illegal workers to discourage illegal immigration .
In the same way , we can only endorse sanctions against employers who resort to this type of labour , often to abuse it , and who are nothing other than modern-day slave traders .
However , I have some reservations .
Once again the European Union is benefiting from a case based on Community law ( first pillar ) in order to extend its competences with regard to the harmonisation of the criminal law of the Member States , with the notable exception of Ireland and the United Kingdom however , who have exercised their opt out recognised by the treaties .
I then recall what happened in France following strike action in a fashionable restaurant in Neuilly favoured by President Sarkozy : bosses claimed to be victims of a too rigid labour market or protectors of a workforce to whom they paid the legal minimum , and it became easy for illegal immigrants to obtain legal status through working - a situation that this directive will further reinforce by promising regularisation for those who report their employer .
I am afraid that in reality , in countries as lax as France in this regard , all this will not limit the influx of illegal immigration .
This report has various merits .
The first is that it has an educational objective .
It establishes the alarming fact of the increase in illegal immigration in Europe , immigration estimated at between 4.5 and 8 million according to the Commission 's own figures , and it specifies the sectors of the economy where illegal labour is most concentrated : construction , agriculture , cleaning , hotels and restaurants .
The second is that it intensifies the fight against moonlighting , in particular by introducing financial and criminal penalties for employers of illegal immigrants .
Unfortunately , the limits to this report are also numerous .
There is nothing about measures to stop these intermittent floods of illegal immigration .
The re-establishment of internal border controls is not even being considered .
Furthermore , in times of social and economic crisis and sharply rising unemployment , the prime necessity for the countries of the European Union is to protect their jobs , and so it is essential to implement national and European policies of social protectionism .
We must reserve jobs for French people in France and for Europeans in Europe .
It is a question of applying the principles of national and European preference and protection as essential conditions for the economic and social recovery of the countries of the European Union .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of Claudio Fava 's report on sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-party nationals .
We must put a stop to the employment of illegal immigrants , both in order to protect them from exploitation and to prevent the economy of the country in question from being damaged .
The most important issue is not to punish the illegal workers from third-party states , but to penalise the employers , who are in a much stronger position .
in writing . - I support the introduction and enforcement of sanctions against employers of illegally resident immigrants .
This report includes minimum rules for criminal sanctions against employers , and inspections are to be made in the sectors of activity most open to abuse , though in Scotland we are already protected by the Immigration , Asylum and Nationality act 2006 .
I voted for the draft directive , which tackles the widespread menace of illegal immigration which often gives rise to exploitation .
There are in fact between 4.5 and 8 million illegal immigrants in the European Union working in construction , agriculture , hotels and other sectors .
We must strengthen the fight against illegal immigration by introducing various types of sanctions against the employers of these illegal immigrants at European level .
It is in fact a matter of giving companies a sense of responsibility and thus contributing to the strengthening of the fight against illegal immigration .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am pleased that the European Parliament has today adopted , by a large majority , the draft directive seeking to impose sanctions against employers of illegal immigrants .
This ' sanctions ' directive fits into the EU 's strategy to combat illegal immigration , which includes the ' blue card ' promoting selective immigration and the ' return ' directive .
Moonlighting is a menace to the European economy , all the more so within the context of the current economic crisis .
The EU still seems to be an eldorado in the eyes of many illegal immigrants ; they often find work and a quality of life here which they cannot find in their own country .
It is estimated that there are between 4.5 and 8 million third-country nationals living illegally in the EU , generally finding work in the construction , agriculture , domestic work and hotel sectors .
They do poorly paid jobs , often bordering on exploitation .
Unscrupulous employers benefit from these illegal workers who are prepared to work for very poor rates and in dangerous conditions .
Thanks to today 's vote , employing illegal workers will henceforth cost employers dear and may even put them in prison .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mr Fava 's report providing for sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals .
I share the concern expressed by the rapporteur over the social consequences of this phenomenon and the conditions of exploitation in which these migrants work .
Unscrupulous employers take advantage of illegal immigrants to fill poorly paid , unskilled jobs that no one else wants to take on .
Furthermore , illegal work should be considered as nothing less than a social evil , since it can depress wages and working conditions , as well as distorting competition between businesses .
I therefore applaud Mr Fava 's initiative , aimed at protecting the rights of these vulnerable people .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Commission proposal for a directive and the related report by the European Parliament on the imposition of sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals are a monument to hypocrisy and deceit .
The real objective is not to impose sanctions against employers who barbarically exploit immigrant workers ; on the contrary , it is to punish , arrest and violently deport immigrants to their countries of origin .
It is one of a set of measures in the EU 's anti-immigration policy , as expressed in the ' Immigration Pact ' , and follows on from the notorious ' directive of shame ' providing for 18 months ' detention of ' illegal ' immigrants , their deportation and a ban on their entering EU territory for 5 years .
In fact , the proposal for a directive and the European Parliament report , which goes in precisely the same direction , intensify the repressive measures against immigrants , methodise their social exclusion and essentially facilitate their even more savage exploitation by capital .
The Communist Party of Greece votes against both the report and the Commission 's proposal for a directive .
It supports the just demands of immigrants , their legalisation , the abolition of black and undeclared employment , an increase in wages and salaries , equal pay for an equal day 's work and the full safeguarding of social and civil rights .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on addressing the challenge of energy efficiency through information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) because I believe ICTs play a crucial role in improving energy efficiency and may result in an estimated saving of over 50 million tonnes of CO2 each year .
The Member States need to make full use of the potential provided by ICTs in order to meet the targets set by the climate and energy package of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 % , increasing the proportion of energy derived from renewable sources to 20 % and achieving a 20 % improvement in energy efficiency in the European Union by 2020 .
We voted in favour of this report by a Czech Member of this House from our political group because we believe it addresses a subject of the greatest importance : addressing the challenge of energy efficiency through information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) .
These technologies can be the driving forces behind greater productivity , growth and cost reductions that make for competitiveness , sustainable development and the improvement of EU citizens ' quality of life .
That is why we agree with the proposal to suggest to forthcoming Council presidencies that they make the topic of ICTs and their importance in combating and adapting to climate change one of their priorities .
We also think it important for more efforts to be made at every level of decision-making to use all available financial instruments for the deployment and take-up of new ICT-based technological solutions that enhance energy efficiency .
Similarly , given the delay in adopting a systematic approach to intelligent ICT solutions , it is important to raise awareness of these , placing particular emphasis on lower emissions in connection with the development of towns and cities , in particular through the development of intelligent buildings , street lighting and transmission and distribution networks and through the organisation of public transport .
I supported the motion for a resolution on the challenge of energy efficiency through information and communication technologies .
ICT should become the solution of the future for practically all energy-consuming equipment , helping to achieve significant savings in terms of energy consumption .
Failing to undertake such action could lead to a significant increase in energy demand , as soon as within the next few years ( around 25 % in the space of four years ) .
The greatest savings might be possible in the sector dealing with the production and transmission of electricity .
Efficiency should be increased by around 40 % in the field of energy production and by around 10 % in the field of energy distribution .
ICT also contributes to better management of the energy grid , as well as facilitating the integration of renewable sources of energy .
Thanks to the application of ICT , significant savings will be possible in terms of the heating , air conditioning and lighting of buildings .
This will all contribute to a real reduction in CO2 emissions , both in terms of energy units and on a global scale .
These technologies , including the components themselves , as well as micro- and nanoelectronic systems , and many modern technological approaches ( for example , photonics ) , increase competitiveness and create new opportunities for businesses and the labour market .
Increasing energy efficiency involves reducing energy consumption during the production , transmission and distribution phases , as well as for the end consumer .
Bearing in mind that this is achieved by means of technological and behavioural changes , as well as economic changes , aimed at ensuring that the same level of comfort and service is maintained , modern ITC technology should be implemented as widely as possible .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on addressing the challenge of energy efficiency through information and communication technologies .
I would argue , in fact , that alongside the target of cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % by 2020 , we must also undertake to improve energy efficiency by 20 % over the same period .
For this reason , I support the motion tabled , which aims to increase awareness , for example through demonstration projects , of the importance of information and communication technologies for improving energy efficiency in the EU economy .
These technologies are a driving force behind increased productivity and growth , as well as cost reductions that make for competitiveness , sustainable development and the improvement of EU citizens ' quality of life .
I voted for the European Parliament 's motion for a resolution on solving the problem of energy efficiency through information and communications technologies as I firmly believe that these technologies can offer viable solutions to this problem .
Energy efficiency is an extremely important topic because we are well aware that the natural reserves from which we obtain our energy are dwindling all the time and will run out at some point .
Consequently , I feel that any technology which can be used to achieve energy efficiency is a benefit which society as a whole can enjoy .
in writing . - ( PL ) The issue of the European Union 's energy security has been raised many times in this Parliament , especially by representatives of the new Member States .
The crisis which has , in recent weeks , affected many Member States , has clearly shown how real the danger of having our gas supplies cut off is , and how ill-prepared we are to deal with the consequences .
Europe must finally start to show solidarity in the way it thinks and acts .
We must build a suitable transmission infrastructure , create support mechanisms for countries which will lack supplies of raw materials and diversify the sources from which we obtain them .
We must seek to find alternative sources of gas and create a system for saving energy and making our consumption of gas more efficient .
I am aware that all of these points have already been raised on numerous occasions in the past , but what good is that if we are still stuck at the drawing board ?
in writing . - The importance of energy efficiency and its contribution to meeting our climate change targets cannot be underestimated .
Energy efficiency programmes have the potential to create jobs .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the return and reintegration of detainees from the Guantánamo detention centre .
It seems to me that Europe can only congratulate President Obama on his decision to close the detention centre , something that many of us have been demanding for several years .
Therefore , this seems to me to be a good opportunity to respond to the request of the USA by putting forward a common position in line with the values of the European Union .
It is essential that we are also able to put our own house in order within our own borders and that the European countries that have allowed the CIA to covertly transfer prisoners are in turn made aware of their responsibilities .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Liberal Party 's MEPs voted against paragraph 4 of the motion for a resolution on the return and resettlement of the Guantánamo detention facility inmates , as we believe that it is the sovereign right of individual Member States to decide whether to accept inmates from Guantánamo should the US administration so request .
We are , of course , in favour of Member States consulting each other regarding possible effects on public security throughout the EU in the event that Member States wish to accept inmates .
in writing . - For many MEPs the existence of the Guantánamo Bay prison became a stick with which to beat America .
Personally , I am grateful that the United States yet again took on a disproportionate responsibility for protecting Europe from terrorism .
Nevertheless , I accept that Guantánamo Bay prison should close .
That 's not because I think that violent terrorists don 't need to be locked up ; quite the opposite , in fact .
But clearly the legal issues surrounding the detention of enemy combatants need to be resolved , and the best way of doing so is by closing Camp X-Ray .
Much as I admire and support America , it must be said that the inmates of Guantánamo are essentially America 's responsibility , not ours .
They were captured or arrested under American command and should therefore be prosecuted for and detained for alleged offences against America , under American law and on American territory .
I do not support the idea of EU Member States taking responsibility for these extremely dangerous terrorists .
However , nor do I think the EU should tell Member States what to do in this regard .
I therefore voted to abstain on this resolution .
in writing . - We have to be very careful when taking decisions like those proposed in this resolution .
We cannot just open our arms and welcome everyone released from Guantánamo .
Whilst assuring that the ex-detainees are treated with dignity we have to ensure that they are innocent beyond reasonable doubt before taking any decisions .
Any haphazard decisions may be fatal if we do not pay the utmost attention .
in writing . - While welcoming the decision to close Guantánamo , I am concerned by the willingness of European countries to admit former detainees who may maintain terrorist links .
Given the policy of free movement of people within the EU , the actions of one European country may have repercussions for others at a time when we already face complex terrorist problems .
Furthermore , our ability to deport a terrorist suspect is constrained by international conventions ( such as ECHR ) whose revision is overdue .
in writing . - I support this resolution which welcomes President Obama 's closure of the detention facilities at Guantánamo Bay and his other important and related executive orders ; Recalls that the United States must bear the primary responsibility for the closure of these facilities including the future of its inmates ; However , calls on EU Member States , in the spirit of providing fair and humane treatment for all and reinforcing international law , to respond positively to any request from the United States to aid the resettlement of Guantánamo Bay inmates within the European Union .
However , I am deeply concerned by reports that the Obama administration is to retain the practice of rendition .
We voted in favour of the European Parliament 's joint motion for a resolution on the possibility of receiving Guantánamo inmates who have not been charged with offences , since we believe that EU cooperation is essential to reinforce international law and respect for human rights , and to ensure that Guantánamo inmates receive fair , impartial treatment .
We therefore regard the Portuguese Government 's initiative and willingness to collaborate with the US Administration in the process of closing the Guantánamo detention facility as an example to be followed by other Member States , in order to support the United States in resolving this complex problem within a framework of respect for human rights and the rules of international law .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted against this joint motion for a resolution .
In view of its recitals D ( third item ) and F , I consider it unacceptable that the EU should encourage its Member States to be prepared to take in prisoners released from Guantánamo in response to an ill-advised , demagogic suggestion by the Portuguese Foreign Minister .
In fact , we should not under any circumstances agree to EU Member States accepting detainees believed to be ' potential threats ' ( recital D ) ; nor should we forget the precedent of the 61 former inmates who have been involved in terrorism since their release ( recital F ) .
Since it is impossible to safely distinguish between those who pose a potential threat and those who do not , it is obvious that the precautionary principle should apply not just in the context of REACH .
Although the joint motion for a resolution includes certain points that we consider positive , particularly where it says that ' the main responsibility for the whole process of closing the Guantánamo Bay detention facility and for the future of its inmates rests with the United States ' , it does not clarify the terms in which we should regard the extremely serious humanitarian situation in question .
As we have emphasised previously , we oppose any agreement between countries or between the United States and the European Union on the transfer of prisoners detained in Guantánamo .
That does not mean that decisions and requests freely expressed by individuals , namely for asylum in Portugal , should not be considered within a framework of respect for national sovereignty , for the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic and for international law .
The resolution , however :
fails to denounce the fact that the detention and illegal transport of citizens have not been questioned by the new US Administration ; and
completely ignores the need to discover the whole truth about the violations of international law and human rights committed as part of the so-called ' war on terror ' , including the responsibilities of the governments of several EU countries regarding the use of their countries ' air space and territory for the rendition and transport of illegally detained prisoners .
I warmly congratulate and support the decision of US President Barack Obama to begin the closure of the Guantánamo Bay detention centre .
This is an important step towards a new beginning in US policy .
I am sure that all EU Member States will support such US policies and will answer President Obama 's appeal for cooperation , or help in solving the question of released prisoners , if he asks for this .
However , I voted against the resolution article , which urges Member States , ' to be ready to accept Guantánamo prisoners ' , as I believe this question should be decided independently by each country in the Community .
I have no doubt that each one of them , once faced with a concrete case , will respond positively and offer support to the US administration .
However , that will represent their own choice and good will and respect for humanitarian and international legal norms .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Greek Communist Party MEPs voted against the joint motion for a resolution by the political parties in the European Parliament , calling for the immediate release of all detainees arbitrarily arrested and held by the USA at the base in Guantánamo and the immediate and definitive closure of the base which they also illegally maintain on Cuban soil , against the will of the Cuban people and its government .
Rather than this , the resolution calls for a ' fair trial ' for anyone the USA considers it has evidence against , calling on the Member States of the EU to accept detainees in their prisons , within the framework of the joint fight against terrorism by the EU and the USA .
It is an absolute mockery and complicity to agree to the trial and sentencing of detainees , when we all know the mediaeval torture which they suffered and hence the credibility of any such evidence following years of inhumane imprisonment .
The celebrations and salutations surrounding President Obama are making people delude themselves about the policy of imperialism .
As far as this specific issue is concerned , the order for Guantánamo maintains the facility for the CIA to ' abduct terrorist suspects ' and take them to secret prisons .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted in favour of the European Parliament 's joint motion for a resolution on the return and resettlement of the Guantánamo detention facility inmates , because I welcome the acceptance of Guantánamo prisoners by the countries of the EU .
Many EU Member States are jointly culpable when it comes to Guantánamo because , for example , they granted overflying rights for the illegal transport of prisoners .
However , the report contains a few points which make it difficult to vote in its favour .
The torture practices in Guantánamo and , in particular , waterboarding are not explicitly referred to as torture , but instead as ' harsh interrogation techniques which amount to torture and cruel , inhumane or degrading treatment ' .
In addition , the amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance asking for all secret prison camps to be closed , the right of compensation for the victims and an investigation of violations of human rights in relation to Guantánamo were all rejected .
Europe 's difficulty in dealing with the decision to close Guantánamo clearly illustrates the gap between intentions based on valid principles and reality , which is replete with difficulties .
The closure of Guantánamo is good news both in itself and symbolically .
Closure , however , does not solve the problem for which the facility was created - and which it too failed to resolve - which is how to deal with a threat to national and international security that is marked by entirely different characteristics from those of traditional enemy combatants , for whom international law was designed and is prepared .
Rather than just cooperating in possibly accepting former Guantánamo inmates - a measure that may be necessary but must take account of a number of limitations - Europe , the United States and the international community must cooperate in seeking a stable and lasting legal solution to the challenge posed by international terrorist combatants .
Without that , Guantánamo will be followed by another poor solution .
As for our taking in former detainees , not only should there be coordination at European level , but it would be advisable not to take in those who , in other circumstances , would not be granted visas on security grounds .
Willingness and caution should be the criteria adopted .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted against the joint motion for a resolution on the return and resettlement of the Guantánamo detention facility inmates .
In particular , I am firmly convinced that the responsibility for the entire process of closing the Guantánamo detention facility and the future of its inmates rests solely and exclusively with the United States of America .
Moreover , I do not agree with the assertion made in the resolution that the responsibility for respect for international law and fundamental rights rests with all democratic countries , particularly the European Union .
We cannot interfere in a matter in which the United States ' Government has sole competence .
In short , for the reasons cited above , I am opposed to the possible admission of Guantánamo inmates to the EU .
in writing . - All EU Member States must play their part in making possible the closure of the Guantánamo Bay prison .
It is no good calling on the Americans to close the place , which the new President is doing , if we cannot shoulder some responsibility .
I welcomed the news of Barack Obama 's decision concerning the closure of the Guantánamo Bay prison .
During his election campaign , Mr Obama had already underlined that closing this notorious prison would be a priority .
The matter of the return and transfer of the Guantánamo inmates may be a sign of an important shift in US policy in the right direction , namely towards respect for fundamental rights , as well as humanitarian and international law .
Now , each prisoner should stand trial .
If they are found guilty , they should serve their sentence in a prison in the United States .
Those who have not been charged and who voluntarily agree to be repatriated , should be sent back to their countries of origin as soon as possible .
Prisoners who cannot be sent back to their country of origin due to a risk of torture or persecution should be allowed to remain in the United States , where they should receive humanitarian protection and compensation .
There are currently around 242 prisoners held at Guantánamo .
Some of them are there only because there is no safe country to which they can return .
These people have not been charged with any crime .
The fight against terrorism is , and remains , a foreign policy priority for both the European Union and the United States .
However , we must strongly emphasise that it must always go hand in hand with respect for fundamental rights and the principles of the rule of law .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
- Madam President , on a point of order , I refer to Rule 142 ( 2 ) ( a ) and ( b ) on the allocation of speaking time .
Yesterday when we were discussing the Guantánamo prison , here in the Chamber , I and several other speakers were interrupted without mercy when we had exceeded our speaking time by a few seconds .

That harsh treatment was meted out by Mr Pöttering and Mr Siwiec , the Vice-President replacing him later in the afternoon .


Mr Schulz , the Socialist Group leader , on the other hand , was permitted by Mr Pöttering to exceed his time limit by far more than a minute .
Now , I would not dream of insinuating that this was because Mr Pöttering and Mr Schulz are buddies - alte Kameraden as one might put it in German - but I do spot a recurring pattern here .
Colleagues from big groups elaborating the political message the Chair wants to hear are treated with great generosity .
Colleagues from smaller groups elaborating the political message the Chair does not want to hear are treated with great meanness .
Now that is in breach of the Rules of Procedure , where it is clearly stated how speaking time should be allocated .
I want to remind Mr Pöttering and all his Vice-Presidents -
( The President informed the speaker that he had exceeded his speaking time )
I was sent here to defend subsidiarity and the sovereignty of member countries and the President and the Vice-Presidents of this Parliament have no right whatsoever to try and silence the voice of 15 % of the Swedish electorate .
Mr Lundgren , I am now cutting you off .
You have exceeded your speaking time by more than half .
I have taken note of what you have said .
I believe that it is clear to everyone .
- Madam President , can I remind you that this would not have happened to Mr Schulz .
He would not have been interrupted by you .
This is the great difference .
But you prove my point - thank you very much .
- Mr Lundgren , I am sure that you are mistaken .
I will record what you have said and it will appear in the Minutes .
It would certainly also be appropriate to discuss in the Bureau the question of differing behaviour , which is partly dependent on the amount of time available .
Kosovo ( debate )
- The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Kosovo .

( DE ) Madam President , we are discussing Kosovo today against the background of a very detailed report by Mr Lagendijk , the rapporteur , which is , of course , linked to statements from the Commission and the Council .
In this case the rapporteur has no official speaking time , which I believe is an appalling situation .
If the rapporteur were only to present the initiative report on Monday evening , he would have four minutes .
I think that this is unfair .
I would therefore ask the Bureau to consider whether someone who has worked for months as the rapporteur of the Committee on Foreign Affairs should not also be given official speaking time .
Now Mrs Kallenbach has given him her minute of time out of a sense of solidarity with a colleague from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Perhaps it would be possible , Madam President , if this is within your power , to give Mrs Kallenbach one minute under the ' catch-the-eye " procedure .
However , I would like to ask you to think about this carefully .
We need to find a different arrangement in this type of case .
- It is certainly correct that the fundamental problem should be dealt with .
As far as this specific situation is concerned , I recommend Mrs Kallenbach to request the minute under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure because that would make things significantly simpler .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I am grateful for this opportunity to take stock of the latest developments in Kosovo .
In two weeks ' time - on 17 February 2009 - Kosovo will celebrate the first anniversary of its declaration of independence , and this debate is certainly timely .
Since then , Kosovo has adopted a constitution and a completely new legal and institutional framework .
The declaration of independence created a new situation and new challenges for the international community and for the EU in particular .
The differing views of the Member States in reaction to the declaration of independence in no way undermine the Union 's overall policy objectives .
We remain committed to assisting in the economic and political development of Kosovo within the overall objective of ensuring long-term stability for the Balkans as a whole .
In the case of Kosovo , that means contributing in particular to strengthening of the rule of law , respect for human rights and the protection of minorities , as well as encouraging economic development and working for the protection of Kosovo 's rich cultural and religious heritage .
It also means continuing to see Kosovo within the wider framework set for the Western Balkans at the Thessaloniki Summit in 2003 .
The policy of supporting a European perspective for all the Western Balkan countries , agreed on that occasion , has since been reaffirmed , most recently by the Council at its meeting of 8 December 2008 .
Proof of our continued commitment lies in the rapid appointment early last year of Pieter Feith as EU Special Representative , who is based in Priština , and you will have a chance to meet him in the Committee on Foreign Affairs very soon .
His task , and that of his team , is to provide valuable support on the ground in order to help us collectively meet all our political objectives .
More recently , EULEX , the most ambitious civilian ESDP mission to date , began its mandate in early December 2008 .
Its main aim is to assist and support the Kosovo authorities in the area of the rule of law , specifically in developing the police , judiciary and customs administration .
Our main challenge over the coming months will be to intensify our engagement in Kosovo , most importantly by moving to full deployment of EULEX .
We are realistic enough to know that 2009 will present its fair share of difficulties and obstacles .
Kosovo institutions will also face many challenges in the implementation of their commitments to develop a stable multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo .
The international community 's assistance is crucial if Kosovo is to succeed in integrating fully with the rest of the region .
The Commission has announced that later this year it will present a study examining ways of furthering Kosovo 's political and socio-economic development .
This has been welcomed by the Council .
It should offer new opportunities and build on what has already been achieved , adjusted in the light of our experience over the next few months .
The situation in the north of Kosovo will certainly continue to be difficult over the months to come , and will require particular attention .
The most recent outbreaks of ethnic violence in Mitrovica in early January this year were potentially serious but were contained .
It is particularly encouraging that the authorities in Priština acted with reasonable restraint .
However , these incidents are a constant reminder of the constant risk of destabilisation there .
We will continue to monitor closely the situation in the north of the country in particular .
The Presidency is grateful for the continuing interest of Members of Parliament and for your support for the role of the Union in the region .
I particularly welcome the proposed resolution which has been tabled at this part-session .
It is encouraging that Parliament is able to give its broad support to our efforts in the region , and to the Union 's commitment to the stability of Kosovo within the wider region .
This Presidency is committed to keeping you informed , both through regular discussions here in the plenary , as well as more detailed briefings through the committees .
We are planning various activities this spring , inter alia to dedicate the Gymnich meeting in late March to the Western Balkans .
I also know that Pieter Feith will be meeting with the AFET Committee next week , and he will be able to provide a comprehensive update on the latest developments on the ground .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , just one year after the declaration of independence , the situation in Kosovo , and in the whole Western Balkans region , is overall stable and under control , in spite of some incidents .
The European Union presence in Kosovo is progressively materialising , taking over from the United Nations .
The EU special representative is residing in Priština , and the EU 's Rule of Law Mission ( EULEX ) is deployed throughout Kosovo and will be fully operational at the end of March .
A stable and multi-ethnic Kosovo is a key priority for the European Union .
The best way for Kosovo to move towards European integration is by creating a democratic and multi-ethnic society , with full respect for the rule of law , cooperating peacefully with its neighbours and contributing to regional and European stability .
This includes extensive measures to safeguard the future of all communities in Kosovo , thereby creating a basis for sustainable economic and political development .
The Commission 's progress report of November 2008 was considered by the authorities to be an objective and fair assessment of what was achieved and of the challenges ahead .
The Kosovo authorities have committed themselves to working and cooperating with the Commission in meeting these challenges .
We allocate significant funding to Kosovo under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( EPA ) , as part of the overall pledge of EUR 1.2 billion reached at the July 2008 donors ' conference .
In 2008 , the Instrument for Pre-Accession supported projects worth EUR 185 million in Kosovo , a three-fold increase compared to the previous year .
We will allocate a further EUR 106 million in 2009 .
The management of this funding is the exclusive responsibility of our Commission Liaison Office in Priština , which is now fully operational with all relevant control systems in place , and takes over from the European Agency for Reconstruction .
The Commission welcomes the draft resolution being discussed here today in the European Parliament .
It touches on many issues that we agree are of crucial importance , such as the preservation of Kosovo 's cultural heritage , the improvement of its public administration capacity , better integration among its communities , the importance of multi-ethnic education , and the plight of Roma families in lead-contaminated refugee camps in the north .
The Commission takes all these issues very seriously . Perhaps I can say a few words on each of them in turn .
Since 2004 , the Commission has financed the reconstruction of religious and cultural heritage sites - its programme with a budget of EUR 10 million - with the close involvement of the Council of Europe .
In 2008 and 2009 funding is continuing , with EUR 2.5 million more for further projects .
We consider this a very important aspect of reconciliation and have supported the establishment of Kosovo 's cultural heritage database .
Graveyards could also be included in this debate so as to ensure their proper restoration and preservation .
I would like to express our gratitude to the European Parliament for the additional amount of EUR 3 million , within the 2008 EU budget , for cultural heritage reconstruction in the war-affected areas in the Western Balkans .
The Commission has allocated half of this amount - EUR 1.5 million - to Kosovo , in a joint project with the Ministry of Culture , in the multi-ethnic town of Prizren .
We are grateful for the additional amount under this heading which is also allocated in this year 's budget .
Under the 2007 Instrument for Pre-Accession , the Commission is implementing projects to facilitate the return and reintegration of internally displaced people and refugees in Kosovo , for a total of amount of EUR 3.3 million .
We have envisaged further funding -EUR 4 million under the 2008 Instrument for Pre-Accession , and EUR 2 million under the 2009 Instrument for Pre-Accession .
This money will also contribute to improving the local capacity to reintegrate returnees into the local social and economic environment .
Gender equality is high on our agenda as well .
The Commission has provided technical assistance to the Kosovo Gender Equality Agency .
It has also supported the activities of several local NGOs working in the field of gender equality and women 's rights through the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
As regards public administration capacity , the Commission monitors the implementation of Kosovo 's public administration reform strategy and action plan .
We have stressed with the authorities the urgency of adopting the Civil Service Law .
Through our involvement in setting up the regional school for public administration we also cooperate with the Kosovo Institute for Public Administration .
Special attention is paid to the Ministry of Local Government and Administration , with a support project for almost EUR 1 million .
The Commission is making significant efforts to help reform the education system in Kosovo .
Our financial assistance is comprehensive .
It aims at improving both material conditions and the quality of teaching at primary , secondary and tertiary levels and in the vocational sector , as well as strengthening the multicultural aspects as a basic condition for reconciliation .
Following the July donors ' conference , a multi-donor trust fund was set up by the World Bank for the broader social sector , including education .
With EUR 5 million , the Commission is among the main contributors to the fund .
Altogether , EU assistance to education in Kosovo , over the period 2006-2010 , amounts to EUR 30.5 million .
The opening of a multi-ethnic European university college will receive our support once all local stakeholders reach an agreement to make this effort a sustainable project .
The plight of Roma families in lead-contaminated refugee camps in the north is an issue of serious concern .
The Commission is actively assisting in finding a swift and sustainable solution acceptable to all .
We have repeatedly called on all parties to refrain from politicising the issue , and to act only with the best interests of the Roma families in mind .
Finally , Kosovo also benefits from our multi-beneficiary programmes , covering the Western Balkans and Turkey , which fund the process of civil registration of Roma people .
Our support for Roma in Kosovo also includes education .
Together with the Council of Europe , we support quality education for Roma children , including in their mother tongue .
In my view , all this is very much in line with your proposals .
I thank all honourable Members of this Parliament very much for their attention and look forward to your questions .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur , because I believe that together we have produced a very good resolution .
This resolution calls on the Council and the Commission to ensure that joint action is taken in Kosovo , that EULEX acts together with the High Representative of the EU and that synergies are created in the interest of the economic and social life of Kosovo which is in need of improvement .
The EULEX mission must also ensure that the court cases which have been going on there for years are finally addressed and brought to an end .
There are still many atrocities which have not yet been exposed and brought before a court .
Combating corruption in Kosovo is also important , as there are still many criminals at large who remain unpunished .
In addition to what we have already heard , the European Union should consider not only taking action on a large scale , but also focusing more closely on the daily life of the people there and the opportunities for local projects involving local people .
This work is very important .
We must call on the government of Kosovo finally to begin the practical implementation of its constitution , which includes the Martti Ahtisaari plan .
The people of Kosovo must become aware in their everyday lives that they all live together .
In addition , Serbs , Albanians and all the other minorities in Kosovo must be regarded as citizens with equal rights .
The government of Kosovo must also push ahead with its decentralisation programme .
I am , of course , very much in favour of establishing a multi-ethnic European college , which would be another joint institution alongside the University of Priština and the University of Mitrovica that focuses on a shared future .
In addition , I would like Serbia to realise at last that the Serbs in Kosovo do not want to be encouraged not to take part in the government .
They must be allowed to take part in the government , in parliamentary work and in civilian life .
This is the only way in which Kosovo will flourish .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
We can confirm that the situation in Kosovo is improving .
We are grateful to the Czech Presidency and to the Commission for their good cooperation .
I am completely in agreement with Mrs Pack in confirming that the EULEX Mission is a very great challenge for the European Security and Defence Policy , one of the greatest challenges in the entire history of the European Union as a Community based on the rule of law .
It is a good thing that there is already a legal basis following the statement by the President of the Security Council , which has been welcomed by the Serbian Government .
There was tacit agreement on the part of China and Russia , who had previously rejected any settlement of the conflict .
It is essential that EULEX cooperates well with the parties concerned in Kosovo .
We must not repeat the mistakes made by MINUK , which wasted a lot of money and alienated the people of Kosovo .
Mrs Pack has also touched on this subject .
It is very important to clarify the division of competences between the Government and the Parliament of Kosovo , on the one hand , and EULEX , on the other .
We cannot take responsibility for the development of Kosovo .
The presence of EULEX in the north of Kosovo is very important in order to avoid partition of this territory .
Finally , the complete implementation of the provisions of the constitution in line with the Ahtisaari Plan is an essential matter for minorities .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , first of all I would like to express my deep satisfaction with this motion for a resolution and to thank Mr Lagendijk for his sterling work .
The result is a text that is well-balanced and to the point , while at the same time managing to deal with all of the important problems .
With this resolution , we in the European Parliament are first and foremost sending out a signal to the people of Kosovo and to the peoples of the other countries in the Western Balkans that says ' you have not been forgotten , you are part of Europe ' .
These are not merely empty words with no real meaning .
The EULEX mission , the largest mission under the common European Security and Defence Policy to date , is already underway .
It is gratifying that the mission is supported by the UN and that it covers the whole country .
With our resolution , we in the European Parliament are supporting Kosovo in this mission .
We also point out the areas in which the EU Member States can assist Kosovo .
This relates to special aid for establishing the public administration , strengthening civil society and for educational projects .
When we point out areas in which Kosovo 's leaders need to improve , for example with regard to the protection of minorities , this is because we are serious when we say that we will stand by Kosovo in its efforts to create a democratic society .
A democratic society with respect for minorities , coexisting peacefully with its neighbouring countries .
This is not only about Kosovo 's future , but about the future of the entire Balkans region and of Europe as a whole .
The road ahead is a long one , and it will be difficult .
There is only one way , and that is towards the EU and full and complete integration of Kosovo , as well as the rest of the Western Balkans , into the framework of European cooperation .
Madam President , the original sin committed when this new country , namely Kosovo , was born involved the feeling , prevalent amongst the Serbian minority in Kosovo and Metochia , as well as in Serbia itself , that the new state , and the entire Muslim majority , were set against the Serbs .
This must have had an impact on relations between Belgrade and Priština , and certainly also on relations between the people of Kosovo and the Serbs living in ethnic Serb enclaves .
If the cultural , educational and religious rights of the Serbian minority are not respected , not only will bilateral relations between Kosovo and Serbia , as well as in other parts of the Balkans , become more difficult , it will also make Priština 's road to European Union membership longer .
I agree with what the honourable Mr Lebech , who spoke before me , stated .
The government of Kosovo has to understand that respect for the rights of minorities is a European standard .
We have to strictly adhere to these principles and , in this regard , keep a careful eye on our partners in Kosovo .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) It took EULEX nearly a year before it was able to carry out its original mandate .
It is good to briefly remind ourselves today what this original mandate involved .
EULEX , the largest European mission to date - as someone already pointed out - was to develop , and be active all over , Kosovo , both north and south of the river Ibar .
EULEX was also to take charge in three areas : customs , police and jurisdiction and crucially , there was to be no - and I mean no - ambiguous relationship between EULEX on the one hand and UNMIK , the UN organisation , on the other .
Let alone that EULEX 's activities would result in that country being split into north and south .
That was absolutely not what was intended .
For a very long time , it looked as if it was impossible to carry out the original mandate on account of the notorious blockade in the Security Council .
It is only since November last year , in fact , that it looks as if things will work out after all .
It is good - two , three months on from the activities actually getting underway - to take stock and to see whether things are working out or , let me couch this in more cautious terms , things appear to be working out .
The Kosovar police are delighted with the excellent cooperation they are enjoying with EULEX .
Customs offices are finally up and running again , also , and particularly in the northern part of Kosovo , after they were burnt down last year by Kosovan Serbs .
Finally , a start has been made on the huge backlog of lawsuits in the fields of inter-ethnic violence and corruption , which demonstrates once more that EULEX 's activities are in the interests of all the communities , not just the Albanians or the Serbs .
What I really hope is that EULEX 's progress over the last couple of months will be sustained in a positive manner .
I also sincerely hope that Belgrade realises that its current approach of constructively working with the European Union is far and away more effective than trying to re-write history all the time .
Above all , I hope that the Kosovar authorities manage to solve this huge stack of problems that they still face .
At long last , corruption will be tackled , as well as organised crime , which is still far too prevalent in Kosovo . At long last , Kosovo will have a durable energy supply , based on EU legislation , and at long last , the Kosovan economy will take off .
Kosovo is an independent state and , whether this Parliament likes it or not , there is no going back .
We , the European Union , stand to gain from Kosovo developing into a viable state . This is why we are there and why we need to remain there .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , rejects the resolution that has been tabled on Kosovo .
The majority of the Member States , but not all , have recognised Kosovo in contravention of international law .
My group insists that all the regulations concerning Kosovo must be in line with international law and must be agreed with all the parties involved , including Serbia .
The recognition of Kosovo has created a disastrous precedent , which is now being followed by other regions , such as South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
The EU has launched the EULEX mission in Kosovo .
The GUE / NGL Group rejects this mission as it is based on the recognition of Kosovo in contravention of international law and therefore creates something similar to an EU protectorate .
EULEX has , and I quote , ' certain executive responsibilities ' .
This means that EULEX officials can annul simple resolutions made by the Kosovan authorities .
The EULEX mission also includes 500 policemen to combat insurrection .
On 26 January EULEX and KFOR held a joint exercise on combating insurrection .
This unfortunately indicates the close cooperation that exists between the EU and NATO in Kosovo .
At the same time , the EU and other organisations are promoting neo-liberal economic reconstruction in Kosovo , but this is not what the local people want .
For this reason , we are calling for solutions which are in line with international law and a clear vote against the EU EULEX mission .
If we really want to support the local people , the EULEX mission will not allow us to do so .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) When I paid Kosovo a working visit two months ago , I could see why many find it difficult to fathom the international presence in that country .
Moreover , I got the impression that the different levels did not always work together that well .
The European institutions should not simply shrug their shoulders .
We are caught up in this .
Via the EULEX mission , Europe is responsible for the situation on the ground .
EULEX should adopt a more assertive stance and should assist the Kosovar authorities wherever it can , whether this is solicited or not .
I should like to underline two things .
First of all , I urge the Member States that have not yet recognised Kosovo to reconsider their stance .
There is no way back for Kosovo within Serbia 's borders .
Secondly , I call for a master plan for the Western Balkans , which should work at a tangible level with all the countries involved to help them get ready to join the European Union .
This is Europe 's commitment with regard to the Western Balkans .
( DE ) Madam President , as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I would like to congratulate Mr Lagendijk on his excellent text .
We support the reform programme in Serbia and we respect , of course , the tiny minority of EU Member States which have not recognised Kosovo under international law .
However , we want to discourage people from believing that this development can be reversed .
Three-quarters of the Members of this House voted in favour of recognising Kosovo .
The Commission has also declared itself in favour , together with 23 out of 27 Member States , all the G7 countries , four of the six former Yugoslavian republics and three of Kosovo 's four neighbouring countries .
This demonstrates that this development is irreversible .
This is why it is important to look to the future , which involves a number of risks .
The first major risk is the division of Kosovo .
Until now the former Yugoslavia has been divided along the borders of the old republics or along the old internal borders of the autonomous regions .
If the map is to be redrawn , for example in Mitrovica , the result would be that , for example , the Albanians in the Preševo valley in Serbia , the people in Sandžak of Novi Pazar and others would begin to question where the borders should lie .
This would give rise to a highly dangerous situation .
For this reason , it makes sense to follow the Ahtisaari plan , which respects the old internal borders of Yugoslavia while providing mutual and extensive protection for minorities .
The protection for minorities offered by the former Ahtisaari plan , which now forms part of the Kosovan constitution , is the most comprehensive programme of protection in the world .
The Serbs in Kosovo should take this opportunity and make use of this minority protection .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you know that I myself come from a minority which was once abused to suit the purposes of others .
The Serbs in Kosovo must ensure that they avoid this type of situation .
The other danger which threatens Kosovo is that of chaos and corruption .
In this case I can only say that we must make EULEX stronger , because UNMIK was not the solution , but , in fact , part of the problem .
( DE ) Madam President , my fellow member Joost Lagendijk is in the same situation as Kosovo .
He exists , but he is not recognised by everyone as a rapporteur , although , in fact , he is one .
In this context I would like to thank him very much , together with Mr Tabajdi , for his report .
Of course , we have not made as much progress with the recognition of Kosovo as many people , including those in Kosovo , would have liked .
We must acknowledge that this has been a painful situation for Serbia .
We should not add fuel to the fire .
Instead we should make every effort to ensure that the process is a peaceful one .
I am very pleased that the leaders of Serbia , despite their many harsh words at the beginning , have attempted to legalise and neutralise the situation in order to give the EULEX mission a chance .
I would ask everyone who is opposed to the EULEX mission what situation the Serbian and other minorities in the country would be in if the EULEX mission did not exist ?
It is nonsensical from the standpoint of the Serbian minority or of Serbia to condemn the EULEX mission .
I believe that the fact that someone here in Parliament who supports Serbia has condemned the EULEX mission is simply grotesque .
However , it is true that there are some questions which remain unanswered .
The political leaders in Kosovo must make an effort to get things done .
One of our main tasks and demands is to implement all the aspects of the Ahtisaari plan , which we will vote on tomorrow as part of this resolution .
Finally , we should promote the integration of the entire region .
Of course , all the countries will have to do their homework .
However , the more progress which Serbia and Macedonia make in the integration process , the sooner we will be able to resolve the Kosovo question and the other related open questions .
Only the integration of all the countries in the region will create the conditions needed by Kosovo for peaceful development .
- ( NL ) Since all those who have taken the floor are familiar to very familiar or exceptionally familiar with the situation in Kosovo , there is no need to expand on this any further in an attempt to convince ourselves how familiar we are with the situation .
We should , first of all , rejoice at the fact that the first year of Kosovo 's independence turned out quite well in the end , and better than many had feared .
I should also like to express my delight and satisfaction at the fact that the EULEX mission finally got fully underway , thanks to the good will of many and the skill within the UN Security Council .
A great deal will depend on the success of this EULEX mission , because Kosovo was a protectorate for ten years prior to its independence .
What matters now is for all of us to guide Kosovo towards maturity .
- ( PL ) Madam President , a unilateral decision taken by the Albanian community resulted in the Serbian province of Kosovo being separated from Serbia .
Personally , I view this move as an unprecedented violation of international law .
Furthermore , this decision has had further repercussions , as events in the Caucasus last year have shown .
I would like to remind you that the United Nations did not recognise the decision taken by the Kosovar Albanians .
UN Security Council Resolution 1244 remains in force .
That is why I would warn against making any decisions before the International Criminal Court in The Hague rules on this matter .
Only then will we know the real legal status of a province which , under international law , is still an integral part of the Republic of Serbia .
I would like to draw your attention to the dramatic situation still facing the Serbian community in the self-proclaimed Republic of Kosovo .
Let us openly admit that the decision taken by certain European Union Member States to recognise that country was a fatal mistake .
It is quite simple : Kosovo belongs to Serbia .
- ( NL ) Since Kosovo announced its independence nearly a year ago , the European Union has been hopelessly divided on this .
Greece is undecided , while Spain , Romania , Slovakia and Cyprus reject this independence for domestic reasons .
The joint EULEX project with which the European Union is hoping to gain influence within Kosovo seems more like an instrument to conceal this internal division than anything else .
EULEX might be beneficial to the European Union , but could this also be said of Kosovo ?
The people of Kosovo are keen to join the European Union soon and become an equal Member State .
After nearly a century of subjugation by Serbia , they certainly do not want any new interference from outside .
A project such as EULEX could perhaps have been useful for a short while , in the first few months of 2008 , in order to avoid any chaos .
That phase is over , however .
EULEX 's late arrival now very much creates the impression that the European Union would like to turn Kosovo into a protectorate , with a military presence and administrative influence , as was previously the case in Bosnia-Herzegovina , where this policy had little success .
To secure a peaceful and harmonious future for Kosovo , it is necessary to involve not only the present government and the governing parties .
Important forces are the movement for self-determination Vetëvendosje in the south , who consider the EU 's initiative to be pointless colonialism , and the representatives of the Serbs in the municipalities north of the river Ibar , who do everything they can to maintain a permanent link with Serbia .
Without these critics of EULEX , we will not have a long-term solution .
Kosovo 's future is better served by widely accepted domestic compromises than a demonstrative display of power by the European Union .
- ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ten years ago NATO bombed Belgrade , no doubt in order to celebrate its fiftieth anniversary and to redefine its area of competence , which is restricted by the Washington Convention .
These bombings were carried out in violation of international law , that is to say , without any prior UN agreement .
One year ago , the independence of Kosovo was declared unilaterally by Priština in blatant contempt of the sovereignty of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , whose sovereignty and territorial integrity had however been reaffirmed by UN Security Council Resolution 1244 .
Today , the European EULEX mission , in association with US experts , hopes that Kosovo can become a state based on the rule of law .
If the situation were not so dreadful , it would be amusing to wonder how such a fruit can be obtained from such origins .
In the meantime , we ask this mission to ensure that the national Serbian minority is respected and valued on the land of their ancestors .
This seems to us to be a good beginning for the re-establishment of the rule of law .
- ( SV ) I was born in the Balkans .
I followed the troubles in Kosovo at close quarters at the end of the 1980s .
I saw Slovenia and Croatia become independent states and experience war at the beginning of the 1990s .
I , personally , experienced the war in Bosnia and finally left the country as a refugee .
I know that it is extremely easy to start a war , but I also know that it is a lot harder to establish peace and restore people 's trust in one another .
Kosovo is currently in a situation that will be decisive for the future generations of that region precisely with regard to this matter of restoring trust between different ethnic groups .
I am pleased that Mr Lagendijk has been so clear in his resolution about the fact that we should put discussions about Kosovo 's independence and the conflicts surrounding that behind us .
Our time and energy should now be put into discussions on how we are to strengthen the equal rights of all people to live in peace , to work to create a better future for Kosovo .
We need to concentrate on the effective protection of minorities and on improving the economic situation and combating the widespread corruption and organised crime .
Everyone in Kosovo should make it a personal task to help to stop the violence between ethnic groups .
The courts should ensure that war crimes are addressed .
Some of the Members of this Parliament regret the EU 's presence and involvement in Kosovo , but those of us who experienced the wars in the Balkans regret the fact that the EU did not involve itself both more clearly and more extensively .
There is an enormous amount of work still to be done and it will take time , but ultimately it is about restoring trust between people so that subsequent generations will have the chance to be educated and to live and work together , in peace , with respect for each other 's differences .
This is what the whole European idea is about .
( Applause )
- ( CS ) I would like to mention briefly the role of Serbia in particular .
Despite a difficult domestic situation the Serbian Government has adopted a very constructive and responsible approach to the deployment of the EULEX mission in Kosovo .
In an agreement with the UN it has also facilitated the appointment of a senior police official of Serbian nationality to the police force in Kosovo .
I firmly believe that this is the way to achieve the gradual inclusion of Kosovo Serbs and also other minorities in the political , economic and social life of Kosovo .
In this context I would also like to invite the High Representative of the European Union to ensure that the Kosovo authorities devote sufficient attention to multilateral development in the Mitrovica area .
And I share the view of Anna Ibrisagic that there is now a need to devote much more attention than before to the security and economic situation as well as to the economic development of Kosovo .

- Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Lagendijk , whose great political skills have produced a wonderful resolution for us to work from .
I thank him particularly for accepting paragraph 26 , to which I wish to draw the Minister 's and the Commission 's attention .
Here we note the exceptional ill-health of 1 500 Roma people , who are sitting on the edge of a lead mine and have been there through UN misjudgement for nine years .
I fully accept that , as Minister Vondra has said , this is perhaps not quite the mission of the European Union .
Nonetheless , I thank the Commission team for picking up this topic immediately I raised it and for visiting and for seeing the damage that the lead levels have caused .
These people have monstrous lead levels in their blood , irreversible damage , and need immediate and urgent relocation and medical treatment .
Minister Vondra , you promised that you would keep this Parliament fully briefed .
May I ask you , as President-in-Office , to give this matter your profoundest attention and to tell me what you do .
- ( SL ) I offer my sincere compliments to the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs on an excellent report .
Its purpose is to contribute to the further stabilisation and normalisation of Kosovo .
Kosovo 's successes over the past year have reinforced our hopes that multiethnic and multicultural coexistence is possible in Kosovo .
The European aspirations of not only Kosovo , but also of the entire Western Balkans , can only become a reality if this prerequisite is met .
We have made progress , significant progress at that , and now we need to take that further .
I welcome , in particular , the fact that the efforts of EULEX are also helping the situation in Kosovo to normalise .
I welcome the recent establishment of Kosovan security forces and the participation of a section of the Serbian community in Kosovo 's police force .
If we are to make more rapid progress , we need to act on political , economic , security , social and other fronts and we need to pay particular attention to what is happening at a local level , where the issue of coexistence is most sensitive .
We need to support projects which strengthen interethnic coexistence and cooperation .
In that spirit , I welcome the European Commission 's intention to employ all means at its disposal to achieve progress .
That is exactly what Kosovo needs .
- Madam President , I welcome today 's debate and resolution as the next step in the normalisation of relations between the European Union and Kosovo one year after independence .
It is important to stress that those , like Mr Van Orden and Mr Tannock of the British Conservatives , who oppose the move , have been proved wrong , with now 54 countries - including 22 of our own European Member States - offering legal recognition , and our own EU Rule of Law Mission has been deployed with the assent of Serbia .
Indeed , all along we have argued that a resolved Kosovo helps Serbia 's EU aspirations , and today we repeat that we want them to succeed .
Yesterday , the EU Justice Mission opened its first war crimes trial in Kosovo .
Today , Her Royal Highness Princess Anne of Britain is visiting a school for disabled children in Gjilan , Kosovo .
Surely , both together demonstrate Europe 's commitment never to forget past injustices but to work today towards a better future for all .

- ( NL ) I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Lagendijk on this very even-handed resolution , and take this opportunity to thank Mrs Pack , as she and her delegation have done a considerable amount of useful work in this area .
The EU 's objectives are clear : Kosovo must not become a black hole .
The primary responsibility for this lies with the Kosovar authorities .
The population must gain confidence not only in the government , but also in the legal system .
Corruption and crime undermine the state .
Women and minorities must also be fully involved .
A second responsibility lies , to my mind , with the neighbouring countries , particularly the Serb authorities .
A constructive dialogue and regional cooperation are in everybody 's interest in that region .
Finally , the European Union also has a large responsibility to bear .
With EULEX , the European Union has set its aspirations high .
It is good that the real work has now begun .
The next two years will bear out whether EULEX can really continue to make a difference in the long run .
I very much hope so .
Stability , reconciliation and the development of the rule of law in Kosovo are of major importance for the Kosovars and all the ethnic minorities in Kosovo , but they are also in the interests of the European Union .
The effectiveness of aid must be paramount in this .
Mrs Pack and I visited Kosovo not so long ago .
There is no lack of aid , but it probably could be coordinated even more and even more effectively .
Madam President , how many recognitions are necessary for a state to be independent ?
This is not the question , since the quality of the recognitions matters more than the quantity .
A declaration of self-determination does not lead to independence if the state in question is not recognised by those from which it wants to self-determine .
The independence of a state is not real as long as the United Nations Security Council does not accept it .
Moreover , a state is not independent if it is not able to offer to all communities living on its territory a fair prospect of organic integration into a civic and multicultural society , and if it is not self-sustainable and self-governable .
For all these reasons , the Athisaari Plan failed .
Asking for the status quo ante is not a solution either - one should move further .
To this end , the European Union and the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council must convene an international conference which should find a sustainable solution for democratic security , geo-strategic equilibrium and social economic stability in the Western Balkans .
Within this framework Kosovo should be put back on the track of international legality , and the region should receive a clear road map for its EU integration .
Unfortunately , the Lagendijk report does not explore such ways thus abandoning any realistic drive towards a better future .
Therefore , Romanian Social Democrats will be obliged to vote against this report .
( RO ) According to the provisions of international law and having regard to UN Security Council Resolution 1244 adopted in 1999 , Kosovo cannot be considered a state .
There are five EU Member States which have not recognised the act of unilateral independence declared by Kosovo .
However , Kosovo is a reality and we must therefore deal with it .
Stability in the Western Balkans , the region with the most chance of joining the EU in the near future , is essential .
This is why the EU must play the main role in managing the delicate situation in the area .
The EULEX mission , which has already reached its initial operational capability , is an important first step in this direction as assistance and coordination are required to ensure , first of all , a climate of interethnic cooperation , making it possible to return to a normal way of life .
The protection of all minorities in Kosovo must be safeguarded , including that of the Serb minority .
Institutions must be strengthened to avoid chaos and ensure stable development .
Properties must be given back and refugees ' right to return must be guaranteed .
The financial instruments which the EU has , in particular the pre-accession assistance instrument , must be used to facilitate social and economic development , increase transparency and promote reconciliation between ethnic communities .
Kosovo must not be isolated from the European processes in any way .
It must enjoy the European perspective in a regional context .
We need to apply the same standards in every region .
Whatever is being asked of other countries in the region must also be applied to Serbia and Kosovo .
The European Union must insist on a resumption of dialogue between Priština and Belgrade .
I feel that the resolution as it currently stands does not reflect the whole gamut of positions on Kosovo from the European Union 's 27 Member States .
This is why the Romanian delegation from the PPE-DE Group , apart from the MEPs of Hungarian origin , is going to vote against this resolution .
- ( HU ) Serbia had to be bombed to make it understand : the rights of minorities must be respected .
It was a harsh lesson .
Instead of granting autonomy to Kosovo , it has had to accept Kosovo 's independence .
Kosovo stands as a warning to EU Member States as well .
Every Member State must ensure that the traditional ethnic minorities within its territory can live in security and feel at home .
Satisfied minorities are the firmest foundation for a country 's security , sovereignty and economic development .
On 17 February 2008 , I participated personally in the official celebrations in Priština marking the declaration of Kosovo 's independence .
I hope that I was able to ascertain as well that the cultural and territorial autonomy of the Serb minority is being recognised within Kosovo 's territory .
The Kosovo Albanians were given the opportunity for a European-style solution .
Serbia has one more chance : Vojvodina .
EU Member States can also make efforts to grant cultural or territorial autonomy to the ethnic minorities living within their territories .
It would be embarrassing if certain EU Member States were to lag behind Kosovo and Serbia in this respect .
( RO ) As an MEP and member of the Delegation for South-East Europe , I expect to hear , on behalf of our common values , which we call with pride ' European values ' , that the European Parliament and European Commission are requesting , with all their power and authority , the political parties in Kosovo to become open to multiethnic representation , and that any future progress in relations between Kosovo and the European Union depends on such a development .
I expected this report to tell us that the model which the EU intends to build in Kosovo , with European taxpayers ' money , as it happens , is truly multiethnic , multicultural and multi-denominational , and not based on segregation .
In our discussions with MPs from Kosovo , they told us that this kind of model cannot be implemented for the time being .
I would like to end with the following question : if this model cannot be applied in Kosovo and if our European values do not have any place in Kosovo , what model then can the European Commission apply ?

- ( DE ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Lagendijk , as well as the Committee on Foreign Affairs , for having ensured , through this resolution and this debate , that the subject of Kosovo remains on our agenda .
It is my opinion that the people of Kosovo have certainly earned this , after the European Union 's failure there in the 1990s .
We have a debt to pay there , namely that we owe it to the people of Kosovo and of the entire region to provide them with quite intensive help them along their route into the EU .
In this respect , the absolute number one priority is the preconditions for improved economic development , as without these , social unrest cannot be ruled out .
I would like to ask the Commission to bring its influence to bear to ensure that the CEFTA agreement is actually implemented by all the signatory States .
I would also ask the Council to please ensure that the Member States handle the matter of the forced repatriation of asylum seekers in a sensitive manner .
( RO ) EULEX is the biggest civilian operation ever launched via the European security and defence policy .
I would like to highlight that the 1 900-strong international contingent includes 200 military and ordinary police from Romania .
Romania is therefore participating in EULEX because it is Bucharest 's duty to support its partners in the European Union , even though it does not always agree with the decisions made by a majority of them .
Romania has not recognised the independence of the state of Kosovo , one of the reasons being that it wants to avoid legitimising any separatist unrest .
A negotiated solution between Belgrade and Priština , possibly of a confederative nature , would have been preferable to the current situation .
However , in the given circumstances , what is important is that the European Union successfully completes the mission .
However , situations need to be avoided where the EU 's involvement is prolonged ad infinitum .
Kosovo must not become a European Union protectorate , but needs help to run its own affairs .
This aspect is important for both Kosovo and the European Union , especially in the current economic crisis and with the limited resources we have .
( RO ) I agree with many of the ideas that have been expressed in the house , but this problem is much more complex .
Romania is right when it expresses the view that the legal basis for Kosovo 's unilateral declaration of independence is highly dubious as , under international law , minorities do not have collective rights and do not enjoy the right to self-determination and secession either .
What I would like to emphasise is that people belonging to ethnic minorities have rights .
Kosovo 's secession and its recognition as a state by other countries have set a dangerous precedent , which has been followed , just a few months later , by Russia 's unilateral recognition of the independence of the separatist regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
In both these cases , President Putin clearly referred to the Kosovo model .
Separatist movements in regions such as Kashmir , Nagorno-Karabah , Transnistria , Crimea , Northern Cyprus and so on have immediately stated that these regions are just as entitled to independence as Kosovo .
I feel that in the future the European Union and its Member States will have to consistently support the principle of territorial integrity for all states and actively discourage separatist tendencies .
The European Union must make special efforts to maintain stability in the entire region of the Western Balkans and give substance to their European perspectives .
- ( SK ) Kosovo exists here as a fact accepted by some and not by others .
Even if a majority of Member States are in favour of its independence or have recognised its independence there are five Member States which have not done so - not to mention the UN Security Council .
If we want the resolution to influence the foreign policy of the European Union then it must have a unifying effect .
If we show that our common foreign policy has been forced through by majority , whether in the Council or in the European Parliament , then it will be counterproductive for the unity of the Union .
Let us seek a unified solution and let us not push through decisions which are at best ambiguous or even confusing and sloppy in their wording .
Mr President , the international rush to recognise Kosovo was , in my view , hard to understand .
There were plenty of older disputes to resolve that were worthier of the EU 's efforts : Kashmir , for example , or Taiwan , or even Somaliland in the Horn of Africa .
Kosovo 's declaration of independence has also exposed a schism amongst Member States .
There is no way Kosovo can be part of the European Union or the United Nations while some Member States do not recognise its sovereignty .
The precedent of Kosovo also provoked Russia 's indignation and recognition of the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia as states last summer .
The people of the various parts of former Yugoslavia clearly have a right to live in peace and prosperity .
We in the European Union have a moral duty to help , but this assistance should never be open-ended .
We need to see real reform in Kosovo , genuine efforts to combat organised crime and people-trafficking , and proper protection and equality for minorities , such as the Serbs .
The Commission and the Council must remain vigilant and insistent on tangible progress .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Budgetary Control is allowing itself to say a few words on high-level foreign policy .
We have established that in Kosovo - the third state that receives the most aid from the European Union - there are extremely worrying cases of corruption with grave consequences for the certainty of our budget and the financial interests of the Community .
There is a final report from a United Nations task force , the Commission 's anti-fraud office and the Guarda di Finanza .
This final report has not yet been implemented .
It dates from the end of June 2008 and exposes serious cases of corruption involving EU funds .
We await an explanation .
This final report really is a final report .
There is no follow-up organisation .
There is currently no one representing our interests on this matter .
In this respect , too , I would call on the Commission to finally appoint someone .
EULEX itself cannot do this job .
I am also opposed to us continuing to make excuses for the uncertain status of this State .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I would like first of all to thank you for initiating this debate .
I think it was the right move , to use the momentum of the upcoming first anniversary of the Declaration of Independence of Kosovo .
I think it is a timely move , especially with regard to the current economic crisis , because there is the potential danger that it will somehow disappear off our radar screen , while we still bear a lot of responsibility for completing the work : not just in Kosovo , but also in the broader area of the Western Balkans .
I guess that what has been said here by many of you - like Hannes Swoboda and others - deserves a lot of attention .
I think that the position of the Council is exactly the same .
We have a lot of challenges ahead of us .
I would like to stress the three most important pillars of our policy towards Kosovo .
The first is the indivisibility and stability of Kosovo .
The second is decentralisation and equal opportunities for all minorities there .
The third - and probably the most important and the most challenging - is the involvement of Kosovo in regional and European mainstreaming : regional cooperation in the Western Balkans .
Certainly , one day we should bring Kosovo closer to the stabilisation and association process , but still a lot of work remains to be done , and it is no secret that on certain issues , unity in the Council will be difficult to attain .
I think our goal should be to concentrate on the future rather than on the past , and I really appreciate the statements of those who did so .
Of course , dialogue with Serbia on the outstanding practical issues must be conducted with full transparency and a lot of intensity , but I think that realism should be the guiding principle for us .
The economic situation and its improvement is of paramount importance for achieving stability , so the effective management and mobilisation of Kosovo 's own resources is a condition sine qua non there , as is sound administration and mobilisation of international resources .
Also , fighting corruption and having transparent privatisation is an important element .
I think that Parliament 's support for EULEX is very important here .
Let me congratulate Joost Lagendijk on the work which he did .
It was excellent .
When I read the text , I personally had no complaints about it , though I would probably be a bit careful : we all know the economic situation in Kosovo and the energy shortages in Kosovo , as well as in the Balkans in general .
Lignite and power generation is one of the few opportunities for them somehow to build a sustainable economy and to integrate this economy into the region .
Yes , environmental concerns are important , but the booming of future economic stability is no less important .
Some of you mentioned the situation of the Roma families in the Trebca mines .
We all know that this is a disastrous situation , and you are certainly aware of the Commission of work on this subject .
There was a delegation led by Pierre Morel which visited the area in December , and they offered to meet with the Roma camp leaders in Trebca .
There is no easy solution .
We know there is an offer for them to move outside this area , but for the time being they are not ready to do that .
In fact they are declining to do that , so a lot of work also remains to be done here .
I think the meeting next week with Pieter Feith , who is also involved in this , will be an opportunity to discuss this further .
Once again , thank you very much .
I think we had a very fruitful debate , and I hope that Parliament will continue to support all our efforts in Kosovo , as well as in the region .


Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission congratulates Mr Lagendijk and welcomes his resolution : it provides for the further involvement of Kosovo in the ongoing process of bringing the region closer to Europe .
The Commission has established an effective mode of cooperation with all local actors working in Kosovo , including EULEX and the EU 's Special Representative .
We will continue this cooperation .
It is the only way our work in Kosovo can bear fruit .
Good cooperation so far has proved essential to maintain peace in this area .
The Commission financed a EUR 7 million project on the rule of law , including a component of EUR 1 million to fight corruption .
To be more specific , in December 2008 we provided detailed and comprehensive answers to all the questions raised , both orally and in writing , to Mr Bösch , Chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
They clarified the issues raised regarding EU funding and the way this has been managed in Kosovo .
They also informed members on the financial management and control systems that the Commission has currently in place .
Since then , we have received no further requests for information .
We can provide Members with copies of the material sent to the Committee on Budgetary Control , should they be interested .
I would like to refer to the remark of Ms Kallenbach concerning the Central European Free Trade Agreement ( CEFTA ) .
We hope that an improvement in relations between Serbia and Kosovo may permit the integration of Kosovo in CEFTA .
The Commission will do its best to facilitate it .
There are many important issues outlined in the resolution , such as the preservation of Kosovo 's cultural heritage , the improvement of public administration capacity , the better integration of all communities in Kosovo , the necessity for multi-ethnic education and the plight of Roma families in lead-contaminated refugee camps in the north .
The Commission intends to follow up these issues through existing instruments and in cooperation with other donors .
We will issue our study on Kosovo as part of our enlargement package in the autumn .
I am confident it will include plenty of ideas to ensure that Kosovo remains firmly anchored in the European outlook it shares with the Western Balkans as a whole .
I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 5 February 2009 .
Impact of the financial crisis on the car industry ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the impact of the financial crisis on the car industry .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I think that we are now moving into a really important issue .
Under the current circumstances , this is something that must be discussed .
Once again , we are grateful for this timely opportunity to discuss the effect of the current economic and financial crisis on the automobile industry .
As many of you are following very closely in your constituencies , the automobile industry is a key factor for the whole of the European economy .
Over the years , we have promoted the competitiveness of the sector by establishing a single European automobile market and calling for fairer competition in trade with third countries .
More recently , we have focused on reducing car emissions in order to combat air pollution and climate change .
In all these areas this Parliament has given us its consistent support .
Thanks to these efforts , and in particular to the resilience and adaptability of the European automobile industry , European cars are today among the best , the most innovative and the most competitive , as well as the safest , most fuel-efficient and environmentally sustainable in the world .
We should be proud of Europe 's record .
Nevertheless , despite its resilience , and as a result of factors largely outside its control , the European automotive sector has been particularly badly hit by the global economic crisis .
These difficulties were already apparent in November last year , when the Council agreed on an approach based on promoting even more sustainable and fuel-efficient cars , realistic targets for manufacturers , and effective incentives for stimulating demand .
In the short time since then , the situation has become more serious .
The industry has reported that 8 % fewer cars were sold in the Union last year than in the previous year , to compare 2008 with 2007 .
The situation is likely to remain as bad - if it does not get worse - in 2009 , hitting not just the automotive constructors , but also the whole automotive industry supply chain .
Ministers met my friend , Günter Verheugen , the Commissioner and the Vice-President of the Commission , on 16 January to discuss the specific problems facing the automobile industry .
They expressed particular concern that the current difficulties would put at risk a significant number of jobs and underlined the importance they attached to the future of the industry .
Of course , the primary responsibility for responding to these challenges rests with the industry itself .
The industry must be encouraged to take all necessary steps to address structural problems such as overcapacity and lack of investment in new technologies .
However , the importance of this industry for the European economy , and the fact that the sector is hit particularly hard by the current crisis , means that some sort of public support is required .
This is reflected in the European Economic Recovery Plan agreed by the European Council last December , as well as in the Member States ' national programmes .
Of course , we cannot allow short-term support for the industry to undermine its long-term competitiveness .
This means focusing clearly on innovation .
Member States agree that public support for the automotive industry needs to be both targeted and coordinated .
It also needs to respect some key principles , such as fair competition and open markets .
It should not be about a race for subsidies , and it should not result in market distortions .
In order to achieve this , Member States have confirmed their willingness to cooperate closely with the Commission on both supply-side and demand-side measures taken nationally .
The Commission has , in turn , undertaken to provide a swift response in cases where it is required to react .
More generally , the Council 's Presidency fully supports the Commission on the need to advance rapidly with the implementation of the European Economic Recovery Plan .
The Commission has also been invited to explore , together with the European Investment Bank , how the utilisation of the loans envisaged for this sector can be further improved in terms of rapid availability , project financing and frontloading of the loans , without discriminating between manufacturers and Member States .
With regard to the global environment , we clearly need to engage in an early dialogue with the new US Administration as well as with our other global partners .
The Czech Presidency is determined to push forward with this overall policy of support for the industry , whilst respecting the principles and parameters to which I have referred .
There is already a wide range of Community instruments which can play their part in providing support , not least in the area of new technology , for example in the development of clean cars .
The full potential of innovative and environmentally sustainable propulsion technologies - fuel cells , hybrid , electrical , solar power - needs to be fully explored and put into operation .
On the other hand , there are also more ready-made and rapidly available instruments , such as , for example , the scrapping scheme for old cars .
These instruments could combine the demand impulse for new cars with positive externalities in terms of transport security , reduction of emissions and others .
There are now several Member States which already use this instrument .
Therefore , the Presidency would like to ask the Commission immediately to put forward a proposal on how to encourage , in a coordinated manner , European car fleet renewal in the area of vehicle recovery and recycling , based on the analysis of the impact of these schemes in different Member States .
Our aim is to have a proposal from the Commission some time ahead of the Spring European Council , in the context of the evaluation of the Recovery Plan , and to be able to discuss the issue during the Competitiveness Council in March .
This will be headed by my colleague Martin Říman and Vice-President of the Commission , Günter Verheugen .
Such schemes may provide an important demand stimulus for the automotive industry at Community level and should also ensure a level playing field within the internal market .
I would like to underline the second half of the sentence , also in the current context .
To summarise : this is not just about supporting a key sector of our economy but is an approach from which we all stand to benefit in the long run .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Vondra has just informed you all of the outcome of the discussions that I held with the Ministers responsible for the motor industry on 16 January .
I can but confirm everything that was said , although I would also counsel caution at the same time .
We must be careful , now , not to raise hopes or expectations that we just cannot live up to .
Allow me to go into some further detail about the position of the European motor industry at this time .
Experience shows that cars are an early indicator of economic trends .
It was therefore no surprise that the heavy fall in demand in vehicles that we experienced last summer was then followed by an economic downturn in all the other sectors of the economy .
Why is this the case ?
Thedrop in demand is a symptom of a lack of confidence in the way the economy is heading .
Consumers behave no differently to enterprises in this respect .
In uncertain economic times , when people do not know what is going to happen to them , they cling on to their money .
In a private household , the purchase of a new car is the largest investment , over a number of years .
It is something that can be put off , however , as , of course , a European car can always last another year .
Everybody knows that the situation will only fundamentally improve when the general confidence and belief in the overall trends in the economy have returned .
This means that the measures that we put in place together in Europe in order to combat this crisis overall are absolutely the most important thing .
I would like to give a few more figures in order to demonstrate how important this is .
The European motor industry employs 12 million people directly and indirectly .
That represents 6 % of all the jobs in the European Union .
It is the most important sector of the economy as far as European exports are concerned .
Our biggest export surplus is in motor vehicles .
In 2007 , we produced 19.6 million motor vehicles in Europe .
Last year , this figure was nearly one million lower and it will fall again significantly in 2009 .
There are currently stockpiles of 2 million unsold vehicles .
The motor industry is the industry in Europe that invests the highest proportion of its turnover in research and development .
On average , carmakers invest 4 % in research and development . This compares with an average of just 2 % for European companies as a whole .
In simple terms , then , it is a key industry for Europe .
The economic crisis has hit this industry in every sector at the same time .
This has never happened before - it is a first - and I have to tell you that the public only think of the situation as regards passenger cars .
The plight of commercial vehicles is much more dramatic .
Here , new orders in the whole of the European Union have fallen to practically zero , and that when there is a production capacity of almost 40 000 commercial vehicles a month .
The negative impact on the employment situation is unavoidable , and for two main reasons .
We have a decided overcapacity in motor vehicles in the European Union .
The industry itself concedes an overcapacity of 20 % .
There are people who say it is much higher still .
Twenty per cent , however , is still a very high figure , and when you compare this with the numbers of people employed by this industry , we are talking about more than 400 000 jobs .
There is absolutely no doubt that European carmakers will be engaging in an accelerated implementation , during this year of economic crisis , of the re-structuring measures that have been planned for some time .
This point I will make quite clearly : there is no guarantee that , at the end of this year , we will still have all the production sites in Europe that we have at the moment .
There is a high probability that , by the end of the year , a whole series of those production sites will no longer be in operation .
There is not even a guarantee that , by the end of the year , all the European manufacturers will still be in the market .
The pressure of international competition in the motor industry is very strong .
As European legislators , we have heightened this competition still further by making considerable demands of the European motor industry over the coming years .
The industry is required to make considerable strides in terms of innovation .
So that Mrs Harms does not criticise me again straight away , I would like to make clear to her that I am not criticising this fact - I believe it is right and proper .
Do not reproach me for describing the facts as they are .
This is not criticism on my part ; it is merely an observation .
Our legislation has made European cars considerably more expensive and , in the coming years , they are to get much more expensive still .
The primary effects of this are to increase the pressure of competition , to increase cost pressure and to increase the necessity for the companies in question to achieve higher productivity .
That is the only way to survive this competitive situation .
We all know what greater productivity means in the motor industry .
In any event , it does not have a positive impact on the job figures .
That is the reality of the current situation .
Our policy now is pursuing two goals at the same time .
Firstly , it seeks to get the European industry through this crisis - and I will stress each individual word here - with the aim of losing not a single European manufacturer where possible .
Not one .
The second goal is to increase the competitiveness of the European motor industry in the long term and to durably establish Europe as the world 's leading car-producing region .
As far as the measures relating to the first of these goals are concerned , we have done everything that could be done .
We have provided the European motor industry , especially badly hit by the credit crunch as it was , with access to financing .
The European Investment Bank ( EIB ) is making EUR 9 billion available for this industry alone this year , and I have to tell you that there is no point in asking for more in this House today .
Given the EIB 's capital base , no more money can be forthcoming .
Nine billion euro is already on the table .
Thanks to the hard work of my fellow Commissioner Mrs Kroes , State aid control now takes such a flexible form , and we have changed the rules to such an extent , that the Member States have considerably greater abilities to react quickly and in a targeted manner where assistance is needed in individual cases .
The Commission is thereby taking on the role that it has acquired through legislation , which is to say that of ensuring that these measures do not give rise to any distortions of competition and that they do not jeopardise our policy goals .
I would like to mention just one example in this regard .
It is patently obvious that aid to the European subsidiaries of US companies can only be authorised where it is clear that the aid in question serves exclusively to retain European jobs .
We have implemented a range of measures to push forward the modernisation of the stock of cars on Europe 's roads , by means of which we were , at the same time , pursuing the objective of having a positive impact on the environment .
Not all the Member States are going to use the system of paying scrapping premiums , but those that do will be following the agreed principles , which is to say that these measures must not discriminate against other manufacturers .
To mention one more example , Member States cannot say , ' I will give you a premium if you scrap your old car , but only if your new car is a German one ' , if you live in Germany , or a French one or a Czech one .
It is just not possible to do this .
One thing that is possible , however - and I would welcome this warmly - is for such scrapping premiums to be linked to environmental targets .
In other words , for instance , they would only be paid if the new car bought met certain emissions standards .
As far as we can see , this system of premiums is working well and is having the positive effect desired .
There is only one way to get the commercial vehicles market going again .
Scrapping premiums , as you can imagine , are not possible in this sector .
What is needed most of all here is to give small- and medium-sized enterprises in this sector access to finance .
We are doing that .
It is also necessary to ensure , where public money is being invested , that preference is given to the procurement of environmentally-friendly commercial vehicles , for example in the case of public transport or other public services for which vehicles are needed .
We have already done all of this .
In the long term - something of which we have often spoken in this House - what is needed is to implement the recommendations of the Cars 21 process , namely to ensure the future of the European motor industry through greater efforts in relation to innovation , research and development so that the European car of the future is the world 's leading car not only in terms of the standard of its technology , its finishing and its safety , but also in relation to fuel-efficiency - meaning low consumption - and environmental friendliness - meaning low emissions .
The European industry is going with us on this , and we are supporting the associated projects as part of the European economic stimulus package , as you all know .
Allow me , finally , to say that the most important outcome of the discussions with the Member States was that we all pledged to prevent the occurrence of any race to protectionism in Europe .
Such a race to protectionism would result in the financially weaker Member States losing out and would very seriously damage the provision of social solidarity in Europe .
Another thing that we can do to stimulate demand and to help and lead the motor industry through this crisis is to ensure that the conditions of international competition , too , are also not violated .
That is a question that must be directed at the United States , in particular .
We will see what measures President Obama puts in place to counter the crisis in the US motor industry .
In this respect , I would like to point out that it is not in Europe 's interest for the American carmakers to go under .
The consequences for Europe would be catastrophic if that happened .
However , it is likewise not in our interest for the US to institute a policy that would favour its motor industry at the expense of competitors from other parts of the world .
I hope that we will get the opportunity to discuss this calmly with our American friends .
The European motor industry is not staring into an abyss .
It is in a difficult situation , but it is our firm belief that the industry is capable and strong enough to get through this difficult situation and continue , in future , to play an important role in creating and securing jobs and prosperity in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I fear , unfortunately that the message just delivered cannot surely be a message of hope intended to restore confidence .
Commissioner , I approved your last but one paragraph on what the car industry should be .
Unfortunately , I fear that the proposals made are not up to the mark and in particular they encourage some Member States to manage all alone when Europe is unable to coordinate .
What are our fellow citizens expecting today ?
They are expecting a great deal from Europe , certainly much too much , but they are expecting us to do something else .
The car industry , as you said , employs 12 million people in the European Union and is equal to 10 % of GDP .
In France , that means 2.5 million jobs or 10 % of wage and salary earners , and 15 % of expenditure on research and development .
The car industry today is experiencing an unprecedented crisis characterised by a drop in demand , by a need for finance for manufacturers and subcontractors but also consumers , and by a structural competitive challenge for companies facing ever-increasing competition worldwide .
If I did not fear being politically incorrect , I would add that the requirements placed on the car industry and the encouragement not to use vehicles are also contributing to this situation .
A coordinated response at European level is essential and urgent to take over and enhance the actions already taken by various governments .
It is essential , in the first instance , that the banking system lends normally to the car industry , that is to say at normal rates and conditions and at volumes corresponding to the needs of that industry .
Despite the efforts of the EIB , we know that credit still has not started to flow again .
Therefore , Europe should make a significant response .
Secondly , it is not only a matter of limiting the impact of the crisis but also of providing the car industry with a new future .
A genuine industrial policy is essential .
We must enter tomorrow 's world and speed up the necessary developments with regard to the protection of the environment and the requirements of sustainable development in particular .
We must develop a science-fiction culture .
It is imperative that the drive for innovation is not made to the detriment of the crisis and that public aid enables action in this domain .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Vondra and Mr Verheugen for their promptness in making these statements .

I have to say that for the most part I share their concern and agree with the realistic approach they propose .
After all , we are all aware of the situation .
I have seen one estimate saying that 2 million jobs could potentially be lost in the course of the year in the car industry as a whole , the majority of which would be in the parts sector .
We are witnessing an extraordinary contradiction .
On the one hand , we have a fleet of public and private vehicles - as you have rightly said - that is very obsolete and has high emission levels , while , on the other hand , demand has slowed down dramatically , if not collapsed entirely .
I therefore very much welcome the recovery plan decided on by the Commission , which has sought to use all the tools at its disposal , although we know that they are limited , and we understand the reasons why .
There is a real need for a genuinely counter-cyclical move to stimulate demand and provide it with strong support , in line with the environmental targets that we have worked so hard on over the last few months .
And what happens ?
What happens is that each country acts independently .
Some intervene while others do nothing ; for example , my country has done nothing so far .
Some do one thing , others do another .
I agree with you , however , that we should make an effort ahead of the Competition Council next spring to maximise coordination , at least on principles , for example linking scrapping schemes to specific emissions targets .
I think that France has come up with a good solution of varying the bonus awarded to purchasers according to the emissions level of the car purchased .
This would , I believe , make for a ' win-win ' situation in terms of employment , innovation , competitiveness and the environment .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis in the motor industry has spread throughout the entire sector , to ancillary industries , other associated sectors , commercial networks and thus services , and has terrible prospects in terms of employment .
In my view , the appalling drop in the latest registrations - in some Member States this month they are down 33 % , or 20 % , and so on - shows that the crisis is not in a technologically obsolete sector , nor is it an internal crisis caused by managerial errors in this or that company .
It is a systemic crisis , and as such must be tackled urgently and decisively by the European institutions .
Some solutions have been proposed , but the important thing is how , and with what resources and what prospects for innovation , they can be achieved .
Of course we must support demand ; consumption is the only route to recovery .
However , while this consumption support measure is implemented , which is a medium-term measure , I think we have to say that we need immediate credit support to recommence production , pay for materials and retain employees despite the fall in orders and demand .
Credit , then , is the answer , but as we were saying , the important thing is how .
I too call for Europe to take a stronger lead ; it is important for the European institutions to send out a clear message .
The United States are taking action , as are some European countries , and I hope that my country will move on from generic proposals to practical measures , but I hope for stronger European action both within and outside the recovery plan , because I believe , and have explained to the Commissioner at length , that the fate of the great European firms is our shared fate .
Large European manufacturers should not encounter competition within the common market in the form of various kinds of State aid or special terms , but should see a response from a strong , decisive and coordinated Europe , since the fortune of the European car market will be measured by our ability to face global competition together .

There is also the other matter , which Mr Sacconi mentioned and I would like to point out once more : this support is not aid , or worse , relief , that maintains the status quo , but it is an incentive for the future competitiveness of the sector , in terms of innovation , environmentally-friendly manufacturing and technologies that better respect the environment and the safety of passengers and transport .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
In car manufacturing , just as in the construction sector , resources have been focused on rapid future growth , but development in this area has been in the past and continues to be closely linked to the availability of credit .
The financial crisis has therefore hit car manufacturing particularly hard .
Stabilisation in the sector will be possible only once bank lending has normalised , and this in turn is linked with surmounting the financial crisis .
I have no doubt that the financial crisis will give rise to significant corrections in the future structure of the car market .
Our task at the moment is not to preserve existing jobs , but to preserve the future competitiveness of Europe 's automotive sector , and so public support for the automotive sector should be linked to two main goals : reducing dependence on oil and the price fluctuations connected with it , and significantly improving environmental indicators and emissions reductions .
These tasks overlap with one another .
They are also , on principle , important for the European economy as a whole , in order to reduce the risk that an increase in oil prices once the crisis has been surmounted , partly as a result of renewed car buying , might stand in the way of a joint economic recovery process .
Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , in my opinion , the first priority should be to link the crisis management of the economic crisis with the global challenge that is the climate crisis .
We would be making a big mistake if , with our economic measures , we were to pursue goals relating to climate protection and energy security as unambitious as those we have laid down in the regulation of CO2 for cars .
We must not repeat the mistake of paying any attention to the inaccurate whisperings of the motor industry .
The mistake made in that regard last winter can now be seen everywhere you look .
The same groups that held us back from implementing the ambitious regulation of CO2 for cars are now stuck with their stockpiles of huge gas-guzzlers which they are no longer able to sell .
It is my belief that we really must aim to make it clear to the carmakers that the future of cars lies in small , efficient and climate-friendly models and that every effort must be made , in connection with incentive measures , to promote such models .
It must also be made clear to what extent innovations such as electric engines are actually covered .
However , this is only possible in conjunction with a coordinated plan involving energy policy .
What I would very much like to highlight in what a previous speaker from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats said , and it is something I absolutely agree with , is that I am completely convinced that , if we concentrate solely on cars without being aware , at the same time , of how we need to restructure the transport sector and of how the public transport sector will look in ten years ' time , we will fall far short of what we need to deliver .
This , too , can lead to securing and creating a large number of jobs .
By hinting that it is not only cars , but also buses and railways , and so on that are produced , Commissioner Verheugen gave an important hint .
So , then , we must think beyond today and plan and promote future-oriented transport systems now .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has become clear that the financial crisis has deteriorated into a terrible economic and now social crisis .
We can see this from the car sector , where , I agree with Mr Sacconi , we can presume that more than 2 million jobs are at risk .
There is a danger that the crisis will result in redundancies , especially among the most vulnerable , that is to say older workers and those who lack permanent contracts .
Swift , firm action is needed .
Assistance is available , but we have to decide - and I say this quite frankly to the Commissioner - whether it should be coordinated at European level or otherwise , as certain larger states seem to be proposing .
I would argue that European coordination is required , and that it should be directed towards two areas : innovation , in relation to the climate change package and , if I may mention it again , to the Sacconi emissions regulation , and the social sphere .
It is my belief that no worker , from the old to the temporary contractor , should be laid off .
Innovation cannot be achieved by getting rid of the workers .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund should also be adapted in this light ; likewise the European Social Fund - why not ? - which currently speaks of creating new jobs but should also seek to avoid redundancies .
Labour must then be restored to its central place in Europe , to play its due role as the founder of democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are aware of the structural causes of the crisis in the automotive sector and its subcontractors .
This sector , as was the case for agriculture and textiles , is suffering social , environmental and tax relocations and dumping .
What are we going to do when the Americans , as the dollar is falling , sell their gas-guzzling , subsidised and highly promoted 4x4s on our market , which is also under siege from bottom-of-the-range vehicles from Turkey , India and China ?
There is a solution .
We must re-establish the common external tariffs abolished by the Maastricht Agreements .
Only compensatory duties at the borders of the European Union can re-establish a genuine and fair international exchange .
Let us dare to do what common sense dictates before it is too late .
However , as you know , Protocol 27 and Article 63 of the Treaty of Lisbon strictly prohibit any customs protection of the European market .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us be consistent .
Let us no longer cherish causes which are so detrimental to us .
Let us finally bury this damaging treaty and stop playing at pyromaniac firefighters .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the Presidency , but also the Commission , for their very clear statements on this situation .
I share Commissioner Verheugen 's optimism that the motor industry has recognised the signs of the times and will find future-oriented solutions for many areas .
Of course , we live in the real world , however , and following a 5 % fall in vehicle production over the last year , the industry is expecting a further 15 % fall in 2009 .
That is the biggest fall in the European Union since 1993 and will mean 3.8 million fewer vehicles than in 2007 .
It is important to realise that for every job that is held in the motor industry itself there are another five in associated areas and industries that depend on it .
That means that the financial crisis , clearly , has a particularly heavy impact on the automotive sector , as it affects both the manufacturers themselves and their customers .
Both groups very much need better access to credit .
The point has been made that the motor industry has access to EUR 9 billion from the European Investment Bank .
However , both manufacturers and suppliers do need further credit in order to finance their businesses and so , too , do customers if they are to finance the purchase of cars .
We therefore need to put our foot on the accelerator in order to shore up demand , as European passenger car registrations fell by 19 % in quarter 4 of 2008 , while those for commercial vehicles fell by 24 % .
So far in this crisis , the banks have been backed to the tune of billions of euro in order to save the entire system .
By and large , however , the motor industry 's banks have been left out .
As yet , these institutions have no access to State aid .
Across Europe , as in the United States before it , the motor industry has had to reserve billions of euro for the residual balances on leasing accounts that are not covered .
These losses - especially in the light of the 2 million stockpiled vehicles - are based on significant falls in the book value of leasing vehicles which then lead to problems in this respect , too .
In other words , there is a need for very rapid action here in order to throw a lifeline to these banks , just as has already been done for the other banks within the system .
- Mr President , Nissan has announced the loss of 1 200 jobs at its Sunderland plant in my North-East England constituency .
That is about a quarter of its workforce , and to that will be added an as yet unknown number of jobs in its supply chain .
Nissan 's Sunderland plant is widely acknowledged as the most productive in Europe .
If the plant with the highest productivity in Europe needs to lay off a quarter of its workforce , then heaven help us when this crunch fully hits the less productive .
A recovery task force has been set up in my area involving all major regional actors .
The measures they are planning - assisting job search , training and retraining , starting small companies , assisting self-employment - are all ideally suited for support from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I welcome the Commission proposals to simplify that fund .
It needs to be urgently simplified and mobilised on a massive scale as part of a coordinated European response to the crisis in the car industry .
Only a tiny fraction of that fund was used last year .
Let us not hoard it . Let us put it to work to put our people to work .
( ES ) Mr President , unlike many others , the car industry does not work on the basis of speculation but rather operates on fine margins that only turn into profit if many units are sold .
Of course cars are a significant source of greenhouse gases , but it is also true that the industry , in conjunction with its support industries , is responsible for 10 % of European GDP and provides 12 million jobs representing 6 % of employment in the Union .
For this reason it is a very important sector for the well-being of our citizens .
We cannot abandon it to its fate and to the hard and fast rules of supply and demand ; these are the very reasons why we now have this crisis in the financial sector and consequently in all other sectors , including the car industry .
We must look for support solutions that respect the principle of free competition in the European Union and which offer the necessary aid to save this manufacturing sector .
For this we need a European framework to ensure harmonisation across all Member States .
Multi-million-dollar aid has already been approved in the United States and other places .
Furthermore , some countries have adjusted their exchange rates and introduced other mechanisms to become competitive in our markets .
We must therefore not be concerned with what the rest of the world says , but rather adopt the necessary measures without further delay .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we will only succeed in fighting climate change and restructuring the world economy if we tackle the two together .
What we need is a green New Deal .
The crisis in the car industry is not a purely economic crisis .
The carmakers ' slump is also the result of their bigger-faster-heavier philosophy over recent years .
Until just a few months ago , General Motors , Daimler and co were focussing on gas-guzzlers , whilst their marketing made out that SUVs were the new city cars .
They were quite simply ignoring climate change .
That is coming back to haunt them now .
If we are now to make billions of taxpayers ' money available , the terms must be clear .
The car companies must use the money to switch to a smaller , more efficient range of products , to alternative propulsion systems - not only for the environment , nor merely for the climate , but also for the long-term security of hundreds of thousands of jobs .
I will give you an example from Germany , my home country , of how not to do it .
In Germany , if the CEO of Deutsche Bank , Josef Ackermann , decides to scrap his nine year-old third , fourth or fifth car and buy a new Porsche Cayenne , he will receive EUR 4 000 .
This is neither socially nor environmentally-minded .
In fact it is simply crazy .
We must not go along with this .
( SV ) Like many countries , Sweden , where I come from , is heavily dependent on the car industry .
Volvo and Saab are well-known makes .
The Swedish car industry has , like the rest of the car industry , been severely affected by the crisis .
Several factors have contributed to this crisis , but one factor in particular is the failure to make the necessary switch in production at an early enough stage .
The switch to the production of smaller , lower-energy and more environmentally-sound vehicles is necessary .
The EU has for a long time required a one-sided flexibility from workers .
I and the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left demand that we also impose the requirement for flexibility on the part of the management of the large undertakings .
The lack of flexibility and new thinking has , after all , contributed to the crisis we are seeing in the car industry and in other industries .
Finally , I would like to say that the car industry is an important workplace , an often predominantly male workplace , and it has our full support .
I trust that the EU will show the same level of commitment when we have a crisis and downturn in what can be considered to be female workplaces .
- Mr President , you could have guessed what these reports would say .
We have got a problem and the European Union has got to give its opinion .
It has got to give the impression that it is in the driving seat to solve the problem .
So we have a European Economic Recovery Plan of which the car industry is a part .
But in reality each manufacturer is going to look after itself as best it can , and each country will look after its manufacturers as best it can .
There is of course a possible case for some support , some financial support to the car industry and other sectors to keep capital intact and to keep skills intact .
But this can only be decided at the national level because the support - apart from the European Investment Bank mentioned by Mr Verheugen - can only be provided by national taxpayers .
But there is one thing that the European Union could constructively do here , at least until the recession is over , and that is to give car manufacturers a break from environmental restrictions .
The industry is already in serious trouble .
These environmental and other standard restrictions make cars more expensive .
You are helping to kill off an industry which is already in serious bother .
- Mr President , yesterday in my home city of Birmingham we held a car crisis summit .
I was sorry I was unable to be there because I started work in the automotive industry 40 years ago .
I have been through many crises , but nothing like this .
There has never been a situation where sales have collapsed so quickly .
I want to say to my Green colleagues that if they go and look at the unsold cars they will find that the smaller , lighter , greener models are of a higher proportion sitting out there .
This is not a failure of business models : it is a failure of the whole economic system .
One of the statistics from our summit - from Professor David Bailey in our Birmingham Business School - estimates that 300 000 consumers in the United Kingdom were refused a car credit application over the last six months .
Now some of them would probably have been refused any way , but that is the nature of what we are facing .
As regards some of the things we have talked about - and I agree entirely with what Stephen Hughes said about Nissan , and he knows them very well - we can do things at a national and a European level to help the industry through this restructuring .
It is much better to help the industry keep those core people on the payroll and retrain them than to let them go and then to hire them back again later .
We have the incentives to invest in those new cars that Ms Harms and others want .
The fact that the Greens are talking about electric cars as being a solution shows simply how out of touch they are with the real world - those are 10 or more years away , and we all know that .
The problem is actually getting buyers and demand back into the economy .
We need to tackle credit ; we need to help public buyers back into the market to buy the green buses , the green trucks , the green cars - after all , there will be things following through there .
We do not want a competitive race between businesses .
Mr Vondra was absolutely clear that this is a single market , and we do not want competitive activities there .
But , above all , we need to face up to the fact that the car dealers have to be out there selling and looking after cars .
My final point is to you , Commissioner , and you talked about Ms Kroes working on this earlier : please tell Ms Kroes to take off the table this entirely unwanted and destabilising proposal to change the whole structure of dealer contracts .

Nobody has asked for it , and we do not want it .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard the commitments of the Council and the Commission , but I would remind you that the overall drop in sales in this sector in 2008 was 8 % .
There are now thousands of workers who have lost their jobs and are reliant on unemployment benefit .
Mr Sacconi gave us the statistics earlier .
This concerns not only the large car firms , but also all businesses associated with the car industry .
I am thinking of Tuscany , where I come from .
As I have had cause to mention recently , according to the European Association of Automotive Suppliers , one in ten companies will be at risk of bankruptcy in the coming months .
I therefore believe that swift , assured and realistic intervention is needed , and I know that Mr Verheugen will be attentive and sympathetic .
There is no time to lose , Commissioner .
Coordination between European countries is essential ; otherwise we run the risk of ending up with a scattering of different measures that fail to bear fruit , either for the EU economy or in terms of support for workers .
We must have incentives , coordinated at European level , such as those Mr Sacconi mentioned , that allow investment in clean cars and support for research and new technologies .
We must act immediately to review the criteria of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to be used to support European workers , and I believe that more funding is needed , from ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( NL ) Commissioner , the rescuing of the European car industry is threatening to degenerate into an anti-European chronicle .
Every Member State is doing its own thing and launching national support measures .
There are Member States - as you know better than we do - that promise cheap loans for car manufacturers , provided that these car manufacturers buy parts from local suppliers in that country .
This , of course , is completely mad , and it is good that you stated here a few minutes ago that you will not tolerate this and intend to clamp down on this practice .
What manufacturers need today - as Mr Harbour has already stated - is measures today and investment support for the future for new environmentally-friendly and hybrid cars .
That is all well and good , but it does not solve today 's problems .
That is why it comes as very good news and as a ray of hope that the Czech Presidency is announcing a new initiative here today ahead of the forthcoming Spring Summit , namely a proposal to implement a measure across Europe that would provide a dramatic stimulus to the purchase of environmentally-friendly cars .
In addition - and this is nothing new - there is a need for fresh credit and credit guarantees for car manufacturers .
The European Investment Bank has freed up a considerable amount of money , but much more is needed to get through this difficult time .
In many cases , the companies in question are SMEs in the supply industry that need credit now in order to survive .
On a slightly different note , Commissioner , we should also seize on this crisis as an opportunity to finally force a breakthrough in the area of car tax .
We have been squabbling for years about the Commission proposal to adjust car tax .
The time has come to finally make the switch right across the European Union and transform car tax permanently into a system in which those consumers who opt for environmentally-friendly cars will be rewarded for doing so .
- ( NL ) The car industry is a very important sector for employment in Belgium .
In and around Opel Antwerp Belgium , there are 2 700 direct jobs on the line today .
The decisions are taken in Detroit , and all Opel sites are faced with overproduction .
Needless to say , the relevant authorities are ready in the wings with rescue packages consisting of State aid and bank guarantees .
To ensure that this aid is effective , though , I would urge the European Commission today , in the form of Commissioner Verheugen and your colleague Mrs Kroes , to sit round the table with the authorities and the sites involved to secure a maximum number of jobs at European level and to guarantee a coordinated approach at European level before 17 February , the day on which the decision will be made in Detroit .
This is to be done , as you said yourself , in order to prevent a race amongst the Member States to enact protectionism .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must revive the great industrial policies on which the European Union was founded .
This was the case for coal and steel .
The strength of these policies lay in the fact that that they were modernisation tools - as must be the decarbonisation of the automotive sector - while , at the same time , being social policies for the support , defence , training and protection of employees .
Therefore , I would like to put forward four proposals .
Firstly , the creation of a European Support Fund for Employees in the Automotive Sector that exceeds the Modernisation Fund because it is important to retain employees in companies during these crucial periods by supporting their level of remuneration in the event of short-time working and by supporting their training within the company .
We cannot be content with hypothetical retraining of employees who have been made redundant .
Secondly , we must create an agency for innovation and accelerate the funding of research and development in order to advance very quickly and close the technological gap between clean vehicles and safe vehicles .
Thirdly , accelerate the renewal of the vehicles on the road .
Premiums for scrapping vehicles can be effective .
They need to be harmonised at European Union level in order to avoid the effects of unhealthy competition .
However , I would like to close on this point .
I fully understand the meaning of the word competition , but it is also necessary ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Ladies and gentlemen , it is now time for the President to receive additional requests to speak but we have a problem as many Members have requested the floor .
I am therefore going to adhere very strictly to the Bureau 's decision to give the floor to five Members .
They will be automatically cut off as soon as the minute assigned to each is over .
( RO ) Amidst all the debates about the crisis in the car industry and the decisions which will arise from this , we must not overlook the problems for car component producers .
They , in turn , have been affected by the crisis as a result of the domino effect because they are at the mercy of the customers ' production stoppages .
In Romania , for example , there are more than 400 companies involved in producing car components , which achieved a total turnover in 2008 of EUR 8 billion .
Three-quarters of these companies are small and usually work for a single customer . This is why the effects of the crisis are being felt extremely hard .
In these circumstances , companies need to resort to redundancies or find solutions such as reducing working hours or giving unpaid leave .
Tyre manufacturers are just as severely affected .
Bearing in mind the large number of employees within these companies , I feel that car component and tyre manufacturers must be included in any future solution for providing economic support during this crisis .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Verheugen has just set out for us how dramatic the figures are and what the current situation is in the automotive market .
Dramatic events , then , require harmonised action .
In 2006 , we , in the European Parliament , launched an own-initiative report on the harmonisation of vehicle tax , which we hoped would be based on CO2 and consumption .
I believe that this would represent an economic programme through which the Council could show , as one - as this would have to be decided unanimously - how consumption-based vehicle taxes could be brought on-line .
With regard to what my colleague , Mrs De Vits , was talking about , which is to say General Motors , I would like to ask the Commission whether it is taking precautions for the eventuality of the collapse of the parent company .
In such an event , would the Commission act harmoniously to find a European solution for General Motors ' subsidiaries ?
- ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to three issues in this debate .
The governments of European Member States are providing automobile manufacturers with significant financial support , amounting to tens of billions of euros .
The German Government , in addition to supporting German manufacturers , has decided to assist vehicle users .
Anyone who decides to send their old car to the scrap yard will receive EUR 2500 .
The European Commission , which has , to date , strictly monitored compliance with the rules for providing State aid to companies , has been very quick to grant its consent in all these cases , generally adapting its decisions to earlier decisions made by Member State governments concerning these matters .
Without calling into question the principles behind the action taken to aid the car manufacturing industry in Europe , I would like to once again remind you of how painfully unfair the European Commission 's decision , namely that State aid given by the Polish Government to Polish shipyards must be repaid , was .
As a result of this decision , around 50 000 jobs are now being cut in the Polish ship-building sector itself , while over ten thousand jobs will be lost in related industries in the future .
- ( SK ) Commissioner Verheugen , the European Commission must take concrete steps towards getting the automobile industry back on its feet .
First and foremost , we must prevent distortions of the internal market .
The protective measures proposed by some states are no way to tackle the current crisis .
I call on the Commission to submit measures for a European scrapping scheme as quickly as possible .
Mr Vondra , I expect from the Council that the Member States during the European Council 's meeting in March will approve a scrapping scheme that will directly boost the purchasing power of consumers intending to buy new cars .
I firmly believe that if the EU wants to be the largest exporter of cars and at the same time wants to be a global leader in the fight against climate change then it must help its car industry , which is the largest private investor in research and development .
Through funding research and development , through supporting investment ...
- Mr President , I was listening to the debate quite carefully and I am not going to bring forward anything new .
I would just like to stress a few remarks that were made , which in my opinion should be overarching the whole debate .
I refer to Mr Vondra 's words that we should take care to take into account fair competition and we should avoid market distortion , and the Commissioner 's remarks that we should be fair and not raise false expectations .
Above all , Commissioner , thank you for saying that we should allow our manufacturers to be more flexible through less regulation , less law and less exorbitant bureaucracy .
Let me take 30 seconds to explain the rule established by the Bureau to you , because I recognise that it is most disagreeable for Members to request the floor but not to be given it .
The Bureau decided that the fundamental debate time is that assigned to Members who speak using the time allocated to the different parliamentary groups .
Subsequently , in the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure , the floor is given to five Members for one minute each , in order from the largest to the smallest group .
However , if there are six requests , and we have six minutes available , they can all be heard .
It can be stretched to six minutes , possibly seven .
However , in this case , 12 Members requested the floor .
Only five of them had their request granted , as laid down by the Bureau for this point in the debate .
I am clarifying this so it can be taken into account on subsequent occasions .
Mr Vondra now has the floor to respond to the various speeches on behalf of the Council .
Minister , you have the floor .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I should like to thank Members for a very useful debate .
The Council appreciates all your contributions to the debate and will try to do its best to play its part , with the Commission , in fixing as many problems as we can in the automotive industry .
There is no doubt that there should be some short-term measures , and they are already happening at Member State level .
So I think we are in agreement that those measures must be realistically sustainable financially , as well as in other respects .
They should be targeted , effective and , most of all , must be carried out in a way that would be compatible with the strict state aid rules under Community law .
I informed you , for example , of our initiatives regarding the scrapping scheme ; so it is really important that the steps being taken are in conformity with the competition and state aid rules and avoid distortion of the single market .
My second point is that we should still bear in mind that the European automobile industry leads the world - we are exporters , those who are producing the cars - and , in this light , we should bear in mind the need for maintaining the long-term effectiveness , as well as the competitiveness of this industry .
So the measures being taken must fulfil certain criteria regarding the long-term viability and competitiveness of the European industry , including investment in innovation and clean cars etc .
So the Council is making all the necessary efforts to ensure that all those efforts for RTD and innovations in the automotive industry , but also short-term measures in this report , are fully coherent with the overarching goals of the Lisbon Strategy .
My third point is that we must follow developments outside Europe .
We are certainly aware that the crisis in the US automotive sector is structural and deep , and US producers are in a much worse position than European car makers .
So it is obvious - and Günter Verheugen mentioned this - that the US cannot allow its automotive industry to simply die , because it would not be beneficial for us .
But we still have to work politically with our international partners , in particular through the WTO , in order to ensure that a level playing field is maintained as far as possible .
The same applies to the other automobile makers and industries in Asia .
We are also watching developments in Korea and Japan etc .
We are now in the run-up to the Competitiveness Council , which will take place in early March , and we hope to produce a high-quality and , of course , consensual decision for the European Spring Council , which will deal mostly with economic issues .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , I agree with what a lot of speakers have said , in particular Mrs Harms .
The short-term measures that we are now putting in place must in no way run counter to our long-term goals .
That is the bottom line .
As you have been so nice , I too will now be nice and say something that will definitely please you and that I said here back in 2006 , namely that the future of the European motor industry will be a green one or this industry will not have a future in Europe .
Let me make that quite clear .
People can argue about whether the choice of models produced by European manufacturers , especially the German manufacturers , was responsible for the crisis we are now in .
I do not know .
There have been environmentally-friendly cars in the past , and low-consumption models too - think of Mercedes ' Smart car , which led to billions in losses for the company .
It is not quite as black and white as you might think , therefore .
From an environmental point of view , the choice of models was clearly wrong and the fact that the changeover is being made now , in a crisis , does not make it easier , but that does not change the fact that this changeover is necessary and needs to take place quickly .
On this point , then , we are in complete agreement .
A tariff barrier against cars from the US , Mr Louis , is definitively not something that we will be introducing .
If there is one thing we will not be doing , this is it .
American cars play no real role in the European market , whereas European cars play a large role in the US market .
If there is a voice here in the European Parliament calling for us to protect our market against American cars , I fear that there will be a voice in the US Congress in Washington saying that they should protect their market from European cars .
Our position would not look too good in such a situation .
I would ask you in all seriousness not to pursue this idea any further .
I can only lend my complete support to what Mr Groote had to say about vehicle tax .
I also thought that the pointed observations made specifically on this topic were sound .
The reshaping of vehicle tax according to a CO2-based principle is something the Commission has been calling for for some time and it saddens me that progress in this matter has been so sluggish .
Mr Groote , you will understand that I cannot express any public view about the question you put to General Motors and Opel .
You will have to make do with me saying that we are keeping a very close eye on this development and we are in discussions with all the relevant parties .
I would also like to make those people who have quite rightly put particular emphasis on the employment issue aware that the Commission has , in fact , already tabled a proposal on how the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund can be made more flexible and effective .
If the Commission 's proposals were implemented quickly and rapidly realised - and I would issue a pressing request to all of you to do that - we would be in a position to provide help , in particular , for temporary workers in the motor industry and unskilled workers , who are ultimately the ones at the front on the cliff edge .
The rules for the scrapping premiums - this has been addressed numerous times and I would like to say it one more time - are clear cut .
There cannot be a European regulation forcing every Member State to take part in this .
That is absolutely impossible .
Similarly , there can be no European regulation that the level of the premium must be the same everywhere .
The reference values must be laid down at European level , and that is the case .
We agreed on this at our meeting of 16 January in Brussels .
Finally , I would like to emphasise , once again , what many of you have said , which is that we must think beyond the motor industry when we discuss the current crisis .
It is , in fact , absolutely right to say that intelligent traffic systems , intelligent traffic management systems , cutting-edge , innovative solutions for the personal and mass transit of the future must be found and that this crisis perhaps offers an opportunity to push such solutions forward more strongly .
Personally , at any rate , I would very much like to see that happen .
( DE ) Mr President , you have just made a statement about the Bureau 's decision , explaining why the ' catch-the-eye ' debate system has been changed .
In this regard , I would like to make a formal protest against this change .
This procedure was introduced in order to invigorate our debates , to generate dialogue with the Commission and to strengthen the debating culture .
What the Bureau has now decided is completely counter-productive and I would like to ask you , please , to bring this matter up at the Conference of Presidents and to answer this protest .
Yes , Mr Konrad , of course you have every right and we take note of your protest .
However , you belong to a very responsible group in this House and you will understand that what cannot happen is that individual Members have more time than the groups .
The groups have a statutory responsibility to participate in the debates .
The Bureau took this decision unanimously .
I consider this to be a common-sense decision , precisely to prevent Members who have not been put forward by their group - because the group does not want them to speak at that time - from speaking afterwards .
That is why the time has been restricted : five minutes for five speeches , in order from the largest group to the smallest , while also making sure that not all the speakers are the same nationality .
That is what was decided .
Of course , this rule can be changed .
If the Conference of Presidents proposes a change in the procedure to the Bureau , the Bureau will consider it with all due care .

Thank you very much , Mr Konrad , for your contribution ; it has been well noted .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I would like to draw attention to the fact that the economic crisis in the car industry in the Maltese Islands is being compounded because of a serious administrative blunder .
Cars in Malta are subject to a heavy registration tax , on which the Government was also collecting VAT .
It has now been established that the Government was appropriating money from thousands of car owners which was not due .
The Government is refusing to reimburse thousands of vehicle owners who have paid substantial amounts when these were not due .
The Government of Malta is claiming that reimbursement will amount to millions of Euros .
It is exactly because of this that the Government has a duty and an obligation to return taxes irregularly imposed .
This is such a serious blunder that if it happened in any other member state of the EU , the Government would have been forced to resign .
In Malta the Government has not even had the decency to accept responsibility and apologize to the thousands of Maltese and Gozitans who have been affected .
Solutions could be found by offering rebates to the owners of these vehicles on such issues as annual licences .
It appears that the Government is completely deaf to any such suggestions .
If we look at the European Union as a living organism , the European car industry is its backbone .
It accounts for 3 % of the EU 's GDP and generates a commercial surplus of EUR 35 billion .
However , 2008 was a difficult year for this industry , where during the first half of the year , car sales dropped due to a rise in the price of fuel , while during the second half , sales fell by 19.3 % as a result of the financial crisis .
These are not the only problems which this sector is facing .
Between 2009 and 2015 the car sector must implement new standards for polluting emissions , fuel economy and so on , while all of this is adding billions of euros to the industry 's costs .
The figures given above are also relevant because the car industry provides for the incomes of more than 12 million families .
One job in a car company is linked to another four jobs at suppliers and another five in related sectors and sales .
It is therefore clear that the health of this sector of the European economy is vital to the EU economy as a whole .
In these circumstances , rapid , coordinated intervention by European governments and institutions is an absolute must , such as introducing programmes for returning old cars against a consistent reduction in the purchase price of a new one , financial assistance and so on .
The financial crisis has paralysed credit ; it has affected businesses and families ; and demand has plummeted , with disastrous consequences for economic growth and employment .
Such a situation justifies exceptional measures , particularly in the case of strategic sectors such as car manufacturing , which represents 6 % of jobs .
Even so , almost all the European Economic Recovery Plan , for which I have the honour of being this Parliament 's rapporteur , is based entirely on national initiatives .
In reality , how can the Commission guarantee that it is out there checking coordination and that countries are not embarking on a war of support measures ?
What mechanisms are out there to safeguard jobs in countries that do not have the financial structure to guarantee the jobs that are vital to them ?
For some countries , textiles or electronics may be just as important as car making .
What action can be expected ?
Will the Commission be more alert to the role of European industry in Europe 's survival ?
There are limits to what can be expected from the European Investment Bank .
Will we have a budget equal to the challenges facing Europe ?
The European Union 's economy is reputed to be the greatest economic power in the world .
On the one hand , this makes us particularly responsible for any action taken in terms of our internal market .
On the other hand , a global economy , with the Union at its forefront , has specific consequences .
One of these consequences is that it is difficult to define which car manufacturers are truly European .
Numerous company mergers , the creation of global manufacturing groups and the presence , for a number of decades , of American or Asian companies on the European Union 's internal market , have provided the foundations for a diverse and competitive European car manufacturing sector .
It seems right that our efforts to create a European Economic Recovery Plan , should be primarily guided by the principles of the free market and its competitiveness .
We should also remember that the motor industry , which has been so badly affected by the financial crisis , is one of the many links in the chain of the European economy .
This induces us to adopt the plan of action proposed by the Presidency , namely that of drawing up a general approach , involving all the stakeholders on the internal market .
This approach should stimulate market demand , which determines the state of the economy .
The mechanism for providing aid should also make use of money earmarked for targeted investment in technological innovations , in accordance with guidelines for improving road safety and environmental protection .
The economic crisis has had a powerful impact on the car industry , a sector which makes a significant contribution to the GDP of many European states .
Even though the EU does not have any direct intervention mechanisms , Member States must be allowed to take the necessary measures to prevent the collapse of an industry on which the jobs of thousands of European citizens depend .
The Romanian car industry has also been severely affected by the crisis .
I only need to mention the cases of Dacia Renault , which is restricting its activities , and Ford , which has requested support from the Romanian state .
The serious situation at European level requires the immediate introduction of suitable measures .
I am not referring , in this instance , to protectionist measures , which distort the market , but to measures which offer equal opportunities to European industry and allow employees in this industry to keep their jobs .
It is not enough for us to take action nationally , as we need to act at European level too .
The economic recovery plan allows this to happen because it proposes new credit regulations in the European banking system which facilitate access to credit .
It is also important that the State aid schemes which Member States apply for can be accessed rapidly and easily .
This is a key aspect for strategic investors , such as those in the car market .
Consular protection of citizens of the European Union in third countries ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on consular protection of citizens of the European Union in third countries .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , this debate on consular protection is , once again , a timely one .
A series of events over the last few years have highlighted the importance of consular cooperation among the EU Member States .
From Lebanon in 2006 , through Chad to the recent tragic events in Mumbai - all have demonstrated the growing risks to citizens of the Union when travelling abroad .
The extent of these risks is even greater as increasing numbers of people take advantage of low-cost travel to visit more remote regions of the world .
Cooperation between Member States in this area is therefore important .
It offers a better service and an enhanced level of consular assistance .
This is of direct benefit to EU citizens .
The Treaties provide us with a basis for this cooperation .
Article 20 states clearly , and I quote : ' Every citizen of the Union shall , in the territory of a third country in which the Member State of which he is a national is not represented , be entitled to protection by the diplomatic or consular authorities of any Member State , on the same conditions as the nationals of that state .
Member States shall establish the necessary rules among themselves and start the international negotiations required to secure this protection . '
The rules mentioned in this article are set out in a decision which was adopted in 1995 .
This decision specifies that assistance within a third country may be requested from a Member State other than one 's own , on condition that there is no accessible permanent representation or accessible Honorary Consul competent for such matters .
In practice that means that a consul who is asked by a citizen of another Member State for assistance should refuse such assistance if that citizen 's authorities ( consulate or embassy ) are also represented .
The 1995 decision is a decision between the Member States , reflecting the fact that consular assistance and protection is an exclusive national responsibility and that consular relations are governed mainly by the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations .
The rules on cooperation in this area also reflect the fact that consular assistance and protection are viewed differently in different Member States .
Some , for example , consider it to be a fundamental right of all citizens .
Others consider it to be a service provided by the state .
That is why the Treaty refers to consular protection as an ' entitlement ' and not a ' right ' .
Since the Jolo crisis in 2000 , consular cooperation has been further developed to include aspects of crisis management .
The terrorist attacks in the US showed that even third countries with sophisticated infrastructure can find it difficult to cope under extreme circumstances .
Member States subsequently drew up guidelines to handle such crises .
Although non-binding , they have been used effectively on a number of occasions and have been refined in the light of experience .
The Council has recently developed the ' Lead State ' concept .
This means that , in the case of a significant incident , particularly in a country where few Member States are represented , one or two Member States can take the lead in coordinating action in matters of protection and evacuation .
There has also been increased cooperation with some countries outside the Union , for example the US , with which we have annual consultations on consular issues .
Norway , Switzerland and Canada have also cooperated with the EU on specific incidents , for example during the Lebanon , Chad and Mumbai crises .
The Commission and Council Secretariat are also part of European Consular Cooperation .
Several years ago the Council Secretariat set up a secure internet forum through which consular authorities exchange information on issues such as updating travel advice .
The Council has also put at the disposal of Member States a sophisticated teleconferencing system which has been widely used during consular crises .
About three years ago , a platform for exchange of information and political coordination of action at EU level was established . This platform is called Crisis Coordination Arrangements ( CCA ) .
The two main actors of CCA are as follows : first , the Presidency , assisted by the Council Secretariat and the Commission , decides whether to trigger the CCA ; second , COREPER II is the ' action platform ' responsible for coordinating Member States ' action or preparing any decisions that may need to be taken at EU level .
The main operational tool is the EU Joint Situation Centre ( SITCEN ) of the Council Secretariat .
SITCEN provides logistical and information support .
In addition , successive presidencies have organised regular consular crisis management exercises which have proved particularly valuable .
A European Consular Training Programme was launched at the end of 2008 with the aim of improving cooperation between consular officials , both from capitals and in the field .
The co-location of consular facilities is also under consideration .
There is certainly more that could be done .
Many other issues , for example prison conditions , parental child abduction and consular information policy , are discussed regularly .
But we also have to accept the reality that , whilst expectations and demands from citizens grow continually , resources for consular authorities are always limited .
Support for improved cooperation in the consular field is not always matched by adequate budgets at the national level .
Squaring this circle will remain a challenge .
Experience shows that cooperation in the consular field is valued , and there are a number of cases where we can be pleased with the results .
The successful evacuation of over 20 000 EU citizens from Lebanon in 2006 is just one example .
The Presidency is committed to taking this work forward , and I would like to thank Parliament for its support .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am standing in , today , for my fellow Commissioner Jacques Barrot , who would have liked to have been here in person but has an institutional commitment to attend to .
Under Article 20 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , every citizen of the Union , when in the territory of a third country in which the Member State of which he is a national is not represented , is entitled to protection by the consular authorities of any Member State , on the same conditions as the nationals of that State .
Article 20 also provides that the Member States are to establish the necessary rules among themselves to secure this protection .
Mr Vondra has already gone into this .
In light of this , the Member States have introduced coordination mechanisms for consular protection , in particular through the guidelines laid down in 2006 and 2008 , which are not legally binding but which help missions to build their cooperation on the ground .
In addition , Article 20 of the Treaty on European Union obliges the diplomatic and consular missions of the Member States to step up their cooperation .
In December 2008 , the Council agreed guidelines for the implementation of the Lead State concept in relation to consular cooperation .
Under the guidelines , in a future major crisis with consequences for consular protection in the third country in question , one Member State is to be nominated as the ' Lead State ' and assume responsibility for the protection of EU citizens on behalf of the other Member States .
The Lead State is to coordinate all the measures implemented by the Member States on the ground and is responsible for ensuring that all EU citizens receive support .
Anyone who is entitled to consular protection from their own Member State is entitled to ask the Lead State for assistance .
This is intended to facilitate cooperation between the Member States on the ground , with the idea being that additional resources in the form of staff , funding , equipment and medical teams will be made available .
The Lead State is also to be given the responsibility for coordinating and leading measures to provide assistance , reunite people and , where necessary , evacuate citizens to a safe destination , with the assistance of the other Member States affected .
However , the Member States need to agree on what exactly is meant by the wording ' in which the Member State [ ... ] is not represented ' under Article 20 of the EC Treaty .
This should cover situations where an EU citizen , for whatever reason , is unable to reach any mission of his / her own Member State .
The Member States are currently working on drawing up joint criteria for this .
That , then , is the situation on paper .
The fact that the practical reality can be quite different is something that a few Members of this House can testify .
I have seen on the list of speakers that Mr Guardans Cambó , Mr Karim and Mrs Mann intend to speak on this issue .
They will certainly be telling us something of their experiences in Mumbai last December .
I have the impression , even though only three Member States do not have an embassy in New Delhi and that only seven do not maintain a consulate in Mumbai , that it was still very difficult - and I will express this very carefully - for affected European citizens to obtain adequate protection .
I am pointing this out now because it is , of course , right to learn from experiences such as this .
In the light of this experience , the Commission takes the view that there is still much work to be done to ensure that the citizens of the European Union are able to claim - to the full and in real life - the right guaranteed them under Article 20 of the EC Treaty .
The citizens expect the European Union to provide added value in their protection in a third country .
Protection provided by diplomatic and consular missions is not , at the end of the day , limited to crisis situations , but also covers the provision of assistance in everyday situations .
The Commission proposes , amongst other things , better information for EU citizens - we have already proposed that the wording of Article 20 be printed in every passport and displayed on posters in airports and travel agencies , and we are also working on a consular protection website with the General Secretariat of the Council , which would contain an up-to-date list of the Member States ' embassies and consulates in third countries .
As part of its mission of better providing EU citizens with what citizenship of the Union means to them , the Commission is ready to tackle every problem in this field that the citizens bring to its attention and to do everything in its power to realise the rights of protection to which EU citizens are entitled under Article 20 .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon would provide a clear legal basis for EU legal provisions in this area .
The new wording of Article 20 of the EC Treaty ( Article 23 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ) allows for the adoption of directives ' establishing the coordination and cooperation measures necessary to facilitate such protection ' .
This means that the Commission could be tabling legislative proposals for this field in the near future .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , I welcome this debate and I thank both the Council and the Commission for their information and presentation to us .
I was the rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the Green Paper on diplomatic and consular protection of Union citizens in third countries and I therefore continue to take a keen interest in developments in this sector .
At the time I maintained that Article 20 should be applied more broadly and should include more rights for European citizens , because this would strengthen the concept of a European nationality and would demonstrate in practical terms the advantages offered by the European Union on a daily basis and would ultimately strengthen European solidarity .
The recent terrorist attack in Mumbai demonstrated the usefulness and the need for reinforced coordination of protection for citizens of Member States of the European Union at such times .
The publication by the Council last December of guidelines on the implementation of the consular Lead State concept in the event of a crisis is a first positive step and they contain important ideas .
However , we are waiting with a great deal of interest for legally binding proposals .
I realise that there are huge practical difficulties .
However , I consider it extremely important that it should be clear how European citizens on the scene of a crisis are to be informed as to who is the Lead State .
I do not think that what has been said to date is satisfactory .
In all events , I welcome the importance which the French Presidency attached to this issue and I expect the initiatives to be continued by the Czech Presidency .
Mr President , the right to consular and diplomatic protection is one of the pillars of European citizenship .
Minister , you cited Article 20 of the Treaty .
It is very clear .
Every citizen has the right to consular protection .
It is not an option , it is a right .
The dramatic events in Mumbai show us , in actual fact , that this right is far from being guaranteed .
Levels of protection vary from Member State to Member State , resulting in discrimination in the treatment of citizens who are never given information about the consulate to contact in the event of need .
Financial support is visibly lacking between the Member States .
European citizens who have lost everything must often face consular offices that are very reluctant to bear the financial costs .
Member States have a duty to put an end to this situation .
It is necessary to make guidelines binding and to make information available to citizens .
The Union must start negotiations with third countries in order to ensure the necessary diplomatic protection .
However , as you said , Commissioner , the events in Mumbai have also shown the unacceptable absence of a guarantee of diplomatic protection for Members of the European Parliament .
The European Union and the Commission in particular must negotiate without delay , and we heard what you told us , Commissioner , and the Council must conclude ad hoc agreements with third countries in order to ensure specific diplomatic protection for Members of the European Parliament .
This is the least we can do .
Mr President , today in Europe citizens can travel without crossing borders , can vote in a Member State other than their own , can collect their pension and can benefit from social security in any Member State in which they choose to live .
Furthermore , police forces co-operate with each other .
A public prosecutor in Stockholm can have somebody arrested in Seville by means of a Euro-warrant , without needing to become directly involved in local procedures .
When it comes to reprimanding citizens for their actions , Member States have been willing to concede sovereignty .
However , for the protection of these same European citizens outside the European Union , it is as if they have travelled by time machine ; they find that time has stood still once they have left the Union .
Outside the Union , we are just 27 States , 27 administrations , 27 flags and 27 consular systems , or in some cases , not even that .
In a crisis , a European citizen loses his or her European status .
There is no such thing as European citizenship .
The 180 million Europeans who travel around the world find that they can only receive protection if they change themselves back into Germans , Spaniards , Poles or Italians .
As Europeans , they do not exist outside the European Union .
This is a serious non-fulfilment of the Treaty and , with all due respect , makes the Council 's statement of a few moments ago a piece of science fiction .
All of what the Council said on the supposed implementation of Article 20 of the Treaty , the ' Lead State ' , video conferences and joint centres , is pure science fiction in an emergency .
Moreover , as the Commissioner said , some of us have had cause to experience this state of affairs at first hand .
Article 20 of the Treaty is ineffective : there are no protocols for implementation ; there are no legal regulations ; there is no information for citizens whatsoever ; there are no consequences for anyone who disregards the article .
In the best-case scenario , consuls help each other .
There is goodwill , as there may have been in the 19th century , as there may have been in Peking in the 1800s .
The situation is this : there is collaboration between consuls who dine together rather than an obligation to jointly serve citizens in respect of a provision of European law .
For that reason , the European Commission has the obligation , including before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into effect and obviously afterwards , to implement Article 20 , to make European citizens proud of their passport and to make sure that certain officials understand that the 19th century is over and Europe does exist whenever a European citizen is in trouble in New Delhi , Beirut or wherever else .
Mr President , I would like to state that I do not share this highly critical stance towards the proposal made today by the Vice-President of the European Commission , on behalf of the Council .
I do not think that this is a question of having , or not having , a treaty , but rather whether European solidarity is a concept that only features in political statements or whether it is a specific political practice , one that applies to the citizens of various Member States .
If the latter is the case , then the treaty is not an indispensable requirement .
During the Slovenian Presidency of the European Union , France represented the European Union in many countries , such as Asia , Africa and Latin America , as Slovenia had no embassies in those places .
I am curious as to whether Slovenian citizens , as well as those living in the smaller Member States , would now receive suitable assistance if they applied to the French consulates in those countries .
It is a pertinent question .
We should expand the concept of European solidarity .
It seems to me that , in reality , the Treaty of Lisbon is not a sine qua non .
- ( SK ) According to Article 20 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , every citizen of the Union in the territory of a third country shall be entitled to protection by diplomatic or consular authorities under the same conditions as nationals of that State .
It is important to stress the need for the Union to develop cooperation in consular services for these purposes .
Europeans are among the most mobile societies in the world , with almost 9 % of citizens travelling to countries where their home country does not have this level of representation .
For example , Slovakia , the country I represent in the European Parliament , has a very weak consular presence in Central and Latin America , which are regions that many of our citizens travel to .
I must add that despite the obligations on consular services most Europeans do not know their rights and it is a sad fact that even the employees of these organisations are unaware of this .
In order to ensure that people are better informed about consular protection , we should aim for standard European passports to include an extract from Article 20 .
The importance of consular protection in third countries became apparent in crisis situations such as the tsunami of 2004 or the Lebanese conflict of 2006 .
Due to differences in consular regulations , citizens of the EU have to cope with as many systems as there are Member States and these systems may have varying legal force and scope .
The recent events in Mumbai show that we have a long way to go in the area of consular services .
The establishment of joint European offices would ensure the functional coherence and at the same time would cut the structural costs of diplomatic and consular networks operated by Member States .
- Mr President , it has been stated already that citizens of the Union travel widely .
Well , there are approximately 180 million trips made outside of the European Union every year , and - in theory - they are protected under Article 20 , as the Commissioner and indeed the Council Presidency have already provided for in this debate .
Under Article 20 , there is a requirement for Member States only to provide consular assistance to unrepresented EU nationals on the same terms as their nationals .
This difference in approach between Member States is recognised within the action plan of 2007 and 2009 .
Of course , there needs to be a criterion as to when and how other consular services should become involved , and these break down basically into three .
I am not going to go through them , but the first two are perfectly sensible .
The third puts forward a requirement for that citizen to provide proof of his or her nationality , either by means of passport , identity card or other document , for the diplomatic or consular representation to be provided .
There is a real problem here , because for any European citizen who is fleeing a situation , it is perfectly feasible that they may not actually be in possession of such documentation .
Assistance is provided in the event of death , serious accident , serious injury , arrest , detention , assistance to be provided to victims of violent crime , and relief and repatriation of distressed citizens of the Union .
It is extensive but not exhaustive .
More work needs to be done there .
To make all this happen , we have heard about the concept of a Lead State , which will endeavour to ensure that all EU citizens are assisted and that it will coordinate between Member States .
That is all very good in theory , but in practice I certainly did not see this happen in Mumbai .
There was no real sharing of information and intelligence , not the sort of cooperation I expected to see .
Instead I saw only competition between Member States , and further centralisation or consolidation of consular services will risk taking away the flexibility missions require on the ground in rapidly changing circumstances .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Karim is absolutely right .
The problem is in the very wording , in the fundamentals of Article 20 itself .
It is necessary to take account of the reality on the ground .
Of course it is .
For one thing , not all Member States have consular protection and in many cases what consular protection there is is very limited and the security structures are insufficient even for the consuls themselves .
I have personal experience of this in relation to the German consul , who drove through the night in order to gather his colleagues , with his driver but no security , on roads that were by no means safe .
Quite simply , such conditions are unacceptable .
You cannot go to countries such as India or to Latin American countries - there are many other countries where a presence is required in such a critical place as Mumbai - and then have only a small number of staff and inadequate security structures .
Intelligence is not passed on at all , the Member States have no access to the information , and so on .
This means that there is no end to the limitations and it is no wonder that Member States are unable to provide the degree of protection for their own citizens or for their officials to anything like the degree they may wish .
That is why it is important that the Council and the Commission undertake a careful analysis of this issue .
You cannot preach about always being present all over the world and seeing Europe as a global partner and then fail to even have in place a security structure and not be in possession of any intelligent information systems .
We are simply opening ourselves up to ridicule if we do not thoroughly analyse our own structures and ensure the requisite level of additional protection .
I would thus offer you the urgent advice that you really must carry out a thorough re-evaluation of the structures , that you must carry out simulations , as other States do , and that you must not concentrate solely on the key capitals , the metropolises , but that in these megacountries and megacities you just have to realise that you also need appropriate representation in the other large cities of the world .
Mumbai will happen again .
There will be another Mumbai , just as past disasters have been repeated .
Realise this and , I urge you to be prepared for it .

- Mr President , Mr Guardans Cambó and others such as Mr Karim and Mrs Mann have illustrated the gap between rhetoric and reality .
We cannot even actually agree on what Article 20 means .
The minister , speaking in English , said that it was only an ' entitlement ' and not a right , whereas Mrs Roure cited the French , which says ' un droit ' .
But it is certainly in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , where it is enshrined as a right .
We will surely not make progress , unless it is legally confirmed that it is a right with binding EU decisions and common standards and the right to challenge a refusal of protection in the courts .
The minister talked about co-location being under consideration of consular officials .
My experience in the field of visa policy is that it is like pushing a boulder uphill trying to get Member States to co-locate .
Commissioner Verheugen referred to practical measures as being in development .
But these were promised in the action plan in 2007 : a reference in passports , posters , a website in development .
Where are these ?
I searched consular protection on the Europa website and found nothing .
On the Council travel website it says ' under construction ' , which I think is a metaphor for the fact that we are failing our citizens in failing to put flesh on the bones of the promise of European citizenship .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ever-increasing mobility of European citizens clearly means that consulates must work together .
The Commission 's proposal is welcome , above all because it seeks to simplify the procedures for granting pecuniary advances to citizens in difficulty .
Without a doubt , the right to consular protection is currently fragmentary and unevenly distributed .
European citizenship often does not exist abroad and people may wish that they were citizens of another country , or even of the Union .
I would like to see appeals made to European pride not only when it suits the institutions , but also when it suits the citizen , who may be in difficulty and hoping that his European citizenship may at last be of use to him .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentleman , consular protection is a fundamental part of European citizenship .
Citizens want to feel European when they are inside the Union , but also when outside Europe .
They want the Union to respond to their needs , especially in the event of an emergency .
The Union did not respond properly in Mumbai , as has been the case in other crisis situations .
Let me take this minute to explain an idea , an idea that will not be a panacea but will offer genuine assistance to European citizens in third countries .
I would like today to repeat the proposal to set up a European emergency freephone number .
This number , which would be printed in passports , together with Article 20 , would allow citizens to have access , in their own language , to essential information on the consulates of Member States of the Union which , I stress , would have to help them .
Citizens expect actions and not just words from the Union .
- Mr President , when we become Members of Parliament , we are issued with a laissez-passer - as are a lot of other people who work for the institutions of the Union .
I wonder whether the Presidency and the Council understand the worthlessness of this document in Member States .
I had an extremely difficult situation in the Netherlands , when travelling back on the business of this Parliament from Africa .
I know of another Member - a British Member - who had difficulty in Dublin .
We really need to bring home to our own Member States that this is a travel document of Parliament , the Commission and of the Union and should be fully respected .
Those dealing with travel arrangements at airports and ports should be fully briefed as to the worthiness of this document .
I would ask you to take that up with each of the Member States and ensure that it is implemented , because that sort of protection should extend to officials and to Members of Parliament travelling on the business of Parliament .
- Mr President , as an MEP I have had several occasions to contact embassies and consuls because someone was injured , lost , robbed or abducted , or because , tragically , someone died .
I am sure this has been the experience of many other MEPs .
I am happy to say that , where I was able to deal with an Irish embassy , the work and the cooperation have been excellent .
But my own country was not represented in every country , and we had to rely on the embassies of other European countries .
I would just say from experience that , without going into stories , I would like to see more coordination , more help between embassies in the bigger countries where they do have embassies and consuls in almost every country , so as to help all other Member State embassies with their constituents .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I think it was , again , a very useful debate .
I have a considerable understanding of how important this is for you as Members of the European Parliament because this is an extremely sensitive issue , where you are confronted with the expectations of your citizens , who are going to elect you in the next few months .
So I have a full understanding of the issue that you are considering with care and that you are approaching with such critical insight .
The second reason why I have an understanding is that I come from a medium-sized state , the Czech Republic , which is not a former imperial power so it does not have an embassy or a consulate in every corner of the world .
So what the Irish and others are expecting from the European Union here is , I think , very logical .
But now I have to speak here on behalf of the Council so you need to respect certain legal grounds which are available to us , and the fact is that the budget and all those issues are important .
And we also have to be able to recognise and to differentiate what is the real problem on the one hand and what is the question or issue which needs more clarification .
I was not in Mumbai , and I was listening very carefully to the critical remarks of Mr Guardans Cambó and some others who took part in the European Parliament mission to India at the time that this tragic attack happened .
When I was getting ready for the special hearing yesterday , my first question was : is there a Spanish consulate in Mumbai ?
I have never been there so I do not know this personally .
I was repeatedly assured that the Spanish have a consulate in Mumbai and those that were there know this .
I think it was simply a matter of a formal obligation for the Germans to assist Mr Guardans Cambó and his delegation , if we are quoting Article 20 and the decision as a whole .
The Spanish sent a plane , as I was informed , to help evacuate its citizens , as did the French and the Germans .
For some reason , which I do not understand , Mr Guardans Cambó refused the offer to fly back on the Spanish plane but instead subsequently returned on the French plane .
So I do not know .
I just have the information which is available to me .
In general I think we all share the opinion that any improvement within the legal framework is certainly desirable , so let me inform you about at least some partial activities of the Czech Presidency to strengthen the consular protection within the current legal framework .
For example , there is a project on including a message in national passports which would inform the holders that they can ask for consular protection from any other Member State embassy or consulate in a third country , provided their country is not represented there .
So that is at least an attempt to clarify the situation on the ground .
Second , the Presidency is to intensify and unify the use of emergency travel documents , the ETDs which can be issued by any Member State representation to any Member State citizen who has lost his passport or had it stolen .
Third and finally , the Presidency will also organise the two consular seminars or training courses in order to contribute to this consular protection team in a very practical and effective way .
These events will deal with the CCA system , simulating a real consular crisis .
The training will define and carry out practical testing of all relevant mechanisms in the CCA cadre , including cooperation between all authorities and institutions involved .
The experience will even , by means of field work , teach the participants how to behave and promptly react in a situation of extreme psychological and time pressure .
I do not know whether this will amuse us enough before the elections , but at least it is a contribution which we are bringing to this important issue .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Treaties do not confer any power of initiative on the Commission in the field of consular protection .
Within its limited powers , the Commission is trying to boost , as much as it can , the effectiveness of the citizenship rights European citizens are entitled to - see , for example , the Commission Action Plan 2007-2009 .
I repeat that the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty would certainly very much improve this situation .
I hope that Mrs Sinnott , who shared her experience with us , will use the fact that the Lisbon Treaty would change the situation and her experience to help to organise support for the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland .
The deplorable events in Mumbai show that , already today , there is a clearly a huge margin for improvement if we are to fulfil the legitimate expectations of EU citizens .
- Mr President , I have just a short recommendation to the Council .
I appreciate very much what you said , but can you make sure that , once you foresee this kind of simulation today , that you invite some of the people who were actually in Mumbai , because it could give you some insight ?
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
The increasing mobility of EU citizens requires us to adapt our current principles of consular protection to take new circumstances into account .
EU citizens must have access to protection and assistance from their own countries , via their diplomatic missions and consulates ( Article 3 of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and Article 1 of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations ) and , under the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty , additional diplomatic and consular protection beyond the borders of the European Union , which stems from their status as EU citizens .
In practice , this means that , while staying in a third country where the Member State of which he is a citizen has no representation , all EU citizens have the right to diplomatic and consular protection from any of the other Member States , according to the same principles as the citizens of that country .
Unfortunately , the critical situation in Mumbai following the bombings last year revealed the shortcomings of many diplomatic offices , in terms of the practical application of Community decisions concerning the security of EU citizens .
Dozens of Europeans , including the European Parliament delegation which was in India at the time , encountered administrative problems and disproportionately long waiting periods for receiving copies of lost documents .
This proved that it is not easy to implement the concept of European solidarity .
The right to consular protection in third countries is one of the main features of European Union citizenship .
The Member States should do all that they can to ensure that it is properly implemented , and guarantee equal treatment and care to all EU citizens .
in writing . - According to Article 20 of the Treaty establishing the European Community ' every citizen of the Union shall , in the territory of a third country in which the Member State of which he is a national is not represented , be entitled to protection by the diplomatic or consular authorities of any Member State , on the same conditions as the nationals of that State ' .
At the end of November last year , our colleague , Ignasi Guardans Cambó was in Mumbai during the terrorist attacks and he witnessed several violations of the Treaty by diplomats of some Member States , as citizens of the European Union were differentiated and discriminated against on the basis of their nationalities .
The conduct of the diplomats of some Member States in Mumbai did not only violate the rights of the EU citizens , but also pointed out deficiencies in the EU integration process .
Therefore , it is crucially important for the EU to investigate this particular case and take action to ensure that such a situation does not occur again .
I would appreciate it , if the Council and the Commission could assure that the implementation of Article 20 of the Treaty is closely monitored and that every deviation is investigated thoroughly .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0006 / 2009 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Council .
Subject : SMEs
Given that the economy is one of ' the 3 Es ' of the Czech Presidency 's priorities , what specific steps will the Council be taking to enhance the confidence of small and medium-sized enterprises in the market economy in light of the current economic situation ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Let me begin by saying that I appreciate the question on SMEs , because during this current economic crisis the big businesses and the big companies are always strong enough to lobby for some relief , but it is much more difficult for SMEs and it certainly requires a systemic approach .
On 1 December 2008 , as you know , the Council endorsed the European Economic Recovery Plan , which was presented by the Commission on 26 November 2008 .
As a response to the financial crisis , the Council supported a stimulus which is equivalent to about 1.5 % of the EU 's gross domestic product to restore business and consumer confidence .
Furthermore , the plan contains specific measures to support SMEs , the most important of which are those aimed at improving access to finance for SMEs and reducing the administrative burden .
The Council also agreed that improvements in the framework conditions for European businesses , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises , was essential to counter the effect of the crisis on competitiveness and to support and enhance job creation .
The Council also adopted two sets of conclusions related to providing support for SMEs , in the context of overall competitiveness .
Firstly , conclusions endorsing proposals to support SMEs presented in the Commission Communication entitled , as you probably know , ' Think Small First : a Small Business Act for Europe ' , this so-called SBA , including an action plan outlining the priority measures requiring particular attention .
Secondly , conclusions from the Commission communication entitled ' Towards world-class clusters in the European Union - implementing the broad-based innovation strategy ' .
Although clusters are not exclusively meant for the SMEs , they play an important role in many clusters that have been set up throughout the EU .
At its meeting in mid-December 2008 , the European Council approved this European Economic Recovery Plan and supported the full implementation of the Action Plan for the Small Business Act .
It has specifically supported an increase in the intervention by the European Investment Bank to the tune of EUR 30 billion for the years 2009-2010 , especially for loans to SMEs , which amount to an increase of EUR 10 million over the EIB usual lending in this sector .
The Council also supported a temporary exemption for two years beyond the de minimis threshold for state aid in respect of an amount of up to EUR 50 000 and the adaptation of the state aid framework as required to increase support for enterprises , especially the SMEs .
The Council also called for the use of accelerated procedures for awarding public contracts provided for EC legislation , as well as for reducing the administrative burden on businesses .
The Czech Presidency will continue to pursue this effort , because our economy is broadly based on SMEs , so we have our own experience with that .
Therefore , both of the forthcoming Competitiveness Councils under the Czech Presidency - one will take place very soon in early March , as well as the informal one which will take place in Prague - will tackle the question of reducing the administrative burden , since we believe that better regulation is an important factor for improving competitiveness , in particular for SMEs , and it plays an even more important role in times of economic crisis .
Moreover , the Presidency will try to make progress in the implementation of the action plan and put this SME policy at the forefront of society as well as linking the implementation of the action plan to the national reform programmes of all the Member States .
The Presidency will also continue with the increased effort of discussing legislative proposals related to SMEs , such as the regulation on the Statute for a European Private Company , which would offer SMEs a form of business enabling them to take advantage of their potential and develop cross-border activities .
Another legislative proposal I should mention is the proposed directive for reduced VAT rates for labour-intensive services , which will be discussed at the upcoming ECOFIN Councils .
In addition , the Council will be concerned with the review of the Late Payment Directive , which is now being prepared and which is to ensure that small and medium-sized enterprises are paid in time for all business transactions .
Again , that is pretty important in the current situation .
Since we are running rather late , I propose that the Council reply to all the supplementary questions together .
As you know , I can only accept two supplementary questions in addition to the original author 's .
That being the case , I have selected two of the five questions tabled based on the criterion of choosing different political groups and nationalities .
The Members I have selected are Philip Bushill-Matthews and Silvia-Adriana Ţicău .
author . - Normally I use my own mother tongue but , as I am replacing Marian Harkin , I will try in broken English .
This is a common language in this Parliament .
You mentioned , Minister , the administrative burden and the goal of reducing it by 25 % by 2012 .
Do you really think that is an ambitious goal ?
Could we not do more , and could you perhaps be more specific about what has been done so far ?
What are your aims ?
Could you not say 25 % by 2010 , for instance ?
That would be rather ambitious .
- You mentioned the review of the Late Payments Directive , which I think is extremely important .
I was concerned , though , that the consultation period for that finished at the end of August , just before the real financial crisis hit .
Had the consultation period been extended I think we might have got much more robust answers as a basis for a better review of the Directive .
Is it worth considering whether we should open a further short period of consultation , so that we get the most up-to-date information possible , on which a review could then be based ?
( RO ) I would like to ask the Council a question about the European Economic Recovery Plan .
This plan is providing a sum of EUR 30 billion for small- and medium-sized enterprises .
The Commission advised us that grants will be awarded on the ' first come , first served ' principle .
I would like to ask the Council about what measures it is taking so that all Member States develop national programmes to support their small- and medium-sized enterprises so that they can access these funds .
President-in-Office of the Council . - In response to Mr Medina Ortega 's question , which relates to the WTO , I think it is an important issue .
We have all read the reports of - some of us even took an active part in - the Davos World Economic Forum , and have listened to the recent comments by Pascal Lamy and others .
There is no doubt that there is a fear of rising protectionism , so we are all very well aware of the challenges ahead of us .
I would like to point out that on 15 November last year the members of the G20 emphasised the importance of establishing the modalities for an agreement by the end of 2008 , which has already passed .
In this context the delegations of the WTO members , including the European Commission on behalf of the EU , intensified their work in Geneva with a view to providing a political impulse .
A lot of work has been done , and the effort led to the new revision of the AGRI and NAMA texts .
Moreover , in the light of the current political and economic development , the European Council in mid-December last year stated in its conclusions that it endorsed the objective of arriving this year , within the WTO , at an agreement on the modalities leading to the conclusion of the Doha Round with an ambitious global and balanced report and result .
The Council and Commission stood ready for constructive EU participation at the ministerial talks , if and when convened .
However , on 12 December 2008 , the WTO Director-General , Pascal Lamy , at an informal meeting of the heads of delegation , indicated that he would not convene the ministers to finalise modalities by the end of the year , because the conditions did not yet exist for a successful ministerial meeting , despite intensive consultation .
The aim of the Doha Development Agenda ( DDA ) is to achieve transparent liberalisation of trade at multilateral level which will bring about long-term advantages and a major boost for the world economy , in particular for developing countries , due to the development-oriented character of this round .
Therefore , despite the fact that no conclusion was possible by the end of 2008 , the Council remains fully committed to the multilateral trade system , as well as to the conclusion of an ambitious , balanced and comprehensive outcome of the WTO Doha Round .
This is even more important given the current economic and financial situation .
Although the Presidency is well aware of the obstacles that exist on the way toward successful completion of the whole process , it will undoubtedly seek to give an effect to these commitments by working on the renewal of discussions on the DDA as soon as the conditions allow .
It will also support more intensive work within the framework of other WTO agendas , in particular in the areas of services and TRIPS .
( ES ) Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , for that response , which I consider quite comprehensive .
I would , however , like to remind the President-in-Office of the Council that , in the summer of 2008 , the Doha Round was about to conclude but an agreement could not be reached because some BRIC countries were not disposed to make any kind of concession .
Considering that the BRIC countries played a greater role at the Washington meeting , it is possible that the previous unwillingness of these countries to make a concession was due to their considering that they had been afforded a secondary position , whereas at the Washington meeting they were given a priority role .
Does the Council Presidency have any information that the BRIC countries , as a result of the commitments made in Washington , may be disposed to adopt a more active role and contribute to the successful outcome of the Doha Round ?
- I just wondered , as a supplementary to this question , if , looking at the European Union 's new proposals , or if the European Union were to come forward with new proposals , he agrees that any such proposals should include moves to remove the inequities of the common agricultural policy so we can unlock the negotiations in NAMA and then unlock the negotiations on services , which account for about 70 % of the EU 's GDP .
Would he also agree that it is time for the EU to show a true commitment to free trade ?
I would like to ask the Minister if his attention has been drawn to the protectionist elements in the plan for recovery in the United States , particularly as put forward by members of the House of Representatives and the Senate , and if he has , on behalf of the Council , communicated the concern of the European Union to the American Administration about this .
This does not augur well for a new Doha Round .
Would he ensure that our concerns are communicated before the necessary legislation passes through the US Congress ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I would like to thank Mrs Ţicău for her question , which is also timely .
Housing , or the issue of increasing energy efficiency and the commitment to increase energy efficiency by 20 % by 2020 , has to be taken seriously .
The Council shares the view that the draft revised directive on the energy efficiency of buildings is of fundamental importance for the achievement of the Community 's targets on increased energy efficiency , renewable energy and reduced greenhouse gas emissions .
The recent gas crisis has once again unveiled the vulnerability of the EU vis-à-vis energy dependency .
Should we succeed in meeting an ambitious reduction goal , while not increasing energy security risks , we must adopt a series of short- , medium- and long-term measures that will decrease our energy dependency .
Increasing the energy efficiency of buildings is definitely among the most important of them .
As a result , the Presidency is beginning to examine this draft directive at working party level .
The aim of the examination is to explore difficulties in the proposal .
We expect that the question of the scope of the directive will be put on the table first .
This question of scope is the most important , not only in relation to possible energy savings , but also regarding the administrative burden of households .
Therefore , the Czech Presidency will ensure that work continues intensively over the coming months .
I have regular discussions with Martin Bursík , my colleague in the Government and the Minister of the Environment , who chairs the respective Council .
The Council will also follow closely the work on this issue in the ITRE Committee .
For your information , I am meeting the Chair of the Committee after this Question Time .
The Presidency is committed to making as much progress as possible , with a view to the early adoption of the directive .
To that end , it plans to submit a progress report to the TTE Council in mid-June .
The adoption of the Council conclusions on the Second Strategic Energy Review is envisaged for the first TTE Councils , which will be held on 19 February , and which will form the input for the March European Council meeting .
Adequate attention will also be paid to the recent Ukraine-Russia gas dispute and its consequences .
A policy debate will be held on the draft Council directive on the oil stock .
So , in general , the Council considers it important that the highest priority be given to the finalisation of the negotiations with the European Parliament on the third internal energy market legislative package over the coming months .
The Council also recalls that energy efficiency will be addressed in relation to the wider question of energy security , the protection of the environment and , indeed , the context of the examination of the Second Strategic Energy Review .
( RO ) I would like you to know that in my report I am going to propose setting up a European fund for energy efficiency and renewable energy to help raise the public and private funds for implementing specific energy efficiency projects across the European Union , and I would like to have the Council 's support for this important initiative .
- ( SK ) The energy efficiency of buildings can lead directly to savings for European consumers .
I see a solution in the wide-scale introduction of automated intelligent consumption metering systems and of systems providing up-to-the-minute snapshots of energy consumption , including ones for household use .
What can the Council do to implement this solution ?
What sort of timetable do you consider to be realistic ?
Can the Council inspire the European Technology Institute in Budapest to address itself to the problem of the energy efficiency of buildings ?
- Has there been any discussion in Council about trying to get Member States to provide financial incentives for increasing energy efficiency , in particular for elderly people ?
On the one hand it would increase energy efficiency , and on the other hand it would provide employment .

President-in-Office of the Council . - I want to thank Mr Burke for his question concerning the southern corridor plans and the meetings during the upcoming Czech Presidency .
We will ensure that these are the three priorities - energy , external relations and the economy - which are fully integrated and interconnected and focus on the concrete initiative ; this is one of them .
It will in particular concentrate on the objective of ensuring reliable supplies of energy through the development of a range of energy relationships with third countries and regions and by working towards greater diversification of energy resources , as well as the transit routes .
The Presidency intends to take this work forward on the basis of the elements contained in the Commission communication on the Second Strategic Energy Review .
The Council is expected to adopt a conclusion on this communication in February and energy security will be of particular focus in the spring 2009 European Council .
As part of its work , a large number of meetings with third countries or third-country organisations are planned .
These meetings will deal either exclusively with energy-related themes or will cover energy among the other issues .
As regards the specific discussion on energy strategic corridors to which the honourable Member refers , the Presidency is organising the following meetings .
The most important are , first , the international investment conference on the Ukrainian gas transit network , which will take place in Brussels on 23 March 2009 .
Second , the so-called Southern Corridor Summit meeting , which we plan to organise together with the Eastern Partnership event ; that will take place in Prague in early May .
The aim of that meeting is to launch a mutually beneficial dialogue between the EU and both the transit and producing countries from the Caspian region .
This should lead to a greater diversification of energy supply routes , suppliers and sources , and will thus strengthen the energy security of the EU .
One of the specific purposes is to promote the Nabucco project .
The issue of the strategic energy corridor is also likely to be addressed during the meeting of the EU-Russia Permanent Partnership Council on Energy , which will also be organised under the Czech Presidency , probably in May , just to create a run-up to the summit meeting between the EU and Russia , which we are planning for 22 May 2009 .
So the importance of the strategic energy corridors referred to by the honourable Members has been clearly underlined by the Ukrainian-Russian gas dispute in early January .
The Council , at its extraordinary session of 12 January 2009 , which was devoted to this subject , adopted conclusions outlining a number of measures to be taken in the short , medium and long term .
So the Presidency will work to ensure that appropriate and concrete follow-up is given to these measures as a part of the high priority it attaches to the issue of energy security .
- I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his very comprehensive reply .
In fact this question was tabled before the Russia-Ukraine dispute arose .
I had a feeling that it might arise at the time it did .
I would like to ask him this : under Lisbon , we were talking about a common energy policy ; maybe he could outline , in his capacity as President-in-Office , his opinions on the improved tool kit which Lisbon provides to address these challenges in the future and the advantages of adopting the whole Lisbon approach and Treaty .
- ( LT ) Thank you for your explanation of a very important subject .
I would like to ask how the Czech Republic , the presiding country , views the Nordstream project , which has both positive and negative aspects , and we know that there are certain doubts about its ecological impact .
Thus , as you begin the Presidency , how do you evaluate this project ? Thank you .
( DE ) It would interest me to find out whether there is an initiative in ECOFIN and on the part of Commissioner Kovács to initiate a progressive tax write-off across Europe for those energy projects that are currently imminent , such as the Nabucco pipeline or the building of new power stations , in order to create incentives and thus drive these strategic initiatives forward .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I see Avril Doyle and I am asking myself whether I am the other side of this question : the last time we discussed this was in the only place in this building where I as a heavy smoker can smoke .
I guess that you observed that , and that is one of the reasons why I now have the obligation to answer your question .
My mother was always advising me to speak truthfully at every opportunity so now I have a dilemma : to read this or to speak my mind .
But I shall use this opportunity to start at the personal level .
I am a member of the 30 % minority in Europe : I am a heavy smoker , and I feel terribly discriminated against in this building .
I appeal to you as a person , not on behalf of the Council , to provide better conditions for appeasing our habit .
But now I have to respond to this question .
The question is about the state of the ratification process in the Czech Republic .
I can assure you that the ratification process of the framework convention in the Czech Republic is in progress .
It has been in progress since 2003 , and the new attempt to find approval in the Czech Parliament is ongoing .
The new Czech Minister for Health - who , like her predecessor , smokes - has the new proposal aimed at renewing ratification and will send it to the inter-agency process , so it will reach Parliament pretty soon .
The ratification process should be concluded if we find enough votes in Parliament .
In the Senate I can assure you that this is not easy when our senators are travelling in Europe and are facing the same problem as I do in this building .
But I think one thing is important : that the legislation is fully implemented so all laws abide by those commitments which are part of the convention .
Regarding our approach as the Presidency : the next formal meeting in the framework of the FCTC will be the third meeting of the international negotiating body on a protocol on illicit trade in tobacco products .
Here my country , as well as the Presidency , is fully committed to fighting the illicit trade in tobacco products .
That will take place from 28 June to 5 July in Geneva , so we will share this somehow with our friends the Swedes , because that is the time when we , the Czechs , will hand over the Presidency to our friends in Stockholm .
That is the substance of my response .
- I would like to thank the President-in-Office .
I do not mean to make him paranoid with my question .
It was tabled , after all , last December .
I am anti-smoking , not anti-smokers .
We all agree they need all the help they can get : nicotine replacement therapies etc .
But we must recognise the damage that passive smoking does to those who do not enjoy smoking , so please do not feel personally under the spotlight here .
Could you guarantee me then that , before the end of the Czech Presidency , you will have ratified the framework convention - yes or no ?
It would be extremely important if you could give me guarantees on that .
After all , cigarettes are the only legal product on our shop shelves that , if used by consumers according to instructions , kills one in two of the consumers .
They are amazing really .
- Thank you , President-in-Office , for your honesty .
You quoted your mother - well , as a mother , can I urge you to stop smoking , while sympathising with your plight in the building ?
If you were in Ireland , you would be completely out in the cold .
My question is : have you ever considered giving some leadership and quitting the bad habit and encouraging your senators to follow suit ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - To conclude this rather unusual evening 's debate , my mother smoked when she was pregnant , and here I am as the Deputy Prime Minister of the Czech Republic , and my brother and sister are both in very good condition .
My wife smoked as well and she still smokes .
We have three nice , very intelligent , kids - so those are my private views .
I notice that this issue attracts particular interest in Ireland , and I know that you have adopted the measures .
The date of our ratification is in the hands of the Members of the Czech Parliament and the Senate .
Parliament is sovereign .
I am now fighting in my country for the earliest possible ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
During the debate on Lisbon , I am often asked by the members of the Senate whether the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty will lead to keeping their freedom of smoking in some public spaces .
So I have a dilemma .
What is more important : the Lisbon Treaty or this ?
But I can assure you that the Government will do whatever it can to obtain ratification of both Treaties .
We signed both Treaties , and the responsibility of the Government is to do the best it can .
- The questions that have not been taken due to lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

The dramatic consequences of the ' Klaus ' storm in Southern Europe ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the dramatic consequences of the ' Klaus ' storm in Southern Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the European Commission wishes to express its sadness at the number of lives claimed by storm Klaus and sends its condolences to the French , Italian and Spanish families that have lost loved ones .
This is indeed a human tragedy , which has had a devastating impact on people 's lives , homes and businesses .
It is also an ecological disaster .
While this storm was extremely powerful , it only affected a narrow band of territory , and national resources have been able to cope with the immediate disaster response .
For this reason , the Community Civil Protect Mechanism was not activated .
However , the Commission 's Monitoring and Information Centre has been in close contact with the concerned Member States from the first moments when the storm was forecast .
Other Member States were aware of the situation and were getting prepared to provide support to the affected regions .
For example , the Czech Republic spontaneously offered its assistance .
The Commission is now cooperating with the authorities of the Member States affected in order to identify options for EU support .
Possibilities may include through the EU Solidarity Fund or a reprogramming of the structural and rural development funds .
Storm Klaus is an unpleasant reminder that natural disasters are a growing threat for all EU Member States .
Devastating floods hit Central Europe in 2000 and 2002 , the UK in 2007 , and Romania and EU neighbours last year .
The 2003 heatwave claimed tens of thousands of lives .
In 2003 and 2007 forest fires ravaged Portugal and Greece .
These events give us an idea of how climate change is likely to affect the EU 's future because , as the climate changes , we can expect more extreme weather events .
The Member States and the Community need to combine their strengths to prevent disasters , to limit their impacts and to improve the Union 's disaster response capacity .
The Commission will shortly adopt a Communication on ' a Community approach on the prevention of natural and man-made disasters ' .
We look forward to receiving feedback from Parliament on the ideas that are set out .
The Commission would also stress the importance of moving forward on the revision of the Solidarity Fund regulation .
The proposal helps to accelerate the rate of response by allowing for advance payments , and it contains simpler criteria for an activation of the Fund in less time .
While Parliament largely supported the Commission proposal , there has been no progress in the Council .
These initiatives are contributing to shape a genuine European disaster management policy , and the Commission hopes that the European Parliament will continue to support its efforts to reinforce the EU 's capacity to deal with natural and man-made disasters .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I am speaking also on behalf of my colleague , Alain Lamassoure .
In November 1999 , I took the floor in this very Chamber following the storm which had raged in south-west France , to call for European solidarity when wide-scale natural disasters lay waste to our countries .
Ten years ago I was told that there was no European fund to help our fellow citizens in such times of need .
Since 1999 , while natural disasters have unfortunately continued to cause death and major destruction in Europe , EU action has fortunately been strengthened with the creation , in 2002 , of the EU Solidarity Fund , an initiative of the Commission and Mr Barnier .
This Fund allows us to take swift , effective action within a flexible framework .
As things stand , I feel that we need to mobilise this Fund to assist the affected regions , and in this regard I support the French Government 's calls to do so as quickly as possible .
I took note , Mrs Vassiliou , of the Commission 's wish to speed things up .
There is indeed an urgent need when it comes to the damaged infrastructure .
There is also an urgent need with regard to the forest .
I would like to stress this point , since the storm has devastated between 60 % and 70 % of the forest in the south of Gironde and Landes , whereas this forest , one of the largest in Europe , was already barely managing to recover from the damage caused in 1996 and 1999 .
You are aware that there is no insurance for this kind of damage , and foresters are now completely penniless in the face of this disaster .
We must show them our solidarity and assist with rebuilding the natural heritage of these regions .
Before ending , allow me to spare a thought for the victims of storm Klaus , in France , Spain and Italy , and express my support for their families .
Madam President , Mrs Vassiliou , ladies and gentlemen , the images of the 1999 storm , which was just mentioned and which hit south-west France causing tremendous damage , are still engraved on our collective memory .
It is an understatement to say that Europe was not prepared to endure such a tragedy again , so soon .
There are those who view it as a blow dealt by fate , but I see it rather as a horrendous example of the climate change which you have just referred to , Mrs Vassiliou , for which we merely propose rough solutions whereas in fact urgent action is needed .
This is a situation that we must handle responsibly .
Unfortunately , we need to be prepared to face even more natural disasters .
On 24 and 25 January this year , storm Klaus , which hit southern Europe , killed 11 people in France , 14 in Spain and three in Italy .
It caused significant damage , destroying schools and many homes , depriving thousands of people of electricity , heating , drinking water and a telephone service and leaving certain economic sectors in a critical situation , as in the case of the timber industry .
While I am keen to express my solidarity with the families of the victims and all those affected , and my support for local councillors , I would like to take advantage of this forum to call on the European Community since , it has to be said , this kind of situation requires a European response and , first and foremost , European solidarity .
Admittedly , in France a state of natural disaster has been declared , which will facilitate aid to disaster victims , but this does nothing to detract from the need to take coordinated European action to supplement the Member States ' efforts to protect people , the environment and property in disaster-stricken towns and regions .
In practical terms , this primarily entails centralising information at European level in order to make a precise assessment of the damage .
We must then release the necessary funds to provide support for local authorities that are facing huge challenges .
In particular we should support the public services , which have been doing an exceptional job , and which we desperately need in order to repair infrastructure and equipment in the energy , water-supply , sewage , transport and telecommunications , health and education sectors .
Past disasters showed that action at European level is urgent and enabled the prevention of natural risks to be included as one the goals of the European Regional Development Fund .
From now on , Europe must prove its ability to react and to translate its solidarity into practical measures .
I therefore hope , although you have just said so , that the Commission will take this message on board and mobilise all means necessary to respond to this urgent situation , in particular through the EU Solidarity Fund and the Civil Protection Financial Instrument .
Lastly , in conclusion , I would like to remind you that , as with the fires in Greece in 2007 , this violent storm has demonstrated the need for a civil protection force that can be mobilised in all crisis areas .
I would like to hear your opinion on this subject , Mrs Vassiliou , as well as your response to Parliament 's request in its resolution of 27 April 2006 , seeking the creation of a European observatory on natural disasters to ensure a more effective European response when these unfortunate events occur .
Madam President , Mrs Vassiliou , on 18 November last year , I said the following in this very place : ' we do not know what the next disaster will be or on what scale it will be , but we are sure of one thing , and that is that there will soon be another disaster again .
When that time comes , our fellow citizens , who for 50 years have been used to seeing a supposedly united Europe being built , will turn round and ask us : " what have you done ? ” ' .
I repeat , I said that here , to this House , last November .
In this same Chamber , in November 2006 , two years before , I said more or less the same thing : ' if there is one area in which all Europeans expect effective Community responses , it is that of large-scale natural disasters ' .
I said that everyone could see this whenever disasters such as the tsunami occur , and continued : ' that is why , together with my group , I am in favour of implementing preventative actions and of putting in place the capacity to respond very quickly to the consequences of tragedies .
In this connection , I should like to draw attention to the quality of the Barnier report , which states the problem well and proposes solutions that are constructive not only in terms of efficiency but also of subsidiarity ' .
Mrs Vassiliou , we have all remained enthusiastic about this report as it contains highly practical and concrete proposals .
It even contains budgetary items and explains that 10 % of the Solidarity Fund can provide funding .
It explains in a most pragmatic way how to work with the stakeholders in each state .
With the twelve proposals contained in the Barnier report , we had everything necessary to take action at European level which , a few weeks prior to the elections this coming June , would have provided an additional indication of the usefulness and effectiveness of true European operational solidarity .
You have just told us , Mrs Vassiliou , that you hope to receive Parliament 's support .
You had this support , and continue to do so .
What is the Council doing , since you say that it is the Council which is the issue ?
The Council is not here this evening .
We hope that over and above this debate , it will listen attentively to our call , which is not a call for help , nor another expression of surprise at the recent tragedy , but a call for it to clearly hear the question which I recently asked : ' what have you done ? ' .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Vassiliou , ladies and gentlemen , I would like us to reflect for a moment on the nature of this evening 's exercise .
It seems to me that we do this often , too often .
Each time there is a disaster , we meet here , in this Chamber , and begin our chorus of lament where naturally we say that what has happened is a tragedy , and we bow our heads in respect for the victims .
Of course , I do this along with everyone else , but I do not believe that our role ends there .
Our role is perhaps , as my fellow Member was just saying , to plan for the future , since there will be other environmental disasters .
We said this again this morning , with our vote on the Florenz report .
We know that the climate is increasingly unsettled .
Storms of the century now come each decade and soon will come each year .
When there is no storm , there is flooding , and when there is no flooding , there are severe forest fires .
Faced with all this , what is Europe doing ?
I am well aware that the Council is incapable of contemplating anything beyond its national navel .
The juxtaposition of 27 navels does not yet make for a great continental project .
We suffer the consequences of this during every tragedy .
We are told to ' call for solidarity ' , but using which funds ?
I remember in the Committee on Budgets , when we discussed funds , precisely for the climate , we were talking about a few tens of millions of euros .
This storm alone has cost EUR 1.4 billion .
How much will we have to pay in insurance bills before we realise that protection of the environment and the climate is not a burden , but an investment in the future ?
Still today , we are continuing to discuss the need to mobilise European stakeholders when a tragedy strikes .
But we already said that , as I recall , here in this Chamber following the AZF factory explosion in my city , in 2001 .
We said that we had to consider a European intervention force to show that in Europe , in the event of a human catastrophe , the word ' solidarity ' is not just a meaningless concept , but that we take practical action .
All these years later , what has become of this European intervention force ?
I was actually at my home in Toulouse , ladies and gentlemen , when the storm struck .
I now know what a major environmental disaster entails .
If I needed to learn , I have now experienced it in the damage to my home , in the tiles that were ripped off and in the trees that were uprooted .
Therefore , I now know what these populations have been through : people who , in just one night , have seen their life 's work completely destroyed .
However , as long as we , here in Parliament , and you , Mrs Vassiliou , members of the Commission , and also those absent this evening from the desperately empty Council benches , as long as we fail to realise that we must make real budgetary resources available to combat disasters , and not content ourselves with hollow words , as long as we fail to implement European solidarity through the actual establishment of a rapid-reaction , continental-scale civil intervention force , we shall continue here , tragedy after tragedy , to simply perform , once more , our chorus of lament .
The real response to storm Klaus may have come this morning , in our preparations for Copenhagen , and may come tomorrow , Mrs Vassiliou , by finally releasing funds and at last creating this civil force which is so lacking at European level .
- ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Vassiliou , the storm called ' Klaus ' in German , or ' Nicolas ' in French , has devastated eight ' départements ' in my south-west France constituency , and Landes in particular , hence the main impact being on the forest .
The equivalent of six years ' harvest of timber is lying on the ground , that is , 50 million cubic metres of windfall or windbreak over 300 000 hectares .
The first thing to do is clear the forest to prevent the timber rotting .
There needs to be payment of EUR 5-10 per cubic metre of timber removed , that is , in the region of EUR 500 million , namely the amount of aid France has given to the press .
Afterwards , the forest will need to be reseeded and replanted , leaving a 20-year hiatus in the timber industry .
Now , this industry ranges from the woodcutters and cafés where they have a drink , to hauliers , nursery gardeners , vendors and so on .
The second industry affected is that of poultry , sheep and cattle farming .
Roofs have been ripped off , animals lost and feed stores destroyed .
We can see a need for a European agricultural insurance fund against climate and health risks .
The French Presidency talked about this , and the Czech Presidency should do likewise .
The third set of victims is silent , since these victims are never mentioned : the elderly and the isolated in villages in France which are still without electricity .
We need to create a European ' Fourth Age-Climate ' strategy , like the ' Climate-Energy ' one , that is to say , we must tackle the impact of the climate on the millions of people aged over 80 or 85 .
We have to create a modern fourth-age economy in order to emerge from the crisis and avoid the geriatric European Rwanda we are heading for , an economy with a modern construction industry , pharmaceutical and medical research , and a new network to avoid Europe having Gabon-style healthcare .
Above all , we must prevent these climatic incidents providing an opportunity to play at Darwin and natural selection , while we should be building a Europe for life .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the Commissioner for her words of solidarity .
As has already been said , on 24 and 25 January , several countries in the south of the Union suffered the effects of a severe storm with winds reaching speeds of nearly 200 km per hour over many parts of the Iberian peninsula as well as some 30 % of total annual rainfall falling in just a few hours .
The result of the storm was serious damage to property , services and public facilities , both in rural and urban communities , as well as widespread power cuts .
The most serious consequence , however , was the loss of 11 lives across Spain as a result of falling masonry and accidents caused by the fierce gusts of wind .
One of the most tragic events was the death of four children , aged between nine and 12 , in Sant Boi de Llobregat in Catalonia , when the wind destroyed a sports hall in which they were playing baseball .
Apart from lamenting the loss of so many irreplaceable human lives and expressing our solidarity with the families in their grief , the European Union must act , as it has on other occasions , by mobilising either the Solidarity Fund or another more appropriate fund , to repair the material damage caused by this natural disaster .
Twenty thousand hectares of forest have been affected in Catalonia , 75 % of which is either seriously or very seriously damaged .
Action is required in order to reduce the future risk of fire ; clearly this task must be completed before the summer .
Furthermore , a lot of debris of all kinds has been deposited in rivers , streams and other watercourses .
This may block water flow and there is a risk of local flooding .
In view of these and many other effects and aware of the fact that we do not yet have a final figure for the material damage , which , of course , Spain will provide through its request for assistance from the Fund , we think that the European Commission should help these regions return to normal .
This would complement the immense public effort in the affected Member States and would give priority to repairing the serious damage with the objective of restoring living conditions and economic stability in these areas as soon as possible .
The affected regions are facing a downturn in economic activity , degradation of the environment , loss of agricultural production , cessation of activities by many companies , a massive loss of trees and so on .
Given the characteristics and effects of the storm , I request that the Commission make these funds available as soon as possible .
They are mainly intended for natural disasters with serious repercussions for life , the environment and the economy of a Member State or region of the Union .
The objectives of the operations that would receive subsidies include the restoration of infrastructure to working order , the repair of power and water supply equipment and the clean-up of affected areas .
Commissioner , for these reasons I ask you to mobilise these funds as soon as possible once all the necessary information has been received .
- ( FR ) Madam President , as my fellow Members have reminded us , this storm has exacted a heavy toll .
There are victims in France and Spain and this evening we think of them and their families .
200 000 hectares of forest have been destroyed in the south west of France .
In fact , this storm has ravaged 60 % of the Landes forest .
1.7 million homes were without electricity at the height of the storm , and 3 200 of them in the Landes are still without electricity .
Thousands had their phone lines cut and also their water supply disrupted .
Many roads are still impassable due to obstacles such as fallen trees , power lines , floods or landslips .
The services are endeavouring to restore everything as quickly as possible .
While I am pleased that the French Government has formally committed itself to submitting an application so that the areas of France affected can benefit from this fund , I deplore the fact that the French Presidency did not deem it necessary to press for a review of this fund .
This fund , as you , Commissioner , and my fellow Members have said , is still blocked by the Council of Ministers .
As far as Parliament is concerned , it is about covering any major natural disaster which causes serious harm to the population and the environment , like floods , fires and droughts .
However , we are going further by also including man-made phenomena , like catastrophes caused by terrorist attacks .
Our Parliament has also declared itself in favour of lowering the threshold for assistance .
Now , if we question whether this Solidarity Fund is working for the affected regions , we can see that we risk being below the damage threshold .
Now , this is a situation where , ultimately , several countries are affected .
Therefore , I think that this threshold should also be reviewed to show that European solidarity really can exist .
As you have said , Commissioner , and my fellow Members have underlined , this sort of event will be repeated due to the results of climate change .
The Commission has already announced a Communication on adapting to climate change .
It is important from now on for this Solidarity Fund to be a genuine European instrument for protecting citizens .
It is time Europe showed that , in tragic situations , it is there to protect its citizens .
- ( FR ) Madam President , first of all , I too would obviously like to express my condolences and offer my sympathy firstly to those families who are in mourning , and to all those who are victims , in particular the many who have been cut off and who today still lack electricity , water or public services .
Commissioner , I listened to you promise us - and I think you were right - that crisis prevention measures would be consolidated , but the issue this evening , if I may say so , is compensation for the last crisis .
This is the third catastrophic storm in 20 years .
The first one , as you will remember , was in July 1988 , in Brittany .
It still holds the wind speed record : over 250 km / h .
The second , which was on an unprecedented scale , was the storm of 27 December 1999 .
It flattened most of our forests , for the first time .
The third storm was on 24 January 2009 .
The reason I remember it is that I live in Gironde , very close to the Gironde forests .
The first thing we need to do is ask ourselves what the European Union 's added value might be .
In forestry the situation is catastrophic and what threatens us is that foresters have stopped foresting , by which I mean that some of them believe this profession has become unsustainable .
We must therefore put a plan in place , and I am among those who were ready , almost 10 years ago now , to consider a joint crisis organisation , so that we can sell all the wood which has now been placed on the market rather involuntarily , without affecting the price : we could do this by blocking supplies from other European regions , by funding transport and by making sure that this land can be replanted very quickly ; otherwise , I think it will become subject to speculation , or even abandoned .
Here we have a problem which is of direct interest to the European Union .
Secondly , I am also thinking of the oyster-farmers .
Today the profession is in dire straits .
It was already in trouble in 2002 after another disaster which was not at all natural , the sinking of the Prestige , and at present the oyster-farmers of the Arcachon Basin are losing all hope of being able to get back on their feet .
Finally , I would like the European Union Solidarity Fund to be mobilised .
Obviously , I sympathise with what Mrs Laperrouze has said .
Today , the Council is not here .
It will do it no harm and I think it is extremely disappointing that it has refused to change the rule and that this fund today is so difficult to mobilise .
I ask you , moreover , whether the French Government itself has mobilised it .
I am among those who will strive to see that it does this , because I believe it is very important , a few months from the elections , that our citizens know that European solidarity does exist and that Europe is not just dominated by the market .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , on 23 January I was in Galicia when winds of almost 200 km per hour struck my region : over 40 000 hectares of forest were devastated , Commissioner .

Galicia has the highest density of forested land in the European Union .
After the passage of the storm , hundreds of thousands of trees had been blown down , roads were blocked and more than 500 km of high- and low-tension electricity cables were down and have still not been fully repaired .
Over 300 000 subscribers , including myself , suffered power cuts , in some cases for several days , as well as a loss of telephone services .
The storm caused injuries and badly damaged homes , infrastructure , farms , businesses , industrial plant , sports facilities as well as public and municipal buildings .
The response of the Government of Galicia to the storm , the worst in recorded history , allowed aid of EUR 17 million to be quickly approved for initial compensation of those affected and to subsidise repair of the damage .
As we know and as has been mentioned here , on 26 January the two worst affected Member States , France and Spain , requested European aid for the damage caused by the storm .
As the damage that we have suffered can be defined as an extraordinary disaster under the terms of the prevailing Solidarity Fund Regulation , the governments of the two Member States announced that they had commenced work to apply for assistance from the Fund .
However , once again , as in the recent floods in Romania , we find that the requirements of the regulation are so restrictive that in actual fact they prevent this disaster being considered severe , Commissioner .
I would like to recall , as you and other Members have already done , that the Commission presented its proposal in 2005 and that Parliament issued its opinion in favour of reform of the Fund Regulation in 2006 .
Since then , the matter has been blocked in the Council , which has sat on the proposed reform for over two years .
For all these reasons , Commissioner , and given that these circumstances are exceptional and that the disaster has had serious repercussions for the living conditions and economic stability of the affected regions , I would ask you to trigger the Fund as proof of solidarity with the Member States concerned and above all with the citizens affected .
They should be given financial assistance , as I believe , even though the sum involved is not so great , this would be a direct and urgently needed expression of European solidarity .
( RO ) First of all , I would like to express my support for the families who have suffered as a result of this disaster .
I saw , along with everyone else , what the dramatic consequences were in the wake of storm Klaus .
I also watched the first intervention efforts on the scene , made by the countries affected as well as other European countries .
As we have been talking mostly about effects and relief funds , I would like to ask the Commission about specific projects which are actually able to implement prevention mechanisms for incidents like this so that , at least in the future , we will not have any more loss of human life .
- Madam President , can I just add my sympathy , as others have this evening , to the families who are deeply and sadly affected by this storm , and offer my support for calls for greater flexibility in the Solidarity Fund .
But there is a wider question as well to which I would draw your attention .
It is not as grave as what you are discussing here but in all Member States there are occasional natural disasters and I think of counties that I represent - Offaly , http : / / en.wikipedia.org / wiki / County _ Laois " \ o " County Laois " and Louth - where there was very unnatural and unseasonal flooding .
A small number of families were deeply affected by it , not enough for anyone to notice , but they will suffer serious consequences .
Perhaps we need to look at funding under rural development or the common agricultural policy and establish a hardship fund to look after cases like this which are there and which need assistance .
- Madam President , the Commissioner mentioned several disasters in her opening speech , and among them the heatwave in France several years ago which claimed the lives of between 12 000 and 14 000 people .
Just to set the record straight on this , it was not a storm or a flash flood , or anything like the other natural disasters .
That heatwave lasted five to six weeks , and the deaths came over a period of five to six weeks .
Almost all of the people who died were either disabled or elderly and in nursing homes or residential care , or in respite while their families were on holiday .
The French Government at no time recalled the families or recalled staff from their holidays , nor did it call in the army or any other rescue services .
They just allowed people to die , week after week .
I have spoken to many people in France about this incident , as I am involved in the Commission-funded project on rescuing people with disabilities in disasters .
It was a scandal , and a scandal that no one has put their finger on or identified .
I would ask the Commission to investigate that heatwave , investigate the level of deaths and realise that France did nothing about it , and yet when the autumn came and all those people had been buried , there were 14 000 fewer people on their social services register .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me say that all of us have at some time experienced environmental , natural or man-made disasters in our respective countries .
That is why I fully share both your sentiments and your concerns .
The Solidarity Fund has to date offered assistance to 20 Member States , including four times to France , to Germany , Greece , Cyprus , Portugal and many others - 20 altogether - but I know , and I share your view , that we should improve .
We should make it even more practical and give greater assistance to Member States .
We shall continue our efforts to have those improvements approved by the Council .
I am glad that we have Parliament 's approval for this , and your support will be a great help in our efforts .
As I said in my introduction , the Commission is fully committed to assisting France and Spain , which were hit by winter storm Klaus , and will mobilise all relevant European instruments to express European solidarity towards them .
The Commission is ready to examine the possibility of mobilising the Solidarity Fund but , as a first step , we need an application for this from France and Spain .
They have 10 weeks to apply for that assistance .
I was asked whether we have in the pipeline other measures to improve the system of solidarity to Member States for natural disasters , and so would also like to mention that , apart from the review of the Solidarity Fund , we have an upcoming communication whose objective is to identify measures that could be included in a Community strategy for the prevention of natural and man-made disasters .
To sum up , it is the view of the Commission that the Solidarity Fund is already a very useful instrument but , of course , there is scope for improvement , and we shall continue our efforts to that end .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The Klaus storm blew across south-west Europe on 23 - 25 January and caused significant damage .
During the storm , winds gusted at speeds of up to 194 km / h .
The storm claimed 18 victims in Spain , France and Germany and the number of victims would have been even higher if the early warning system had not been operating .
In Slovakia , we watched our television screens with feelings of profound sympathy as the terrible tragedy unfolded in the village of Sant Boi de Llobregat where four children lost their lives after the roof was blown off a sports hall .
I would like to express my sincere condolences to all families that have lost family members .
The Solidarity Fund is a useful instrument .
It was established in the EU after the floods in August 2002 .
Assistance from the fund is designated for Member States and Accession States that have suffered major natural disasters .
This applies to disasters causing damage estimated at more than 0.6 % of the GDP of the affected country .
Following the November 2004 storm which destroyed 2.5 million cubic metres of timber , Slovakia received EUR 5,667,578 from this fund .
Disasters are steadily increasing in number as a result of climate change in Europe , forcing us to adopt rules to ensure not only the rapid and flexible provision of financial assistance in the immediate aftermath of a disaster but also the implementation of preventative measures against various natural disasters .
Use of PCB waste oils in an Irish food recycling plant ( debate )
- The next item is the Commission statement on the use of PCB waste oils in an Irish food recycling plant .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is fully aware of the high risks of polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) for human health and the environment .
Incidents like those in Belgium in 1999 , and in Ireland last year , have demonstrated once again that even small amounts of PCBs can cause severe contamination of the feed and food chain .
Over the past three decades , the EU has established legislation to decrease the release of PCBs and dioxins into the environment , with the objective of reducing human exposure and protecting human health and the environment .
Nevertheless , as equipment containing PCBs typically has a long life expectancy , even after the ban of PCBs in 1985 significant amounts remain in use and are one source of possible human exposure .
In particular , the Directive on the disposal of PCBs , Directive 96 / 59 / EC of September 1996 , provides the appropriate tools to ensure the disposal of equipment and waste containing PCBs as soon as possible , and for large equipment before the end of 2010 .
However , there remain significant gaps in the full implementation of this legislation .
The Commission had to launch infringement procedures against most Member States concerning the obligation to establish inventories of large PCB-containing equipment and PCB disposal plans .
As a result of these infringement procedures , the overall situation has improved .
Currently only two such cases are still open , but are about to be closed .
All Member States have communicated their plans for the decontamination and / or disposal of inventoried equipment and the PCBs contained therein , and for the collection and subsequent disposal of equipment containing less than five cubic decimetres of PCBs ( as required by Article 11 of the Directive ) .
Nevertheless , additional efforts are needed .
In order to ensure the efficiency of PCB disposal plans , Member States have to further improve the implementation of existing legislation on PCBs and of European waste legislation in general .
The Commission is placing increasing importance on the proper implementation of EU waste legislation , and is actively supporting Member States in enhancing the implementation of their national waste legislation .
The feed hygiene Regulation No 183 / 2005 lays down minimum requirements for feed hygiene which apply from the primary production of feed ( at farm level ) , through the production , the processing and the distribution , to the point of feeding the animals .
Feed business operators ( FBOs ) should put in place , implement and maintain procedures based on the HACCP principles .
This means the identification of critical control points and the identification of , inter alia , possible chemical contamination when using the direct heating process to dry feed materials .
The responsibility for compliance with these requirements rests with feed business operators , although the adequacy of the measures put in place by FBOs must be verified by the competent authorities of the Member States .
In most cases , this must be done by an on-the-spot visit .
Furthermore , general principles on the organisation of official controls laid down in the Official Control on Food and Feed Regulation require Member States to ensure that controls are carried out regularly , on a risk basis and with appropriate frequency .
These official controls must include controls on feed businesses .
The role of the Commission is set out in Article 45 of the Official Control on Food and Feed Regulation ( EC ) No 882 / 2004 .
Commission experts carry out audits of the competent authorities in the Member States to verify that controls take place in compliance with Community law .
A general audit of Ireland under this article was carried out across a number of sectors in 2008 and a report will be available shortly .
The list of establishments to be audited is jointly decided between the national competent authorities and the auditors from the FVO .
The plant mentioned in the question was not one of those subjected to inspection in the 2008 general audit .
In the Irish dioxin contamination incident , the use of contaminated breadcrumbs as animal feed was identified to be the source of contamination .
The breadcrumbs were produced from bakery waste ( out-of-date biscuits ) , which are dried using a direct heating process .
In a direct heating process the combustion gases are in direct contact with the feed material to be dried .
The fuel used was apparently contaminated with PCB transformer oil .
The relevant responsibilities of the different actors , from the breadcrumb producer to the fuel supplier , and so on , will be identified by an ongoing legal investigation .
I would like to stress the major importance of a comprehensive approach to be adopted for the risk classification , which includes possible risks related not only to the nature of the incoming material , in this case breadcrumbs , but also to the process itself .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Commission for that very detailed statement on this subject .
I think the reason we are debating this tonight is because we want to learn lessons and ensure that it does not happen again .
The difficulty is that , back in 1999 , when we discovered a problem in Belgium , we thought then that we had tightened up our rules sufficiently so that there would not be another incident .
However , we are where we are now , and we know the consequences of the system 's failure , in terms not just of money - although that is hugely significant for the European Union , for the Irish Exchequer , for taxpayers - but of the loss of confidence among consumers , and the damage done generally to the Irish food producing sector in terms of markets .
I am happy that we have made progress now and are restoring our name on the international marketplace , but I am also acutely aware that farmers throughout the European Union also face problems because of the Irish difficulty .
That is why I think that tonight 's debate is not just about Ireland .
In my view , it is clear from your statement that this problem that occurred in Ireland has the potential to happen in other Member States .
So that is , I suppose , where the starting point for this debate must be .
We know that this oil should not have got into the animal feed chain .
What we are trying to find out is how that happened and - as you rightly say - that is the subject of a police investigation with a cross-border dimension to it .
We will , I hope , find out the exact trail of events so that we can avoid a similar occurrence .
But it also raises another question , which you have alluded to , and that is how we handle waste or surplus food .
Recycling is now ' the thing to do ' .
Everybody is in favour of it because we all want to be environmentally friendly and sustainable .
So there are two issues here : first of all the issue of recycling of oils - to which you have alluded - and I think that needs more careful attention in relation not only to PCBs but more generally to the collection , distribution , handling and so on of waste oils , though obviously there is a particular worry about PCBs .
Regarding surplus food - or waste food as it is sometimes called - my own view is that it is appropriate that we use this product in the animal feed chain , but I want to say very clearly that , if we cannot guarantee its safety and how it is processed and handled , then I am afraid we may need to look at banning this in the food and feed chain .
I would not like to see that happen , but then again I would not like to see happen again what occurred in Ireland and the subsequent consequences of it .
What we want is for this surplus or waste food to be used because it is good quality , not because the animal feed chain is a dumping ground for it - I think that is an important point .
We need to talk , too , very openly about the whole issue of the mixing of animal feeds .
Farmers like to buy ingredients and to mix their own rations , and generally larger farmers do this .
That is appropriate if we have tight controls on it .
I understand that there are regular checks carried out , but in this case there were clearly some gaps in the checks on that market .
Indeed , those farmers who were caught and suffered consequences because they used this product were saying to me , ' Why was somebody not coming and checking what was coming into our yards ? '
On the issue of regulation , I believe that there are very tight controls on licensed animal feed operators - the compound feed industry of the European Union - and they came in because of practices in the past which we needed to tighten up on .
I have a sense that , in Member States , we regulate the compliant particularly tightly and we do not keep a lookout for the potentially non-compliant .
We do not think outside the box .
There is perhaps a tendency , once the paper trail is correct and the boxes are ticked , to put it all to bed and not look underneath the surface .
I think we need to look again at regulation .
We are looking at it again in the financial sector , and we also need to look at it in the food sector .
I also think that , at farm level , inspectors are sometimes regarded as the devil incarnate coming on to farms .
Why do farmers not welcome inspectors in , seeing them as protectors of their businesses ?
I think we need to change the mindset now in the entire food chain , based on this experience .
I welcome very particularly the announcement of the Irish Farmers ' Association that they are setting up a food taskforce .
It is high time that farmers took some control of the food chain that they are the first step on .
Lastly , the issue of low-cost ingredients is not one for now , but the pressure on producers to produce ever more cheaply is part of this issue and needs to be addressed .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I have a number of points to make in relation to this issue and of course I would disagree slightly with Mrs McGuinness in relation to ' this is not about Ireland ' .
Of course , this is about Ireland .
This is the most recent scandal in relation to food risks .
The protection of human health has to be the primary concern on this issue and what we are talking about here is the implementation of a 1996 directive .
Indeed , unfortunately , Ireland was one of those Member States which had to be forced by threats of legal action to actually implement this directive , five years later , in 2001 .
Of course , the process of implementing it is still , it would appear , under way , and the inspection procedures for ensuring that it is being complied with appear to be quite weak .
From what I understand from what I have read about it , one of the surprising things is the lack of information about what precisely occurred in this particular instance with regard to the contamination of pork .
It would appear that the factory concerned which produced the feed had not inspected for some time .
I also have to say - and I am sure the Government would be surprised to hear me say this - I do believe they took the right decision in clamping down immediately on the distribution of pork and indeed the withdrawal of pork from the shop shelves .
Of course it hurt many innocent and compliant producers and butchers and so on : 90 % or more of products were not contaminated at all .
The factory concerned was only supplying something like 10 outlets , so it was a big move to make , but it was the right move to make .
The most important thing is that we try and ensure that the public and the consumer can be certain that the food they are buying in the supermarkets , in their local corner shops is safe to eat .
If we do not take immediate and drastic steps to guarantee that , then I think we are failing in our responsibility .
I have two questions for the Commissioner .
One is , as I say , we are talking about the implementation here of the 1996 directive .
Is there not an argument now for that directive to be reviewed ?
Are the standards that were set in that directive not now adequate or inadequate ?
Should we not be looking more seriously at taking these PCBs out of circulation much more quickly than is envisaged , particularly because of the late way in which many Member States actually implemented the directive ?
My other question relates to the management plan which the Environmental Protection Agency in Ireland is belatedly putting in place in 2008 where it talks about the code of practice , which the plan also includes , for the in-use management of PCBs and PCB containing equipment .
What I want to know is whether a code of practice is in fact compliant with the directive .
Should we not be looking for a more stringent application of the rules in terms of the management of PCBs ?
I am not in favour of charging everybody who breaks a rule here and there , but I do think that , where food safety is concerned , there should be criminal sanctions for those who carelessly abuse their position .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , the Irish pigmeat industry plays a vital role in the Irish agri-foods sector .
That industry is valued at approximately EUR 1 billion and is responsible , directly and indirectly , for the employment of 10 000 people .
Against the backdrop of the current economic climate and the rising cost of food prices , it is critical that we do our utmost in Ireland to defend the Irish pigmeat sector , which operates to the highest European Union and international standards .
The detection of dioxins above the minimum threshold in a sample of pork fat under the National Residue Monitoring Programme enabled the source of the contamination to be quickly traced to an individual feed manufacturing plant .
While any contamination of our food is always regrettable , what this incident shows is the very high level of food safety controls which the Irish authorities have in place to guarantee the integrity of the food chain .
In other words , those controls worked .
I would therefore like to acknowledge the competence and swiftness of the action taken by the Irish Government and the Department of Agriculture regarding the decision taken for a total product recall .
This was very well received by European and international markets , and indeed by the European Commission .
It highlighted how seriously we as a country view food safety matters , and helped maintain our reputation at home and abroad as a quality food-producing nation .
Irish consumers continued to buy pork as it became available on the supermarket shelves , and there was an early resumption in trading in most European and international markets .
Obviously , additional work needs to be carried out to resume full trading , such as enhanced marketing campaigns and so on .
I would like to commend the Oireachtas Agriculture Committee for its comprehensive investigation of the dioxin incident , which involved a series of hearings that involved government departments , state agencies and representatives of the pork industry .
I am glad also that the Department of Agriculture is carrying out a further investigation , under the chairmanship of a very well-known individual in European circles , Professor Patrick Wall .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , at least this was discovered , in the Irish case , by means of inspections .
Ten years ago in Belgium , the cases came thick and fast .
In both cases , we hear talk of accidents that took place , but these accidents have never been proven .
After 10 years , the case is now closed in Belgium .
One person got a suspended sentence of one and a half years .
However , how the substance got into the products is not clear .
We must therefore continue to assume that toxic substances were deliberately mixed in , that feedstuffs were used to save on disposal costs .
Thus , the oil is diluted and added to the feedstuffs .
In both cases , the oil in question is transformer oil .
As long as these accidents have not been reconstructed and it remains unproven that it really was the result of burning , it must be assumed , in Ireland , too , that a criminal act took place whereby these toxic substances , this PCB , were admixed .
This means that we must increase the frequency of inspections so that criminal efforts are not focused on such feedstuffs with the impression that this is an easy way to cut costs .
For that reason , the open declaration that we will be adopting here tomorrow represents a further opportunity not to increase the focus against criminal efforts but to increase the frequency of inspections .
Risks , furthermore , must not be determined merely in terms of which plants are involved but also in relation to who on earth is running these plants and from what murky sources this oil is obtained .
We do know the sort of people we are dealing with here and the institutions thus need to be aware , in relation to inspections , that they represent a higher risk and must therefore be subject to stricter inspections .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , my colleague mentioned the murky channels by which PCBs came into the food chain in Ireland .
I think maybe it is worse , sometimes looking back at the history of PCBs .
Polychlorinated biphenyls are almost 100 years old .
They are man-made and from the very beginning it was obvious they were very dangerous .
They were used for many years in capacitors , hydraulic fuels , wood floor finishes : clearly not something we want in the food chain .
But almost from the early 1900s until 1966 , when a Swedish scientist actually established their danger , people looked the other way and allowed them to be used , even though numerous industrial accidents happened over and over and over again .
But even once the science was in place it was really not until the 1970s - 1972 -before PCBs in public areas were banned ; even then , they were still allowed to be used and their use was not fully banned until 2000 .
So there are a lot of PCBs out there and they were left out there almost 100 years after we knew there was a problem .
So , despite the Commission 's directive of 1996 which required the disposal of PCBs , we find them coming up again and again , in particular in Belgium and in Ireland recently .
But I have found that one thing really confused people in Ireland .
I remember visiting a butcher around that time and he just could not understand .
He said , we have put into place so much traceability .
We can know exactly where this egg comes from , what day it was laid and if we really want to delve a little bit further we can find out exactly what farm and so on .
And yet , even after we knew the source of the PCBs , this butcher , who sources all his own pork , who had all the code numbers etc. was still being forced to throw away and destroy pork .
I do not understand how that happened , because we have really worked so hard on the Committee on the Environment ; you have worked so hard to achieve traceability , and yet when the chips were down , those systems were not used .
Maybe they were used to find the farms , but they were not used to clear the reputations of the innocent and this cost people an awful lot - and it cost my country an awful lot , for it was not these particular supply chains , it was the whole country that was blackened .
And there is confusion about other things .
We are talking today about PCBs and dioxins and rightly so , but are we going to spend 100 years before we realise the connection between dioxins and incineration ?
This is something that I am also constantly trying to do , namely to keep dioxins from incineration out of the food chain .
- Madam President , several farmers and a processing business in my constituency face millions of pounds of loss through no fault of their own because contaminated feed bought in good faith was supplied from a food mill where wanton disregard - never mind good practice - was shown .
It is no surprise that there is considerable anger amongst those affected constituents .
I have a series of questions for the Commissioner .
If they are not answered tonight , I would like them to be answered in writing if that is possible .
Firstly , what is the history of the culpable recycling feed mill in terms of compliance with EU regulations ?
Is it a law unto itself as has been suggested ?
Secondly , did Millstream have a licence to use the oil in question ?
If not , was it not the responsibility of the Member State to ensure that such defiance of basic regulatory requirements was discovered and dealt with ?
Thirdly , was Millstream implementing an HACCP-based risk analysis and an auto-control plan as required by the food hygiene regulation ?
Fourthly , is the Commission satisfied with the level and frequency of inspections and supervision imposed by the Member State on this plant and its produce , given the Member State 's obligation to have a risk-based official control plan ?
Was there negligence on the part of the Irish authorities in enforcing with rigour the feed law and food safety requirements ?
Fifthly , in my constituency legitimate food mills have to comply with rigorous controls and standards under quality assurance schemes .
Why was there no equivalent scrutiny of the Millstream recycling ?
Sixthly , was there any reliance upon self-certifying of safety of feed mills and , if so , why - since that should only be permissible on small-scale operators - was it allowed to apply here ?
Finally , if I might , what is the precise legal basis upon which the Commission agreed a large payout to the Irish state , as initially the Commission spokesman said that no such basis existed ?
Will there be a follow-up in terms of infringement if that Member State is found to be in breach of its requirements ?
( RO ) It is useful that we can have a debate this evening based on the declaration which the Commission and you , Commissioner , have already made concerning the use of waste oils in feed preparation in Ireland .
I would like to extend the debate slightly to tell you that a very large number of Member States , including Romania which I am going to speak about , have been affected by this incident , or to put it more precisely : the incident has affected the meat industry but , above all , consumers .
It has affected the industry , which has recorded major losses in an extremely short space of time , and consumers at a time when , at least in Romania , there is usually a significant consumption of pork , in keeping with the tradition of celebrating Christmas .
The one thing which has functioned extremely well is the notification of the veterinary authorities via the European rapid alert system .
However , apart from this measure , all the information has disappeared .
What quantity of contaminated meat was involved , where was it distributed and where are the food products were the questions to which partial answers were given , although , in some cases , none at all .
What has been the effect of this ? A panic reaction among consumers and huge losses for producers , as well as the fairly poor ability on the part of the responsible authorities to manage such an incident effectively .
In my view , we have at least two problems .
The first is the dioxin contamination as a result of using waste oils , given that dioxin is , as we all know , a substance which poses a major hazard as it is highly toxic to the human organism , even in tiny quantities .
What can we do to ensure that such an incident never happens again ?
The second problem is : how do we improve the ability of the responsible authorities in the Member States to respond and take action in such dangerous situations ?
On a final note , I hope that this debate will give us some answers , at least to these two questions .
- ( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the problem of the use of waste oils containing polychlorinated biphenyls at a food waste recycling plant again has posed the question of the need for guaranteeing food safety in the European Union .
First of all , we must underline that the problem does not stem from some animal disease but from the inadequate monitoring of stipulated measures carried out for fodder hygiene and safety in the European Union .
Despite the controls in place , a high level of dioxin was intersected by the time it had reached the pork meat .
The logical question is : why did this not happen earlier ?
Many European citizens today are asking whether the European Union has the necessary legislation available which would require Member States to apply adequate monitoring on the safety of fodder fed to animals .
The answer to this question is urgently needed , taking into view the fact that not applying safety norms at even just one food processing plant can have fatal consequences and bring about losses amounting to hundreds of millions of Euros .
I would like to call upon the European Commission to undertake the necessary measures to intensify monitoring , which is an inseparable part of European Union policy for consumer safety protection .
Pork meat containing high dioxin from Ireland also reached Bulgaria as well as many other European countries .
However , such incidents must not be allowed in future as the financial and social price that must be paid afterwards is exceedingly high .
Finally , I would like to welcome Mrs McGuinness on her initiative to put this issue to scrutiny before the Commission .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , we are , tonight , discussing the use of PCB waste oils in an Irish food recycling plant .
Tomorrow , we will be debating the placing on the market and use of feed for animals .
Tomorrow , we will observe that we have , together , already achieved a series of important and expedient measures in this sector .
Yet there are still problems in this area .
That is why the five questions posed by Mrs McGuinness in her oral question must be taken seriously and must be given a serious answer .
Commissioner , you , yourself , talked of gaps that are still to be closed in the implementation of our legislation in a number of Member States .
It is true that the feed sector overall has thoroughly proven its reliability in recent years , but certain businesses are either unaware of the risks or do not wish to see them .
It would seem , furthermore , that there is still much room for improvement in many Member States in terms of inspection on the appropriate risk basis .
All of us - Parliament , the decreasing number of farmers and also consumers - expect the proper application of EU legislation with inspections to that effect .
For that reason , I believe that general food law , food and feed hygiene and the licensing conditions for food recycling plants needs to be looked into .
Yes , we do want to make use of surplus foodstuffs .
I , personally , at least , would like this to happen and for the surplus foodstuffs in question not to be destroyed .
Traceability , however , must be ensured .
Unwanted substances and products must be excluded in a secure and controlled manner .
When feed companies are licensed , the professional competence of their staff in the area of food and feed safety must be ensured .
Feedingstuffs are the basis of food safety and there must be certainty on the part of farmers so that consumers can be ensured of safe and sound food .
- Madam President , first of all can I say I welcome the opportunity for this debate .
It has been brought home to farmers how vulnerable they are to what others do .
This is something that occurred in the Republic of Ireland , but the ironic thing is that the waste oil which was the supposed cause of the problem originally came from Northern Ireland .
But it manifested itself in the compound feed from the Republic of Ireland .
The problem that has arisen as far as I am concerned is that the farmers in the Republic of Ireland , be they of pig or beef , have been compensated , aided and assisted by Europe .
Farmers in Northern Ireland at this time stand high and dry with no help and no support .
Northern Ireland farmers have been destroyed and many of them stand to lose their farms and be put out of business through no fault of their own .
They have done nothing wrong , committed no offence , and I have to state straightforwardly to this House tonight , and to the Commissioner , as far as I am concerned the farmers in Northern Ireland have been seriously let down , not only by our own Department of Agriculture , the DARD as it is known in Northern Ireland , and most especially by the Minister , who seems incapable , weak and unable to solve the problem .
The Minister of Agriculture in the Republic of Ireland has shown clearly that he takes care of his own first .
That I understand .
Can I ask this question to the Commissioner : are you going to receive any information from an inquiry that is supposed to be carried out by the police both sides of the border ?
Will you be prepared to act on the information that you receive , and will you be prepared to ensure that Northern Ireland producers have the same support as farmers in the Republic of Ireland and that they are not disenfranchised in any way financially ?
And , above all , and this is my last point , will you ensure that such a problem can never again occur ?
All this achieves is a loss of confidence for the consumer and above all else the destruction of the producer .
- Madam President , one source of human exposure to PCBs is through the food chain , as the Commissioner says .
However , open fires and cigarette smoke are far greater sources to a far greater number of people .
Let us be proportional and let us keep the hysteria out of this debate , and more light and less heat on it .
Minimum requirements for feed hygiene are indeed very important and must be rigorously enforced , but they must also be accompanied by full identification and traceability for all meat products - not just beef but also poultry , pigmeat and sheepmeat .
I have put down amendments to current legislation to that effect , and we will be discussing these in this House shortly .
The pig feed concerned was indeed contaminated by breadcrumbs because , inadvertently , Millstream Recycling used fuel to dry the breadcrumbs after buying this in good faith from a company it had dealt with for years and with which it had had no previous problems .
There is an ongoing police investigation and the company concerned is cooperating fully with them .
I would like to refute completely Mr Allister 's claim that the company showed wanton disregard .
That will be proven not to be the case , so let us be careful what we say here .
The biggest problem was that we had to have 100 % withdrawal of all pigmeat products , and their destruction , albeit only in the short term .
The livelihoods of many Irish farmers , and indeed the reputation of Irish food products abroad suffered because we had to have such a disproportionate response , when only six to seven per cent of our pig farms were contaminated , since the Irish system of identification and traceability failed at the point of the slaughter-house .
All pigs are supposed to be eartagged in Ireland , or slap marked , but somehow , at the slaughter-house level , we could not differentiate those pigs that had had the contaminated feed from the vast majority of other pigs that had not .
We need to look at that issue .
The Commission needs to look at the whole role of identification and traceability , and above all let us wait for the police investigation , which I think will surprise people .
The companies concerned are extremely sorry , and have said so publicly , for the damage caused to the food chain and Ireland 's reputation , and indeed for the economic damage caused to the many farmers who have purchased their excellent feed products up to this point .
They are now back in business and again producing , I might say , an excellent feed ration for farmers to mix .
This has been an appalling episode . No one would have wished it to happen .

- Madam President , I have tried not to be judge and jury on this Irish case , because that is not why we are here tonight , but I would like to ask the Commissioner three questions : what volume of PCBs is still in circulation ; can you guarantee that none of these will contaminate the food chain in the next 23 months , when they are still in the process of disposal ; and would the Commission present a report on the status of implementation of the Feed Hygiene Regulation , which this House would like to hear ?

I would also like to point out to Jim Allister that this is a cross-border issue .
The contamination , as we understand it , came - as Jim Nicholson rightly pointed out - from across the border .
That is why I do not agree with Proinsias .
This is a European issue because it has a cross-border dimension .
What happened in Ireland could happen in any Member State because there are - as I understand it - thousands of tonnes of PCBs in circulation .
Perhaps the Commissioner could clarify that point .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , has the Commission investigated or reconstructed the course of events leading to the accident ?
I find the idea that the burning of waste oil and the smoke that then seeps through a few breadcrumbs could cause dioxin contamination on this scale , where a 200-fold increase in dioxin levels occurred in the pigmeat - not in the feed , but in the pigmeat itself - quite laughable .
I shall continue to assume , until or unless it is proved to the contrary , that this was a case of a deliberate admixing .
Every road accident is reconstructed and it is investigated how such an accident could have occurred .
This accident - if that is what it was - too , must be reconstructed and it must be investigated whether this type of combustion and the smoke which it passes through the meat really can cause so much dioxin to end up in the meat .
As a practician , I would say that everything that is being said in this regard is nonsense .
What we are talking about here was a deliberate admixing and we are being made into repositories for this poison , one which does not break down by itself and which therefore continues through generations of people .
- ( NL ) This has been an extremely interesting debate .
I fear that we will have cases like this again in future .
We can never rule out criminal behaviour and people taking advantage of the system .
One of the issues that were not discussed this evening is the system of private hallmarks .
Why does the Commission not give the industry more encouragement to carry out its own inspections , and to develop private quality hallmarks ?
The Commission can then say , ' we can carry out checks at the end , but , in the first instance , it is up to you to ensure that you check your fellow professionals and to ensure that these things do not happen .
If you develop a reasonable system , we will encourage it and recognise it . '
It appears to me that we need to encourage from the bottom up so that practices of this kind do not occur in future .
- Madam President , there is no dispute about the fact that the oil apparently came from Northern Ireland .
That is not the issue .
The pertinent point is that Millstream chose to buy in that oil , knowing it was looking for oil to use in dryers - to deal with feedstuff , to dry the breadcrumbs - so why was it buying oil of that sort , no matter where it came from ?
Why was it not checked by state inspectors and by the company itself ?
The use of oil in that circumstance is , as I understand it , illegal , a breach of the food and hygiene regulations .
So where it came from is not the issue - it is why it came there and why it was used for the purpose for which it was used .
- Madam President , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's allegation of deliberate mixing of this contaminate into feed is contemptible and unworthy of any professional politician .
Let us allow the due process of the legal investigation to take its course .
The company concerned , Millstream Recycling , are cooperating fully .
They have a full paper trail to prove they bought this oil from a licensed company in Dublin that supplies oil .
They bought it as a recycled light fuel oil which would have been the correct oil to use in this particular drying process .
They were sold it by a licensed company and , as far as they were concerned , it was recycled light fuel oil they bought ; they accept , however , that they were given transformer oil which caused the dioxins .
There is a legal and police investigation .
Let us let due process take its course and stop these allegations flying because this is a very serious issue , which is not helped by hysterical and over-the-top reaction .
- Madam President , everybody agrees - no one denies - that , yes , the oil came from Northern Ireland .
We cannot deny that .
But , while we argue , there are eight farmers in Northern Ireland going out of business , and in the Republic as well .
They have suffered as well , I accept that .
This is not political .
This is ordinary people suffering , and it is our farmers who are suffering financially .
The truth is - and we have to face up to this , and you , Commissioner , have to face up to this - there were tonnes of pigmeat that were untraceable .
Nobody knew where it had come from , what pigs it came from or where it came from .
Commissioner , it is time , long past time , that you brought in straight , clear labelling of origin of where this comes from .
At least if that had been the case , we would have known where we stood and where it is .
I do not want to make this political because for me this is not political .
I talk to my farmers every day , and some of these people are most probably going to lose their farms .
So this is serious stuff .
If we have to follow the legal investigation to its ultimate conclusion , I want to see that happen - but I want to see my farmers protected , and I do not want to see them sold down the river .
I want to see them properly protected by you so that they get the same position and protection as farmers in the Republic of Ireland .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this discussion has been really lively , and many questions have been put .
Many assumptions have also been made , and I would agree with Mrs Doyle that we have to be patient and wait for this investigation to finish .
Then we can draw our conclusions and take decisions for the future .
One thing I have to say - I was not involved at the time but have heard about it - is that similar incidents happened in Germany and in Belgium , and there was wide information about those incidents in all the Member States .
So I would have thought that a prudent Member State would have taken more stringent control measures .
But even with the most stringent control measures such a thing may happen , either because of fraud , or because of negligence , or whatever .
Our responsibility is to see to it that we have legislation - which I believe is now satisfactory - and to see that Member States comply with that legislation .
Our duty as the Commission is to have controls and to see that Member States do their duty .
FVOs make their inspections , and FVO reports are open to the public , so the extent to which there is a compliance with our laws can be implied from those reports , which are even prepared on a country by country basis .
A number of you raised the issue of traceability , which is indeed one of the main pillars of general food law and is the responsibility of the food business operators , who must be able to indicate from whom they have purchased and to whom they are selling .
However , the level of detail or specificity of internal traceability chosen by the food business operator determines the final economic loss to be borne by food business operators in the case of recall .
In this particular case , what the traceability rule in Ireland required was simply the date of production , and not the farm where the meat came from .
That was why it was necessary to recall all the meat produced in those two months .
If stricter traceability rules were applicable ( which would have costed more , of course ) only the meat which was identified as originating from that particular farm would have been recalled .
So one has to decide : pay more and have better traceability rules or pay less and , in the final analysis , bear the loss .
It was mentioned that we have provided aid , as a Commission - although the payment of compensation is not my responsibility , but that of Commissioner Fischer Boel - and I must say that what was paid in this case was paid on the same basis both in the Republic of Ireland and in Northern Ireland .
I have here some figures .
The Commission has introduced a private storage aid scheme for Northern Ireland , and under this scheme up to 15 000 tonnes can be stored for a maximum of six months .
The budget for that measure is EUR 6.9 million .
A similar private storage scheme was also adopted in the Republic of Ireland .
Under that scheme , up to 30 000 tonnes can be stored for up to six months , with a maximum budget of EUR 13.9 million .
In the Republic of Ireland there was also a disposal scheme which was cofinanced by the Community and which cost EUR 20.6 million .
No payments were made by the Commission directly to farmers either in the Republic of Ireland or Northern Ireland , because there is no legal base for such compensation .
Summing up , I would say that we have good laws , but in the future we have always to be vigilant .
We must make sure that those laws are applicable by the Member States , and we need the cooperation of the Member States .
On the Commission side , we have to keep up our controls and make sure that Member States comply with our regulations .
Moreover , once we receive the results of the inquiries and investigations , we can then think about the future .
If we believe that there is scope for improving our regulations , we shall have no hesitation in doing so .
- The debate is closed .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
The placing on the market and use of feed for animals ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the placing on the market and use of animal feed - C6-0128 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , today we are discussing what is known as the ' open declaration ' .
This is about transparency with regard to feed as the basis for healthy food for consumers , and it is about giving purchasers of compound feed an overview of what is supplied to them .
It has been a long road but , if we adopt this Regulation today , I hope this brings matters to a successful conclusion , and I should like to thank the Commission , which has helped us a great deal with its constructive work on the issues .
The Commission encountered absolute political will on the part of Parliament to push through this open declaration , and also experienced a stubborn but fair debate with the Council .
We can be proud of the results .
Let us take a brief look at the history .
We had the BSE crisis and , in 1997 , the Temporary Committee of Inquiry issued its final report in which Parliament called for this open declaration .
The Commission presented a proposal , which subsequently became Directive 2002 / 2 / EC .
In a compromise with the Council - this went through all the bodies - the Directive pushed through the open declaration , which meant that labels had to state the ingredients with a ± 15 % tolerance , and the exact composition had to be provided on request .
That was a directive rather than a regulation , and Member States implemented it only very hesitantly or not at all .
The feed industry brought an action to the European Court of Justice , and the Court gave the following first-class confirmation : apart from the exact information , the legality of this Directive was not in dispute .
We then took account of this judgment in a further procedure in Parliament , and have now brought matters to a conclusion in the form of this Regulation .
I had the honour of being rapporteur each time and , throughout this long period , I enjoyed extremely intensive cooperation with the Commission that was based on trust .
Today we have a result that has been fought for hard but fairly , and of which we can be proud .
It is also apparent that it enjoys the support of the majority in this House and of the groups .
There are no amendments , from which I conclude that this Regulation will indeed be adopted by a large majority .
Therefore , we have a good Regulation that brings about the open declaration in three steps - you know what they are - firstly , the components in descending percentage order ; secondly , the provision of information to feed businesses with a ± 15 % tolerance - in this regard we have not laid down a reservation of intellectual property rights in this legislation , but rather referred to the general legislation - and thirdly , the provision of exact information to the authorities .
I also wish to point out that we have set up a register .
No feeding or admixing of components will now take place in the European Union without such components being published , as they must be included in the register .
This is important not only to the supervisory authorities but also to the public and to customers .
From the point of view of the rapporteur , therefore , I can say that I am very satisfied with the result overall .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for its work on this dossier , and especially the rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , as well as all the shadow rapporteurs , who all played an important role .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has managed to steer discussions during the negotiations with great skill , and we are very grateful to him .
The compromise package maintains the high level of feed safety achieved in the EU .
It strikes the right balance between consumer protection and intellectual property rights .
It removes the burden of the pre-market authorisation procedure for bio-proteins , modernises the labelling of feed through proper information for the customer and places coregulation at the heart of legislative procedures .
It improves market transparency through the notification system for new feed materials , facilitates innovation and competitiveness in the EU feed business and marks a concrete step against the misleading of feed users - be they farmers or pet owners .
The result of the negotiations is the compromise package submitted for your vote , which amounts to simplification and modernisation of the current legal framework .
The provisions concerning the so-called ' open declaration ' allow for a more modern type of labelling .
Feed materials incorporated into compound feed for food-producing animals will have to be labelled by weight , in descending order .
On top of this , the exact percentage of weight has to be indicated for highlighted feed materials , and in the case of voluntary labelling .
Furthermore , the provision that certain information concerning compound feed can be transferred from the competent authorities to the purchasers on grounds of urgency improves the appropriate information to the user in cases such as feed contamination incidents .
In this context , the Commission makes the following declarations .
First , in order to adapt Annex III on the tolerances for the compositional labelling of feed materials and compound feed to scientific and technical development , the Commission and its services envisage taking up examination of that Annex .
In this context , the Commission will also consider certain feed materials with a moisture content in excess of 50 % .
Second , with regard to the labelling of additives , the Commission will study whether the principles of information through labelling of feed could also apply to the additives and premixtures authorised under the Regulation on additives for use in animal nutrition .
Finally , the Commission understands that any urgencies relating to human and animal health and the environment may include urgencies generated , among other things , by negligence , international fraud or criminal acts .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and myself , I should like to extend the warmest of thanks to our rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
I believe that the approach taken to this report is a model for the parliamentary work in this House .
Today 's vote does not involve any amendments , as the work on this was technically very sound and encompassed the entire political spectrum .
I believe that this result is one to be proud of .
It is a balanced result that safeguards the interests of farmers as users of feed , feed manufacturers , and all other links in the food chain .
It improves transparency , and my group , in particular , sets great store by the setting up of a register in which the raw materials mixed into feed must be entered .
Food scandals occur time and again and not even the new legislation will prevent this , as no European rules are designed to prevent criminal activity ; but these rules will help ensure that , when these scandals do occur , it will be easier to detect what substances have been mixed in .
I also think it a good thing that manufacturers of feed may provide further information on a voluntary basis , and I consider it an excellent proposal that , if they provide such information , this must be scientifically proven .
I am of the opinion that this new feed law significantly improves protection and that the decreasing order enables farmers to see the proportions of each feed component and what is the best feed for their animals , and to choose accordingly .
I reiterate my thanks to all those who contributed to making this such a good report .
Mr President , Commissioner , as I have already done in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteurs from the other political groups and also the Council for the work carried out .
This work has allowed us to reach agreement at first reading and furthermore , has been an excellent running-in process for the codecision procedure that will be standard practice in our committee in the near future .
Ladies and gentlemen , at present , legislation on the movement of raw materials for feed and compound feed for animals , including pets - a sector that represents some EUR 50 billion in trade at Community level - is regulated by several directives and some 50 amendments and implementing acts .
The simplification of the legislation and its harmonised application are the main objectives that will doubtless be achieved by this Regulation .
Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has already debated the placing on the market of animal feed , back in 2006 .
We will all recall that we unanimously asked the European Commission , in future review , to endeavour to find a fair balance between the interests of farmers in obtaining detailed information on feed ingredients and the interests of the industry in ensuring sufficient protection of its know-how .
The compromise reached on the main sensitive points of the Commission 's proposal , the open declaration of raw materials and the creation of a Community list of raw materials , is a good reflection , in my opinion , of this balance .
Proof of this is the welcome the compromise has received from all those involved .
In fact , by means of the open declaration , the compromise protects the rights of purchasers to be informed and of manufacturers to retain ownership of their know-how by indicating that information should be provided without prejudice to the 2004 Directive on intellectual property rights .
There is no question , ladies and gentlemen , that in a relationship of trust between supplier and user , the formulae should be known , but it would not be logical to be obliged to give the recipe to the first client who came through the door .
Many of us have drunk Coca-Cola for many years .
Although we do not know its recipe , this does not mean that we doubt that the product 's characteristics are observed and that health standards are respected .
The Court of Justice judgment previously mentioned strictly establishes that the obligation to inform customers of the exact composition of feed , if they so request , is not justified by a desired aim to protect health .
That said , I must remind you that the competent authority will have access to the precise composition at all times and , as established in the compromise reached , any emergency related to human or animal health or the environment will mean that the purchasers will have access to precise information on the composition of the feed in question once the legitimate interests of both the manufacturers and the purchasers have been considered .
With regard to the list of good labelling practices , this remains voluntary for the professionals in the sector without at any time becoming a positive list of raw materials for the manufacture of compound feeds , as this is something that has not been requested .
The legislation will include , at the European Parliament 's request , a new annex comprising a list of raw materials for animal feed of which the placing on the market or use is prohibited or restricted .
This is information , whether an annex or a list , that the Commission can update .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament , whom I represent , supports the compromise reached and has not tabled any amendments for the plenary .
We are fully in favour of the position as presented today in this House and , as such , we will vote in favour of it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) I , too , should like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe shares the view that the compromise that has been struck is a good one , and so we will be able to vote in favour of it later today .
What matters most is for the intellectual property of the cattle feed manufacturers to be safeguarded .
If we in the sector want innovation - as indeed , yesterday , we voted on a climate report - there is much room for improvement in the cattle feed sector too , so that the emission of all kinds of gases caused by livestock can be reduced .
Well , this is a challenge we need to confront squarely .
When cattle feed manufacturers decide to innovate , they should not be impeded by excessively strict legislation on disclosure .
This disclosure is , to my mind , safeguarded , as others have already mentioned , and could be done at the request of the government or a certain customer , for example .
There is nothing stopping the cattle feed manufacturers from doing this on a voluntary basis .
The ingredients as such are not the most important thing : the precise nutritional value of cattle feed is much more important , and should be correctly labelled .
Everything that is on the label , such as energy , protein , and suchlike , is valuable information .
In short , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe will be backing this compromise .
We will also say to the cattle feed manufacturers that if they wish to innovate in their production processes and their cattle feed composition , for example , this is a good compromise that will help them do this .
Mr President , the market for feedstuffs and their use in animal production is extremely important , because it concerns the health of hundreds of millions of citizens in EU Member States .
Unpleasant experiences from the past in the form of animal diseases caused by unsuitable feedstuffs brought about huge material and social costs in the countries of the Community .
This is why defining the composition of feeds is also extremely important , in order to limit the use of improper feeds .
Effective enforcement of the provisions contained in the regulation is also important , so that they will not be merely hollow declarations .
Currently , when millions of people and even entire countries in Europe are against the consumption of food produced using animal feeds which contain genetically modified plants , those people have the right to know what is happening .
Therefore , it is not only farmers who should be informed about the contents of animal feed , but food processing plants should inform customers about this on product labels .
And this is not being done .
Several months ago in this Chamber , we debated the increasing numbers of obese people in Europe .
This problem , however , in great measure concerns precisely the contents of animal feeds , because it is these contents which significantly affect the quality of meat .
It is very good that in the draft regulation , much attention has been paid to the hygiene of feed production and to the problem of the addition of contaminated materials during production .
That practice has sometimes been used by many producers .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I will be no exception in offering my congratulations to my group colleague , Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf , who has worked very hard on what must be one of the more technical dossiers we have dealt with .
He has also displayed the wisdom of Solomon in striking a balance between the needs of the consumers and the very legitimate needs of manufacturers for the protection of their product and their intellectual property .
This is what I would call back home one of the more classic European Parliament dossiers .
Looking at our guests in the visitors ' gallery , it is pretty safe to say that animal feed labelling is probably not one of the most glamorous subjects they could have heard us talking about today , but it is crucially important and it is a real example of where this Parliament adds value , and where we can ensure our consumers ' , our citizens ' and our voters ' faith in the food chain of the food they eat .
It is important to remember where this issue came from .
The BSE crisis proved that what we feed our animals needs to be regulated .
This Regulation needs to be transparent , and there needs to be a balance struck between consumers ' needs and the needs of the manufacturers , but it can go wrong .
It has gone wrong and we must ensure it does not go wrong again .
This report is crucial in taking that forward .
I have had numerous meetings with the industry in Scotland , and with consumer groups and the farmers themselves , and there has been pretty well universal support and approval for the way that the Commission and Parliament have taken this forward , and particularly for our rapporteur .
This dossier does add value .
It is a good example of Parliament working .
We often say that there has been good cooperation between the Commission and Parliament .
On this one , there really has been , and the fact that there are so few amendments being tabled to this report demonstrates that it will go through with a big majority .
Parliament has had a good day today .
Mr President , the compromise achieved concerning feedstuffs does have certain advantages - it harmonises and simplifies EU legislation - but it also has fundamental flaws : it does not offer sufficient guarantee of the safety of animal feeds and of foods , it affords weak protection of the interests of the five million farmers who breed and raise animals , and it does not sufficiently protect our health .
The access of animal feed users to information about the contents of the feed will still be limited by the protection of intellectual property rights .
If the producer of a feedstuff uses a dangerous ingredient , we will still be vulnerable .
The problem of feedstuffs is further proof of the mistaken direction being taken by agricultural policy which , in spite of declarations , supports industrial agriculture first and foremost and , in such agriculture , farmers do not have to have their own feedstuffs and can raise animals using feedstuffs produced by specialised businesses .
These businesses are , of course , profit-driven and will always find a way to reduce costs , but will not necessarily take into account the safety of animals or our health .
As a consequence , we have to multiply specific provisions and increase monitoring , which takes the matter to an absurd level .
Is it not time to reverse these tendencies and to return to the sustainable development of agriculture , in which farmers will have their own feedstuffs and will not be exposed to the losses caused by dioxins or BSE ?
Progress in agriculture does not have to mean the concentration of production or the concentration of feedstuff production .
We should bear in mind that in the EU , we currently have 15 million farms , and as many as 95 % of these are small and medium-sized farms .
Most of these farms can use the sustainable model of agriculture for the good of farmers , the environment and of us all .
We only need to radically change our approach to agriculture , and in doing so to change our approach to current common agricultural policy .
( FR ) Mr President , what is good about animals is that the years go by and the problems remain the same .
For example , we always mention jaw traps when talking about wild animals , and the question of transport , breeding and feed always arises in relation to farm animals .
Animal feed is a classic case ; it is a mishmash , a load of rubbish .
Antibiotics , clenbuterol , growth hormones , even the remains of other animals , are used , and this is what the United Kingdom 's contaminated feed problem from the 1990s was all about .
However , today we are told that the junk-food era is over .
There has been a 2002 directive and a 2005 Court of Justice ruling and , now , there is the desire to reconcile the market and profit - which is referred to as intellectual property - with consumer safety .
Thus , here we find ourselves today armed with a regulation .
Using the classic tool of labelling , all the components are going to be indicated , in descending order of weight , and there will also be an open declaration , an Annex III and a tolerance of + / -15 % .
Moreover , the most inquisitive among us will even be able to request the exact composition .
Only two big questions remain .
The first concerns imported animals which have not been labelled .
Mr Parish is here ; he has taken a great interest in animals arriving from Brazil , which are not marked and which have been fed clenbuterol .
When it comes to the safety of these animals , we do not know a great deal .
And then there remains the big question of imported feed , namely raw materials that have been arriving from the American continent since the 1960s .
In the 1960s , this came in the form of corn gluten feed - molasses , oilseed residues - and , today , it is in the form of transgenic soya from Argentina , Paraguay and Brazil , and transgenic maize from Canada and the United States .
And this , dare I say it , because people are against local GMOs , but not immigrant GMOs .
The fact is , we are talking here about two-thirds of the feed of our herds , and that is a real health issue .
The single issue of European health security is obscuring the wider issue of global health risks , due to the Uruguay Round agreement and the Blair House agreement , which oblige us to import our oilseeds to feed two-thirds of our herds .

Mr President , I should like to congratulate the Commissioner and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf on their excellent work and the good cooperation we have had .
Let me say to the last two speakers and to the guests we have in the gallery : please eat your food safely this afternoon when you have your lunch , because , if we are to believe the last two speakers , there is nothing safe to eat anywhere as far as I can see !
The whole idea of this legislation is to bring safety to the food we eat , and , of course , what our animals eat is essential because we eat those animals .
I know it is a very simplistic approach to take , but that is exactly why we are here .
Yes , we have made mistakes over the years , and I would be the first to admit that the feeding of meat and bone meal back to cattle caused the BSE problem - which was not anybody 's finest hour - and that is why we are bringing this legislation forward .
The whole argument now is not about whether we should have transparency and have the ingredients on the label , because that is precisely what will be there .
The manufacturers ' argument was to ask whether they had to put the precise percentages , because somebody could then turn round and copy that feed and make exactly the same feed .
That is where the compromise and the work that Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , the Commission and Council have done is so good , because we have reached a situation now where we can really trust our feed .
If you have looked recently at the problems that we have had in Europe - and we have had problems in various countries with animal feed - this is not because the labelling system and the processes have been wrong , but because companies have broken the law .
Therefore , we must ensure not only that we get this law right but also that the Commission and Member States monitor this law and inspect the feed companies to make sure that they are not breaking the rules , because , again , people and consumers must have confidence in our food .
I would say to you that European food is as safe as we can get it , but we must never let up , to make sure that our consumers are absolutely satisfied that what they are eating is safe .
I would say to our guests : please go and have a good lunch and be assured that it should be safe !

( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I heartily congratulate Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf on another excellent report .
Efforts at simplifying current legislation in the area of the marketing and use of feedstuffs and in the area of required and additional information placed on packaging and in freight documentation are a justified step .
It is certain that simplifying technical provisions and an enlargement of purely administrative provisions will have a beneficial effect on the growth of competitiveness of the EU feedstuffs sector and on food safety , which Mr Parish has just spoken about .
I am certain that this assumption is itself justified .
However , I would like to draw attention here to a question which may be problematic .
I think that the obligation to label products with a freephone number placed on small and medium-sized producers of feedstuffs for domestic pets is unnecessary .
Introduction of this provision may cause a financial burden which is too great for these small and medium-sized producers , and most feedstuff producers fall into these two categories .
In summary , I would like to stress that we must strive to simplify the entire system of legislation in the area of the marketing and use of feedstuffs .
In so doing , care should be taken over safety .
However , the introduction of controversial provisions which generate excessive costs may unfavourably affect precisely those small businesses which produce for local markets .

( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr zu Baringdorf , for the thorough work he has done in preparing for this debate .
Food safety in the EU has been shaken by many crises in recent years , such as BSE and several dioxin scandals , the latest of which apparently occurred last autumn .
The causes of the crises have often been found to be contaminated feed , due to negligence or even criminal activity .
This regulation to simplify and clarify legislation is welcome .
The regulation must bolster consumer confidence throughout the European food chain .
Consumers need to be protected and they must be able to tell where and how the food they buy has been produced .
Another objective is the legal protection of farmers .
They have to make choices on the basis of labelling , and they must be able to have faith in the impeccable quality of feed .
The manufacturing rights of the producers of feed must also be safeguarded , as Mr Mulder said earlier on .
In many Member States , things are well under control , but the regulation before us , which will make labelling clearer and make it easier to trace the origin of feed , is needed to ensure things are put right throughout the EU , and to end differences of opinion when it comes to interpretation .
I would nevertheless like to point out that it is crucially important with this regulation , and others , that there is proper implementation and monitoring .
Clear and precise regulations will not help unless they are complied with in practice .
When monitoring the quality of feed , it needs to be ascertained that it is safe and fit for purpose and that it meets the legal requirements .
This way we can improve the safety of the entire food chain and protect consumers .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a few years ago in Italy , it was claimed that foodstuffs mixed in the shed by farmers were to be considered as feed , and thus the sheds were to be considered as feed factories .
Agricultural producers would never have been able to comply with complex health regulations , HACCP and traceability , and would therefore have been forced to purchase from real feed factories the foodstuffs that had been made on the farm for centuries .
At the time , we managed to avoid this snare .
The report that we are debating today defines feed but not feed factories .
So that Europe does not get the blame once again , it must be crystal clear that foodstuffs for livestock , mixed on the premises of the livestock company , does not constitute feed , but simply extemporaneous mixing of foodstuffs and raw materials produced directly in the fields , and that the agricultural business is not a feed factory .
Perhaps it is a partisan position , but one can never be too careful when interpretations have considerable economic significance .
Mr President , in the aftermath of the dioxin contamination in the Republic of Ireland which visited such losses on innocent producers and processors in Northern Ireland , we discussed new measures on the labelling of feedstuffs .
The obvious question for me is : would any of these proposals have saved my producers from their present losses ?
Sadly , the answer is ' no ' .
They will , of course , impose greater transparency which is , of itself , all to the good , but only in respect of EU feedstuffs fed to animals within the EU , not in respect of feed fed to animals whose meat we then import into the EU .
Providing maximum detail on the precise composition of feedstuffs is right and understandable , but we must not so undermine intellectual property rights as to make them meaningless .
In that respect , I have some residual fears on aspects of these proposals .
Compound mixes are trade secrets built up over years of research and trial .
They must be adequately protected .
I trust that the 15 % margin in description precision will be enough .
I , for one , do not want to see feed mills in my constituency , which have worked hard and invested heavily in producing premium product , being gazumped and their intellectual property rights raided by manufacturers operating in cheaper production areas , either within or outside the EU .
I trust this regulation will not be either misused or abused in that regard .
Yes , farmers are entitled to maximum information on compound contents , but within the confines of preserving the viability and the future of the mills from which they buy .
( NL ) I should like to echo all the compliments that have already been paid to our rapporteur .
Needless to say , public and animal health should be at the heart of cattle feed legislation .
This translates into clear rules regarding the use and labelling of raw materials .
This should , of course , remain workable and not lead to a greater administrative burden or , as has already been mentioned , jeopardise the manufacturers ' intellectual property .
We will continue to monitor this with a critical eye , but it looks as if the new regulation will meet these requirements .
I should like to make an observation with regard to inspection .
Once again , effective controls and sanctions to separate the wheat from the chaff will make or break this legislation .
The regulation stipulates that the penalties which the Member States may apply themselves must be effective , proportionate and dissuasive .
I would urge the European Commission to closely monitor the situation in the near future , to make sure this is the case in all the countries of the European Union .
It is , after all , unacceptable for one country to be stricter than another .
An excellent case in point is , to my mind , the suspended sentences that were given this week , ten years after the event , in the Belgian dioxin scandal .
Finally , I should like to mention a topic that cannot remain untouched , namely meat and bone meal .
Following the emotional speech of the first speaker from the Non-Attached Members , I shall confine myself to the facts .
Meat and bone meal in animal feed has been banned since the BSE crisis .
However , in the case of chickens , for example , this leads to a shortage of animal protein in their feed , quite apart from the fair criticism that valuable proteins are destroyed .
Moreover , animal feed is the largest overhead for the five million cattle farmers in the European Union who have not got it easy to begin with .
Of course , we do not want to revert back to a situation in which animal proteins from within the same species end up in the feed .
Cannibalism : never again !
We need to put tests in place in order to handle this situation properly .
The European Commission has indicated that these tests could be available in 2009 , which means that meat and bone meal could be reintroduced in the feed of chickens or pigs , for example , in a safe manner .
I should like to find out from the European Commission what the latest is on this score and what steps we can expect in this respect in the coming year .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the quality of food products of animal origin ( meat , eggs , milk ) and the protection of consumers against poor food quality has been a subject of EU interest for many years .
For products of animal origin to be of good quality , good quality feedstuffs are essential - this is the most important factor - as well as suitable living conditions for the animals .
Most of the ingredients of feedstuffs are produced by agriculture itself , but the additives which are used are most often chemical products .
It is these which create the most controversy .
Therefore , we should fight for the exact composition of industrial feedstuffs to be declared .
It has nothing to do with intellectual property rights and their protection .
Only when a patent office grants a protection certificate is a product protected .
When they have not been tested sufficiently , new animal feed additives may be harmful to our health , although they ensure the best growth or the best appearance of the product .
A farmer does not have the facilities to test feedstuffs and can only rely on information supplied by the producer .
We should remember BSE and the results of adding meat and bone meal to animal feeds .
Industry will do everything for profit .
This is why I support Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report in its entirety .
( PL ) Mr President , I hope that the proposals contained in the compromise package which we are debating today will bring about the simplification of provisions in the area of the marketing of feedstuffs and that in so doing , they will raise the competitiveness of the feedstuffs sector in the European Union .
I also hope that the new rules will not increase costs for small and medium-sized producers of animal feed mixes .
When discussing the subject of labelling , it should be remembered that often the problem is not a lack of information on the product label , but a lack of understanding on the part of the ordinary consumer .
Too much information on the label may actually hinder the buyer when making a choice .
On the one hand , we must ensure that our citizens have access to information , while on the other , we must safeguard the intellectual property rights of producers .
I endorse the idea of drawing up a list of ingredients which may not be fed to animals .
One thing is certain - we cannot allow a repeat of food-related scandals .
Irish pork contaminated with dioxins or melanin in milk from China are examples of incidents which should not have happened .
We ought to ask why the monitoring system did not function correctly and why the contamination arose .
The system of monitoring therefore requires greater supervision .
Procedures must be transparent and unambiguous .
Fines for not complying with the monitoring system or for breaching it should be high , because they are related to human health .
In spite of the incident in Ireland , I would like to give my assurances that in Europe , farmers and producers maintain the highest standards in the world .
Our food is characterised by its acknowledged reputation and quality .
The food in Europe is safe .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me start by giving my very sincere thanks to our rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
Not only in this report but also over many years in the past , he has always followed a clear line , which aims to achieve what we have achieved today : creating clarity for farmers and setting out clear requirements in the field of placing feed on the market and the use thereof .
Today , we are discussing the second step , and this , in particular , has become clear time and again .
Commissioner , yesterday evening , last night , we discussed the first step : production .
I should like to return to this .
The type of production and the type of controls on production are the most important prerequisites for this report , to ensure that ultimately , we have healthy , safe feed from which to produce healthy , safe food .
I should like to reiterate my conviction that businesses that also process food to make feed should be subject to better scrutiny , that the HACCP concept should be required as a basis for authorisation - possibly for authorisation throughout Europe - as that has also been a problem in both yesterday 's and today 's debates .
We need the same controls for the same risks throughout the European Union .
Although we can never rule out abuses , this report and also yesterday 's debate have laid good foundations for safety without going over the top .
This is another point made in today 's report , of course : that we have learned from developments following the BSE crisis , and that we now know that quite a few things can - and must - be done differently .
I wish to reiterate my thanks to our rapporteur , who has produced a good report today out of all the negotiations here .
I hope that he receives one hundred per cent support from this House .

( FR ) Mr President , the excellent report by our fellow Member - whom I congratulate - on which we are going to vote today , is important because the European animal feed sector is one of our main agricultural sectors , both in terms of production , since it accounts for half of the agricultural production within the European Union - 120 million tonnes - and of turnover - around EUR 50 billion .
Within the European Union , there are , in fact , 5 million farmers and 60 million pet-owning households .
In the past , the European Union has come to terms with a number of health crises , which means that , today , we have to be more vigilant with regard to transparency , in order to meet the expectations not only of farmers , but also of consumers .
The provisions laid down in this report have the advantage of representing a minimal cost for the industries and a great benefit for consumers , who are paying more and more attention to the quality of the goods they buy .
Adopting this report will make it possible to limit the risks by guaranteeing better quality goods , better monitoring , more traceability , and better information for farmers and , therefore , ultimately , for consumers .
Today , with the increase in international trade , it is vitally important to strengthen all prevention systems , so as to ensure that the food crises that we have experienced in the past do not happen again .
This report succeeds in reconciling the right to information , while strictly defining the nutritional elements that must appear on the labels , with the right to intellectual property , which is so important when it comes to preserving the competitiveness of our industries .
I believe that manufacturers should actually be obliged to give immediate notification of the use of any new raw material going into animal feed , in order to guarantee transparency and to facilitate the inspections performed by the competent authorities .
Including an urgency procedure that enables a new dangerous substance to be incorporated into the list of prohibited materials seems altogether crucial to me .
Equally , giving farmers the opportunity to question the competent national authority or the European Commission in case of doubt about an unfair allegation enables the system to be controlled better and customers to be protected , while fair trading is also preserved .
I therefore wish to offer my full support to this excellent report , for experience shows that a regulation on the labelling of animal feed that prioritises quality , transparency , traceability and monitoring is the best means of preventing further health crises in Europe .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for this report , which is a very technical one and answers the Court 's question about protecting the rights of farmers and the rights of those who produce the animal feed they purchase .
I support the idea that intellectual property rights are worth protecting .
We cannot have formulations being copied by operators who come in and out of the marketplace , so the report is successful from that point of view .
The issue of rogue operators has been brought up in the debate here this morning .
The truth is that we will only keep a check on the industry if we check those who do not comply .
That can only be done by regular monitoring , inspection and control at every point along the way .
We debated that very vigorously last night in this Parliament and I was glad to hear that improvements will be made .
Lastly , a bigger point on the volatility of commodity prices .
The Agriculture Commissioner is joining us .
This is a big issue for the feed industry and for farmers , and it is one that we need to address .
Mr President , firstly , I welcome this report and wish to congratulate the rapporteur , who is to be commended for his report and hard work .
We do indeed need transparency , and have to know what is in compound feed - there is no doubt about that .
I have no problem with a company keeping its intellectual property rights confidential .
However , recent events in the Republic of Ireland , with the dioxin problem , bring home very clearly to all of us the need for control .
Farmers can have the highest possible standards of livestock husbandry and do everything right but , as we have witnessed , all can be lost when events way beyond their control destroy all their good and hard work .
This is a good day for Parliament , and it shows what we can achieve through cooperation .
Maybe it also shows what we can actually achieve within agriculture for a better future for farmers throughout the European Union .
I am pleased that Commissioner Fischer Boel is here with Commissioner Vassiliou this morning , because it is very important that we make the point of the serious danger of farmers in Northern Ireland - eight farmers at this moment in time - losing everything because the local Assembly has not been prepared to support them .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to start by thanking our rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , as he has succeeded in producing a genuinely workable compromise at first reading .
It has also proved possible to reconcile consumer protection and food safety with the necessary protection of intellectual property .
Farmers must be able to trust that the feed they are using contains what is stated on the label .
Black sheep in the feed industry have caused great economic losses in agriculture and far beyond .
Thank you once again , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
Mr President , I should like to make two quick points .
Firstly , yes , consumers and farmers depend on clear and transparent labelling , and I support the rapporteur 's amendment to allow the manufacturer to refuse to disclose information if he or she is able to prove that intellectual property rights could be infringed on any ingredient which constitutes less than two per cent of the ration .
We urgently need more investment in research , especially into ruminant feed to reduce the methane and nitrous oxide emissions .
Secondly , is it not long past the time for reference points for action , or RPAs , for dealing with the adventitious presence of minuscule levels of GMO in feed , rather than the present zero-tolerance regime , which results in criminally disproportionate waste of feed and cereal shipments and criminally disproportionate sanctions ?
I refer , of course , to the presence of previously authorised GMs by the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) , so that they are fully risk-assessed by definition , or perhaps a GMO that is fully authorised in another jurisdiction .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners , I do not have anything to add about the content , as enough has been said in this regard .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , who showed good staying power in the trialogue .
This report has been a long haul .
As we know , the European Court of Justice issued a judgment , which was followed by clean , fair discussion .
We had opportunity to discuss this at length and , as rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has shown that a satisfactory solution can be achieved in a short space of time even as part of a first reading agreement .
I have crossed swords with him a fair few times since 1994 , but our teamwork has always been fair , and I should like to thank him once again for his work .
( DE ) Mr President , I had run out of speaking time , so I do have some new things to say .
If we now adopt new European feed legislation here in Parliament , by what will probably be a large majority , and the Council accepts this legislation , we shall have achieved a new , high quality standard in Europe .
I should like to ask the two Commissioners present to insist on these European standards in the case of imports of feed and food as well in future .
Europe can face up to global competition only if the same standards are applied to imports .
Therefore , the Commission must also press for our European standards to form part of the WTO negotiations and to become a global standard - then we need not fear this global competition .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank everyone for their remarks , and shall now reply to some of those remarks .
First of all , on the question of safety , safety of feed is guaranteed by the negative list of feed materials which cannot be used in feeds .
The proposal contains the list of feed materials which are forbidden .
The Commission will extend that list every time it is convinced that it is necessary to add to that negative list .
On the other hand , I wish to remind you that there is a large list of maximum levels of contaminants , such as dangerous micro-toxins , heavy metals and dioxins , which has been in force , under the Directive on undesirable substances , since 2002 .
I would agree with all those who said , as I confirmed , that European food is safe .
However , as I also indicated last night during our discussions , laws and regulations are as good as we make them , and we therefore have to remain vigilant and see to it that Member States , feed dealers and , indeed , the Commission , ensure that everybody sticks to their obligations in ensuring that laws really are enforced and that they are good laws .
The recent Irish meat incident highlights the need for stringent enforcement and controls on legal requirements , and my services will continue to examine how that can be improved .
I am confident that , once the new rules come into force , regulation of the feed market will be significantly improved , in the interests of both feed manufacturers and users .
Last but not least , I would like to thank the rapporteur once again for his excellent contribution , and all Members for their constructive and positive role in reaching an agreement on this important initiative .
Mr President , Commissioners , I wish to express my thanks for the many kind words that have been said today .
I believe this is a good report .
On the subject of whether criminal activity can be prevented , this report cannot do so , of course , but the improved intensity of controls it provides may deter such activity .
Criminal activity always focuses where it sees an opportunity , where it sees loopholes , and we have now been able to close these in some areas .
I hope - as Mr Nicholson said - that both the feed industry and farmers will understand that there is something to be defended here , that a community is being formed against these attempts to dispose of toxic substances via feed .
I am fairly sure that this will also curb criminal activity .
I should like to make clear once more that we are not creating a separate line for intellectual property here , but rather making reference to the legislation already in force , which also applies to this field .
We wanted to prevent the duty of information from hiding behind these intellectual property rights .
That is why this is a good arrangement .
Let me conclude by thanking the shadow rapporteurs .
Here , too , there were arguments , of course - after all , we hold different opinions in this House - but I believe that what we subsequently created now has everyone 's support .
I should also like to thank our committee 's administrative team - in this case Mr Emmes - who did outstanding groundwork .
Although we Members of the European Parliament always play a leading role in the political field , in the administrative field we do need to be able to fall back on this groundwork .
Here , too , this was very successful .
I should like to add that , when we have codecision , parliamentarianism is fun .
It was always said that codecision in agriculture would make everything much more complicated and time-consuming .
This is not true , as we have seen that , given good work , a good understanding of matters , good groundwork and good political opponents , things can be staged very quickly .
I think that this is proof that the expertise of the European Parliament can serve , and help , to set good legislation in motion .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Dumitriu , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 3 / 2008 on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries - C6-0313 / 2008 - .
I am pleased that we have this opportunity to debate in a plenary session an issue which is important not only for the Community 's agricultural sector , but also for the European economy 's competitiveness as a whole .
At a time when the economies of our countries are suffering as a result of the global crisis and when increasing the demand for agricultural products is an imperative , amending Regulation No 3 / 2008 on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries offers us additional leverage to support agricultural producers and , by extension , the EU economy .
European Council Regulation No 3 / 2008 , which combines in a single text regulations 2702 / 1999 and 2826 / 2000 , has accommodated the European Commission 's new political approaches on simplifying legislation , while also achieving the objective of facilitating administrative procedures within the European institutions .
Based on this regulation , the Community can take information provision measures for a certain number of agricultural products on the internal market and on the markets of third countries , while also preserving the specific nature of the measures , according to the market in which they are implemented .
This policy provides a response to a real need on the part of Member States to promote the image of their agricultural products , especially the benefits in terms of quality , nutritional value and food safety standards , both among European consumers and consumers in other countries .
It also helps open up new market outlets and has a multiplier effect for national and private sector initiatives .
The amendments initiated by the European Commission are aimed at allowing interested Member States to devise a relevant programme where the organisations involved in drawing up proposals do not wish to present programmes to be implemented in third countries .
As a result of this , Member States will have the opportunity to expand the area of application of the measures targeted by these programmes and also seek the assistance of international organisations in implementing these measures .
The draft report we are discussing proposes certain additions and adaptations to the Commission proposal , which are necessary in order to clarify and supplement the logic of the regulation .
First of all , we are proposing to introduce consultations with professional associations and organisations operating in the target sectors of the Member States , which are involved in the process of devising information programmes for agricultural products , both on the internal market and in third countries .
In view of their expertise and the important role these associations and organisations also play in guaranteeing and controlling quality , it is absolutely paramount that they are consulted .
At the same time , we support these programmes being drawn up based on an assessment of the need for them and their timeliness , providing us with the assurance that the funds are being spent effectively in programmes which meet the objective of helping promote Community products .
We are also proposing to extend the areas where international organisations can be assigned the implementation of information programmes for third countries .
Promotion and publicity measures are also relevant to the wine sector , both on the EU internal market and in third countries .
As is the case with the olive oil and table olive sector , international bodies exist in the wine sector , such as the International Organisation of Vine and Wine , which can ensure the implementation in third countries of programmes proposed by Member States , thereby disseminating information about the characteristics and advantages of wines with a protected designation of origin and those with a protected geographical indication .
Another amendment which we are proposing to you is aimed at increasing the European Union 's cofinancing percentage from 60 % to 70 % at a time when it is increasingly more difficult for small producers to gain access to financing due to the financial crisis .
Without any financial support , they risk going bankrupt as they do not have the leverage to promote their products and are facing a drop in market demand .
The ultimate aim of these proposals is to generate greater market demand in order to boost production and support the European economy as a whole .
Attaining this goal will help us overcome these difficult times we are going through .
The quality of the European Union 's agricultural and food products is an advantage which we need to utilise in order to guarantee the European economy 's competitiveness and higher incomes for producers .
I hope that the recommendations we are going to adopt will be implemented as soon as possible by the European Commission and Member States because we cannot afford to waste time in such circumstances when European citizens are being hit by the effects of an extremely deep economic recession .
The measures being proposed will obviously not resolve all the problems linked to marketing and promoting the Community 's agricultural and food products .
Simplifying the red tape involved with registering traditional products , introducing a ' Made in the European Union ' label and solving the problem of products imported from third countries of lower quality and safety standards are just some of the areas which we need to consider in order to boost the market share for Community products .
Thank you for your attention and I look forward to your comments and questions .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Dumitriu , and the members of the Agriculture Committee , for an excellent report on the Commission proposal on information and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal and external markets .
I would like to stress the importance of the issues addressed in this report .
I think we all agree that the promotion of European agricultural products is of huge importance , both internally and externally .
I am convinced that trade in agricultural products will continue to grow in the future - even if we have to admit that we face a setback at the present time owing to the economic crisis .
However , there will be huge opportunities for our European products in third-country markets , and our promotion campaign should help European producers explore those new markets .
Before going into the content of the report , I would like to put it into perspective .
In 2008 , the Commission adopted 42 programmes on the internal market and on third countries , representing a budget of EUR 128 million over three years .
According to the rules , half of that amount was then to be financed by the Community .
The aim of the Commission proposal is to make it possible for Member States to launch programmes cofinanced by the European Union in third countries - as described by the rapporteur - because today this possibility only exists for the internal market .
It should also be possible for those programmes to be implemented by international organisations .
The three most important amendments from the rapporteur and his colleagues are as follows : firstly , to make it compulsory for Member States to consult trade associations about the proposed programmes ; secondly , to specify that implementation by international organisations is not only a possibility reserved for the International Olive Oil Council , but a general possibility , for example - as mentioned here today - also in the wine sector ; and , on the budget side , to increase the cofinancing rate .
With regard to those amendments , I would emphasise that Member States do , in fact , already consult trade associations in order to make sure that they have the support of producers .
I would prefer that partnership approach to continue on a voluntary basis .
My mentioning of the International Olive Oil Council is only meant as an example , because of the discussions that have recently taken place on the whole olive oil sector .
It certainly does not exclude other international organisations , such as the International Organisation of Vine and Wine .
Regarding the funding of the budget , there is , of course , ongoing discussion on the level of cofinancing by the Community , but we discussed this issue when merging the two regulations dealing with promotion and information in 2008 , so I do not think we should re-open the discussion on this issue .
Could I just take the opportunity to say that , when we agreed the wine reform , we did recognise the importance of promoting our products on third-country markets .
Therefore , in the interests of spending the budget for wine in a smarter and more intelligent way , we proposed the earmarking of EUR 120 million each year for the promotion of our wine products on third country markets as a special budget line .
However , since Member States - and especially the new Member States - did not want to be in a position where that money was earmarked in such a way that , if it was not spent , then it was lost , we included the EUR 120 million in the national envelopes , so that Member States can decide for themselves .
In any case , this gives a clear signal that the Community does care and does recognise the importance of strong promotion of our European products .
I look forward to the discussion here today .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Dumitriu , for his objective report which reflects the real needs of this Community sector in terms of promoting European producers .
The report contains measures which will help open up new markets and make our farmers ' agricultural production profitable .
This policy meets the actual needs of Member States wishing to promote their agricultural production , both among the Community 's consumers and among those in third countries .
It provides an excellent opportunity for the emphasis to be placed on quality , nutritional value , production methods and the safety of the food produced .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal offering the opportunity to interested countries to put forward information programmes for third countries if the latter do not have this facility .
This amendment will allow European countries to extend the practical scope of the measures envisaged by these programmes and to seek assistance from international organisations in implementing them .
I believe that during the process of devising these programmes , consideration should be given to the important role played by the associations and industry organisations in the individual countries , which have an objective view of what is happening in the individual industries .
We must note the importance of certain international bodies in promoting the specific characteristics and advantages of food products typical of particular EU regions .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal for increasing the percentage rate for the Community 's financial participation so that additional assistance can be provided to the projects selected by Member States .
I urge you to support Mr Dumitriu 's report .

Mr President , Commissioner , I sincerely congratulate Mr Dumitriu on a good report - a continuation of the reports which were drawn up earlier , in which we talked about promotion and sums of money allocated to promotion of the European Union in third countries .
Information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries play an enormous role in creating a positive image of the ' Made in Europe ' brand .
I have been stressing this for a long time , and for several years I have been active in efforts to simplify the entire information provision and promotion system .
In my speeches I have repeatedly stressed the necessity of promoting the ' Made in Europe ' brand in third-country markets .
This is especially legitimate in the formal and legal conditions of today .
In accordance with the Declaration of the Sixth WTO Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong , the use of all forms of export subsidies and disciplines on all export measures with equivalent effect will be eliminated in 2013 .
In view of the complicated nature of organising promotional campaigns in third-country markets and the higher costs of such measures at a significant distance , particularly in Asia or America , the mechanism for supporting promotional activities did not attract much interest from trade organisations .
The proposal of the European Commission allows for stimulation of their activity .
Promotional programmes carried out by Member States offer the opportunity for entities to work together , where they have not managed to run and finance these activities on their own .
Nevertheless , efforts to increase the percentage share of the Community in financing this type of project should be continued .
I will mention as an example the United States of America , where several times more is spent on promotional activities than all the money allocated to wine and to activities in the area of other promotional products in the entire European Union .
In the face of liberalisation of the commercial flow of agricultural products , an instrument to support the promotion of Community production in third-country markets might be the only tool available which accords with the guidelines of the Agriculture Framework Agreement in the WTO Doha Development Agenda Round .
Promotion of the ' Made in Europe ' brand is the chance to maintain competitiveness and , on a longer time-scale , even to strengthen the attractiveness of European agricultural and food products and to extend their market .
I would like to thank the Commission for these measures , which we have repeatedly spoken of in Parliament , and which have been included , and especially for the reduction in contributions from trade organisations from 20 % to 10 % and for increasing the funds available for promotional activity .

Mr President , I warmly welcome Mr Dumitriu 's report and I would like to congratulate him on the work he has done .
This budget gives Member States an excellent opportunity to find markets both inside and outside of Europe .
Coming from Ireland , I would like to say that selling our healthy , fresh , food products on world markets , particularly in Asia , is of great help to us in Ireland .
Like my colleagues , however , I would like to say that I see a better opportunity here to simplify the rules related to this budget so that accessing the money supply for trading would be easier than it is currently and , of course , the budget must also be increased as has been said .
This is very important , not only to the Member States , but to Europe as a whole .
Mr President , Commissioner , I agree with you that advertising is important .
Yet advertising comes about not only as a result of professional offensives but also of occurrences in the region from which the foodstuffs originate .
When the world associates us with BSE , when we have turned our heraldic animal mad , or when , as now , countries are issuing product recalls because of the dioxin problem - which , of course , is also going around the world - and when millions of slaughtered sick cattle are shown on television news around the world , this is also a kind of advertising : negative advertising .
We must be careful to avoid contradiction here .
On the one hand , there is our talk of good products but , on the other , there are the negative reports - but we are working on this , as we have just seen with the debate and what we have concluded .
If we wish to advertise externally - yes , that is right , we have good reason to do so , as we have good products - I do not want it to be generalised advertising , but advertising showing European diversity .
As you know , we have the situation in Germany where the Federal Constitutional Court has ruled against a kind of compulsory advertising with a compulsory levy .
It pointed out that advertising that does not differentiate between the individual qualities does not increase sales , and that instead , it is important that the individual producers be able to advertise for their specific products .
In addition , it is increasingly important - not only within Europe but also externally - to describe not only the quality of the end product but also the quality of the process .
What is the situation with regard to animal protection , to the environment , to the ingredients , to the structure of the farming , to fair trade ?
These are all criteria that do not necessarily affect the quality of the end product , but are becoming increasingly important to consumers .
We must incorporate this into our advertising too , therefore , and must see that Europe 's reputation in the world is further enhanced as a result .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we need to bear in mind that it is important to improve the conditions and support for information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products , both in the European Union and in third countries , broadening the scope of the proposals that the European Commission has presented .
We therefore support the proposals of the rapporteur and of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , namely those aimed at greater intervention and strengthening the role of trade associations and organisations operating in the sector , in view of their expertise and the important part they also play in ensuring quality control , including the associations and organisations of the Member State that draws up the programme , as well as increasing the percentage of the Community 's financial participation .
It is important that there is additional aid , especially for projects selected by the Member States .
Likewise , we believe that promotion and advertising actions in third countries should be able to benefit other important products in addition to olive oil and olives , with emphasis on wines with designations of origin or protected geographical indications .
In this respect , I will also mention here the important role of farmers ' associations , with emphasis on cooperative wine cellars and other associations of small and medium-sized farmers , whose existence is fundamental in ensuring the flow of the produce of farmers who , on their own , would not be able to survive .
Once again , I would call for there to be enhanced support for these farmers ' organisations to be able to completely fulfil their role in upholding family farming and promoting the high-quality agricultural products they produce , which are essential in guaranteeing a healthy diet for the population of our countries .
We will therefore vote in favour of this report .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union is a significant exporter of many agricultural products , but the future of EU agriculture will be determined by consumption in the internal market .
Stimulation of this may bring benefits to farmers , consumers and whole economies .
In many Member States , the consumption of food products essential for good health is not high , and its growth , by means of good information and promotion , is most desirable .
However , it is important that EU farmers benefit from the programmes under discussion and , in particular , small and medium-sized farms , which comprise 95 % of all farms .
These programmes should enrich consumers ' knowledge of healthy eating and , at the same time , leave the choice to them .
This is why it is worth taking the following steps : organising consultations with specialists in the field of healthy diet and training salespeople , who should also be consumer advisors in matters of healthy diet .
Good presentation of information about the health benefits of the products being promoted , and about the way the foods are produced , is essential .
Information on food labels is insufficient .
This programme may be threatened by the promotion of food mass-produced by large food corporations , which can prepare effective programmes and which have the best specialists at their disposal .
Except will this not then compromise the promotion of high quality foods ?
Legibility of the expiry date on products is also very important , as is a rise in consumer awareness of the significance of all the information which is to be found on product labels .
( RO ) I would first of all like to congratulate my colleague for all the hard work he has put in as rapporteur in terms of simplifying EU legislation to reduce the administrative burden , something we very much need to do .
The information provision measures taken by the European Union are a response to a real need on the part of Member States to promote the image of their agricultural products , both among European consumers and consumers in other countries , especially as regards quality and nutritional value , as well as food safety and safe production methods .
As quality rapporteur , I greatly cherish this competitive edge that our European products have .
This legislative amendment will offer interested Member States the possibility to propose information programmes , including when there are no programmes put forward for third countries .
As a result of this amendment , Member States will have the opportunity to expand the area of application of the measures targeted by these programmes and seek the assistance of international organisations in implementing these measures .
The percentage rate of the European Union 's financial participation needs to be increased in order to provide additional support for the projects selected by Member States , at a time of a general tightening of the conditions in which national organisations and authorities seek to obtain the amounts they must contribute to cofinancing .
I support the idea that the organisation tasked with implementing the selected programme should be an international organisation , especially where the programme is aiming to promote the olive oil and table olive sector , not to mention the sector for wines with a protected designation of origin and those with a protected geographical indication in third countries .
At the same time , we must bear in mind the important role which professional associations and organisations operating in the target sectors of the Member States have in devising information programmes for agricultural products .
I would like to conclude by thanking the rapporteur once again , and especially Commissioner Vassiliou , because she has accepted all the proposals we have made within the report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over the last few months , above all during this parliamentary term , we have witnessed a steady decline in direct support for our farmers and in the rules that used to protect our industry from cheap imports from outside the EU , in order to free up the resources needed to meet the new environmental , economic and social challenges of this millennium and to comply with international trade agreements .
As a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and , most importantly , as a representative of a country that has earned worldwide recognition and respect for the quality of its agricultural produce - I am thinking of olive oil , wine and cheeses - I cannot help but approve of any action whatsoever that the Commission may propose to safeguard high quality European produce and to promote , where possible , the marketing of this produce both on the internal market and abroad .
This information programme is , in fact , particularly significant , since it is to make clear to European and other consumers that our produce is not in competition with that , which may be cheaper , from other countries , but rather that it represents an alternative that focuses on quality and on a production model that respects the environment and social and animal welfare standards which , in turn , naturally benefits human health .
The legislation that we vote on in this House every day can come at a price , above all for our producers .
That is why we must offer them all the help we can , so that the richness and quality of our produce is not lost and does not become ironed out in an ever-more homogeneous global market .
For this reason , I support the rapporteur 's amendments , which are aimed at increasing Commission cofinancing , adding to the activities that can be funded and , most importantly , increasing participation in producers ' associations , which are best-placed to defend the qualitative features of their produce to ever-more exacting consumers .
( RO ) Today we are discussing a report that is extremely important for European agriculture .
As the rapporteur himself has emphasised , the quality and safety of European products provide a competitive edge which has not been sufficiently utilised yet .
Measures aimed at providing information about and promoting these products , their quality and the food safety standards they comply with may trigger a chain reaction by boosting demand , increasing farmers ' production and profits and creating new jobs , which also implicitly means economic growth .
These measures must be directed equally at consumers in the internal market and those in third countries .
Let us not forget the competition we are facing on the internal market from producers from other countries , offering products which are sometimes cheaper , but where , very often , the quality and safety standards are much lower .
Consumers need to recognise Community products and know why they are healthier than others .
Last but not least , they must know that buying these products supports European farmers and agri-food producers and , therefore , the European economy .
I particularly appreciate the initiative from the rapporteur on recognising the important role which professional associations and organisations play because , in most cases , they have the expertise which the country 's institutions do not have .
They are also much more familiar with the real situation on the market and its requirements .
At the same time , I think that the proposal to increase the cofinancing percentage is an absolute necessity in the current credit crisis .
I strongly believe that this will increase the rate of use of these funds .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Dumitriu , on all his hard work and his proposals , a view which I believe all my fellow Members share .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Dumitriu .
The agricultural sector is important for the Member States ' economies because it provides food for the population , agricultural products for export , not to mention a large number of jobs .
The European Union must be able to provide sufficient quantities of food for its population at affordable prices .
It is obvious that in a competitive market , information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries are becoming increasingly important .
Professional associations or organisations must be consulted when it comes to drawing up the programmes for promoting agricultural products .
I believe that this regulation will encourage European farmers to promote their agricultural products .
Romania has a huge number of agri-food products which we do not , unfortunately , come across on European markets , even though many of them are environmentally friendly .
A campaign to promote these products will benefit both European consumers and Romanian agricultural producers .
Particularly at times of economic crisis , the agricultural sector obviously remains one of the sectors which must be given special attention , along with adequate programmes and funding .
In a crisis situation , Member States must focus greater attention when setting their priorities .
This is why I believe that agriculture must remain an area which is supported because it is important for the European economy .
( RO ) I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on all his hard work on this report , which raises a very important issue .
There is a real need on the part of Member States to promote the image of their agricultural products , both among European Community consumers and those in other countries .
I would like to highlight two proposals mentioned in this report .
A request is being made for the percentage of the European Community 's financial participation to be increased in order to provide additional support for the projects selected by Member States , at a time of a general tightening of the conditions in which national organisations and authorities seek to obtain the amounts they must contribute to cofinancing .
The second paragraph of this amendment seeks a financial participation of 70 % from the European Community for measures to promote fruit and vegetables specifically for children in schools .
I feel that these amendments are appropriate and I hope that this initiative will be supported by as many MEPs as possible .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for all his hard work and for his contribution to expanding the area of application of the programmes for providing information about and promoting agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries .
One of the most important amendments being put forward by this report is the 10 % increase both in European cofinancing for programmes promoting European agricultural products and in the budget allocations for promoting the consumption of dairy products , fruit and vegetables in schools .
On the one hand , Europe will benefit from a larger number of agricultural products being promoted more actively while , on the other , the biggest beneficiaries of the Community 's aid will be children and pupils .
I think that the measures which have been proposed are extremely important as , now more than ever , we need investment in the areas which are developing rapidly and can lead to economic recovery .
Agriculture is one such area and the European Union can make a significant contribution to promoting it .
Mr President , the major food manufacturers around the globe spend billions promoting themselves - maybe using EU-produced food , but concentrating not on its origin but on their own brands .
We have celebrity TV chefs promoting their particular version of food production , with access to the airwaves and budgets of millions .
And here we are talking about a relatively small amount of money to promote all of Europe 's food , both throughout the world and internally .
It is a big ask !
It is a very good report , which I fully support , and I endorse the comments of our Commissioner here today .
I am particularly interested in the idea that we need to promote outside our borders , and I would agree wholeheartedly with that , but we also have to be realistic about how we are going to compete , and whether we are competitive on a global market .
Perhaps the Commissioner would take that up in her responses .
The question of our standards has got to be acknowledged and recognised .
Is that being acknowledged and recognised at the WTO ?
Mr President , I very strongly support promotion of our high-quality food .
In today 's difficult market , the quality product is the best refuge , but it does need fulsome promotion .
60 % cofinancing would be good if it can be obtained , and I regret that the Commissioner was unable to be as forthcoming as we hoped she would be in that regard .
In respect of my own region , I would very emphatically call upon the regional government - not one blessed with much initiative or with funds given how much it wastes on its top-heavy administration and needless cross-border bodies - to exert itself to draw down this EU funding , and thereby give our excellent local produce the best chance in the marketplace .
Along with what I hope will be 70 % support from Europe to promote food and vegetables to our schools , I trust this opportunity will not be lost by a lackadaisical local department .

( RO ) I wish to express my support for the report presented by Mr Dumitriu on the information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market .
I believe that we need to increase the percentage rate of the European Community 's financial participation in order to provide additional support for the projects selected by Member States .
In particular , it is vital to increase the European Community 's financial contribution to 70 % of the real cost of the new programme for promoting fruit and vegetables specifically for children in the European Union 's schools .
This measure will make a substantial contribution to the implementation of the programme for promoting fruit and vegetables in schools , which is an effort that must be made for the benefit of our children 's health .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a very good report .
Commissioner , I would like to endorse what you said .
I believe the future of European agriculture policy is very much with the market .
We have got to go out there and promote our high-quality products .
You mentioned the wine reform - previously , we were taking a lot of low-quality wine out of the market , buying it into intervention and then making it into biofuel , which was absolutely the wrong way to go .
What we should be doing is promoting quality food .
We have got a great diversity of wines , cheeses , meats , olive oil , fruits , vegetables - you name it .
Europe is rich in all these and we must go out and market them in the future .
I think , as we move beyond the Health Check into the new agriculture policy in 2013 and beyond , we have got to make sure that we use more money to promote our products and to link into the marketplace , because that is where the future lies .
As one last comment , can I say to the Commissioner that perhaps he should go to America and convince President Obama that Roquefort cheese is extremely good and that perhaps he can reduce the tariff that President Bush put on it before he left office .
( PL ) Mr President , European and third-country consumers receive too little information about the quality and standards of European food .
The requirements which we place on European producers are exceptionally high .
Consumers should be aware of this , because it will affect their decisions concerning the choice of suitable products .
I am for promotion and information , although I more often speak of information as a more objective form of message .
We must also have specific requirements and standards concerning the quality of information and the method of promotion .
Finally , I am in favour of the EU and also national budgets supporting information provision and promotion programmes in the field of food .
At a time of crisis , it is important to have promotion and information which will counteract the fall in demand and consumption , including food consumption .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , my thanks for all the contributions .
It is great to hear such enthusiasm and interest in this important issue .
I think that all the comments here are , to a certain extent , very much in line with the Commission 's view on the proposal .
I would like to take this opportunity to respond to some of the questions or issues raised here .
First of all on the financing - this has been raised by quite a few of you - to increase the cofinancing rate .
I think , though , that we have to be very cautious and careful when we try to monitor the benefit of the Community financing because I fear that if we increase the cofinancing , the bottom line will be that there will be less promotion .
That would be a bad outcome and that is the reason why we have maintained our proposal .
Quality has been mentioned quite a few times today and I agree with you .
I think we have a golden opportunity to discuss this quality issue that is also linked to how we promote our products in the Third World , how we explain to consumers what they get when they buy European .
Last October , we presented a Green Paper on quality and we have had lots of contributions ; there are more than 1 000 contributions on the website from all over Europe .
We are now digesting all these different ideas and we will present a communication in May .
We should take this opportunity when the discussion takes place here in Parliament on communication to make a link - how do we improve our possibilities to make it visible and make it understandable .
Here the labelling issue , which is both difficult and important , comes into the discussions , so I am looking forward to having a discussion with you on this issue in the autumn .
Finally , regarding the school fruit scheme which has been raised here today - it is not part of the proposal , but just to keep you updated - we introduced a school fruit scheme with a cofinancing rate of 70 % to increase the awareness of young people and to take the opportunity to underline the importance of good eating habits among school children .
Once again , my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Dumitriu , for a very good report .
I think it is very well mirrored here today by the dynamic discussion that we have had .
I wish to apologise if I run over my allotted two minutes by a few seconds .
Thank you for the extremely relevant comments and views you have expressed about this report .
I am confident that our remaining fellow Members will consider that the new regulations being proposed are appropriate and that we will vote in favour of them .
I would like to advise fellow Members that I will support their suggestions , especially those aimed at promoting European diversity , introducing European quality labelling and more consistent financial support from the Community .
I have been asked : why wine , along with olive oil among the international organisations which can implement promotion projects ?
I would like to respond with another question : why olive oil then ?
My response is positive on both counts . They are highly successful export products from European Union Member States .
They have powerful , experienced international organisations which have already demonstrated their ability to manage complex programmes .
Indeed , the report 's provisions do not exclude other areas .
As regards the second question about the 70 % rate for cofinancing , the initial percentage rate was 60 % and I felt that , in the current economic climate , it was necessary to increase it .
As experience from the uptake of European funds has shown so far , one of the biggest problems remains how to obtain cofinancing , especially at the moment when we are faced , on top of this , with a credit crisis .
This is why this rate needs to be increased , otherwise we risk ending up with the funds not being used .
Mrs Fischer Boel , I would like to thank you for the importance you have given to this report , in particular for the views you have expressed .
Although this is a consultation report , I hope and I would like these amendments to be included in the Commission 's new proposal .
To finally sum up , there are two reasons why this report is necessary .
Member States will have the opportunity to expand the area of application of the measures targeted by these programmes and seek assistance from the international organisations in implementing these measures .
It assigns a greater role to professional organisations and associations in the process of drawing up and implementing product information and promotion programmes .
Last but not least , it is part of the logic of the proposals for adapting European legislation in order to make the use of European funds more accessible by increasing the cofinancing percentage rate during a time when it is extremely difficult to gain access to credit .
As a further recommendation , I would also like to mention that the report was adopted unanimously by the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues on the Committee for the support they provided .
I would personally like to thank Neil Parish for the support he gave me and , last but not least , Lutz Goepel for the trust he placed in me when he assigned me this report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place later today .
1 .
Information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products (
2 .
Implementation in the EU of Directive 2003 / 9 / EC on the minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers : visits by the Committee on Civil Liberties 2005-2008 (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , we have not been able to hold a debate in plenary on this very important report , which is why we feel it is necessary , on behalf of the Committee , to take the floor before you today .
We have all worked together , and I commend the outstanding work of the shadow rapporteurs .
We visited no fewer than 26 detention centres in 10 EU Member States , and we noted several key points .
We observed , in certain centres , an obvious state of decay and an obvious lack of hygiene , and we denounced the failure to respect human dignity .
We found that access to healthcare was not always possible and that the children 's right to education was not always respected .
We call for respect for clear , fair , effective and proportionate asylum procedures , and we call for the implementation of a permanent system of visits and inspections of detention centres .
We must show the reality on the ground and stand up for a right to inspect these centres - something that these kinds of visits permit - and we must do so in order to take action so that things change .
The press has asked me why we did not cite any countries in this summary report .
I replied that it was my choice , that it was our choice , since we have a collective responsibility with regard to what goes on in detention centres in Europe , and the purpose of this report is not to rank the Member States .
We will not stop calling for European solidarity in the area of asylum .
We cannot leave the Member States , at Europe 's borders , on their own to face large migratory flows .
I repeat once again : we have a collective responsibility .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Mrs Roure .
I can see that even the top jurists here in plenary , or those who see themselves as such , are unaware that the rapporteur is entitled to make a two-minute statement when a report has not been discussed in plenary .
Therefore , Mrs Roure has this right , which she has exercised , and everyone should accept this as it is laid down in our Rules of Procedure .
( Applause )
3 .
European SMEs in international trade (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , please excuse me and accept my thanks for your patience .
As we know , the European Parliament has wished for many years to express its views on small and medium-sized enterprises , which represent 99 % of all European companies and 75 million jobs , while today only 3 % of these SMEs access the foreign , external market and only 8 % access the internal market .
We are therefore asking the Council and the Commission to take account of these facts in multilateral and bilateral negotiations , in access to external markets , in the fight against counterfeiting , in the use of trade protection instruments and in competitive tendering .
Trade is the key to greater prosperity .
I would like to thank my colleagues at the Committee on International Trade and , most of all , the shadow rapporteurs of the two largest groups , Mrs Saïfi and Mrs Locatelli , and offer my heartfelt thanks to the secretariat and to Dr Bendini in particular .
I believe that after all our work , we are today handing shared thoughts and proposals to the Commission , on a topic close to Mrs Ashton 's heart , as we heard from her opening speech as Commissioner , and one that must be tackled without delay if we want to resolve , at least in part , the serious economic and financial crisis that is haunting our workers and citizens .
4 .
International Trade and the Internet (
5 .
The placing on the market and use of feed for animals (
6 .
Development impact of Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) (
7 .
Kosovo ( vote )
Before the vote on Amendment 2 :
8 .
Trade and economic relations with China (
Before the vote ( concerns Amendment 1 ) :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to move an oral amendment in the form of an addition to paragraph 64a .
That addition reads as follows : ' where this does not require statehood , for instance , in the ILO ' .
So the last part of paragraph 64a will read as follows : ' supports Taiwan 's participation as an observer in relevant international organisations where this does not require statehood , for instance , in the ILO ; ' .
I would ask colleagues not to oppose this oral amendment , because it is important for the Socialists to give their support to this resolution , and broad support is very important in order to send a strong signal to the Commission and to China .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
- ( CS ) Mr President , I was delighted to support a report which will lead to administrative and legal simplification , which will increase consumer awareness about the quality and nutritional value of food both in Europe and in third countries , and which will also provide clarification to consumers about the use of safe production methods .
I did not agree with the prioritisation of the olive oil or the olive sector and I trust that the Commission will also include the wine sector in the specific programmes in order to improve public awareness of the high quality wines produced in various regions of the European Union .
Mr President , thank you again for giving me the floor .
I supported this report because it makes good sense that we should have a regulation that protects farmers ' interests and the interests of those who produce their feed .
I think what we now need is to communicate with the stakeholders what it means for them , as either feed operators or as users of animal feed , because it will not be enough that we have this regulation in place until there is good communication between all stakeholders .
( PL ) Mr President , I endorsed the report on the placing on the market and use of feed because it represents the interests of farmers and producers , as well as the health security of farm animals , and , by the same token , the health security of those who will later consume consumer the meat - people .
Clear definition of the ingredients of feedstuffs and the Community Register of Feed Additives will make it easier for farmers to make responsible decisions about the choice of the right type of feed .
This is a step in the right direction .
I will , however , permit myself to point out that protection of a trade secret of producers cannot justify a lack of essential information , and cannot lead to situations like the ' mad cow disease ' epidemic or the appearance of dioxins in feedstuffs .
Mr President , in November 2007 , I visited Uganda to meet with local entrepreneurs and local NGOs .
As we were leaving Kampala on a dusty road , the driver drew my attention to some booths selling pre-paid telephone cards .
He turned to me and said : ' Those telephone companies , those private companies , have done more to take people out of poverty in this country than any of your white , Western NGOs ' .
I thought that was a little unfair at the time , but it highlights the feeling that so many entrepreneurs have towards European Union development policies .
In fact , entrepreneurs in many poor countries have told me that they believe our aid programmes and our NGOs actually have an interest in keeping them poor .
I still think that is a little unfair , but it highlights the fact that we need to show that we are supporting entrepreneurs in developing countries , and one of the best ways to do that is through encouraging open markets globally .
Mr President , I am delighted to be able to rise in support of Mr Schröder 's excellent report on this issue .
Economic Partnership Agreements are very key as a development instrument .
It is trade , not aid , which is going to uplift poor countries from poverty .
We are now in a global economic condition with the global recession where there are the beginnings of the whiff of protectionism coming from the developed world , especially from the United States , and I hope not from the European Union .
If we create a protectionist climate , then the whole question of trade , not aid , to help alleviate poverty will be blown off course and thrown out of the window .
We do not wish the developing countries which do want to trade with us to be stopped by our own selfish needs which are misguided to protect our own markets .
In the long term , that would be a disaster for our economies .
( NL ) I voted against the resolution on Kosovo for two reasons .
First of all , there is a paragraph that states that the Member States that have not yet recognised Kosovo 's independence should still do so .
Well , a paragraph of this nature is in contravention of the principle of subsidiarity .
It is up to the Member States themselves to decide , and they do not need any external pressure from the European Commission , the Council or Parliament .
The second reason why I have voted against the resolution is to do with the paragraph that states that Kosovo , and the entire region , in fact , should have a clear prospect of EU membership .
It is wrong , in my view , for Parliament to make promises of this kind .
As things stand at the moment , there are many problems related to enlargement , and also related to a number of new Member States , and it would be totally wrong to make promises at this point to countries like Kosovo that they will be able to join the European Union at some stage .
Mr President , whence comes our obsession with preserving multi-ethnic states regardless of the wishes of their inhabitants ?
Kosovo had an unquestioned right to self-determination : it was expressed in a referendum with a participation rate and a turnout of more than 90 % .
However , by an extension of that logic , so , surely , have those Kosovans of Serb extraction , who are clustered conveniently close to the border with Serbia proper .
Why not allow them also to enjoy self-government ?
We do it de facto , so why do we not do it de jure ?
The answer is because we would rather keep Kosovo as a European protectorate - as a satrapy , such as it was in Ottoman times .
We forced on them a version of our 12-star flag and a version of our national anthem .
We have a Kosovan Parliament and institutions subject to the overriding decisions of an appointed European commissar .
We should allow the people of Kosovo to have referendums on partition - if that is what they want - and on ethnic self-determination , and we should allow that same right to the subject peoples of the European Union .
Pactio Olisipiensis Censenda Est !
Mr President , China is a very important trade partner for the European Union , as is Taiwan .
I wanted to draw attention to a very positive development in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
They voted an opinion which calls on China to respect women and children 's rights by ending forced abortion and forced sterilisation .
It also calls on China to end political persecution and other human rights abuses .
I think this raises the issue that we cannot separate trade from other factors .
I made this point in the Gaza speech about our trade with Israel - if we do not bring up issues of human rights abuse , we are in danger of having our money used to encourage human rights abuse .
So I want to congratulate the Committee on Foreign Affairs for recognising the coercive nature of China 's one-child policy and bringing this into the trade issue .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , China obtained some enormous advantages when it joined the WTO in 2001 .
We opened our markets to China but China does not adhere to the terms and conditions it signed up to , and we have basically taken this lying down for a number of years .
I am very much in favour of establishing a strategic partnership with this major economic player .
However , the strategic partnership must be founded on the obligation of China to respect human rights , because we need partnerships with countries which are democratic , not totalitarian .
We in the new Member States are all too familiar with totalitarianism .
( NL ) I have voted in favour of the amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , because at least it takes account of the fact that Taiwan is an important economic business entity and supports Taiwan 's participation as an observer in the relevant international organisations .
In actual fact , this amendment is still far too restrictive .
Since Taiwan is a democratic country that enjoys de facto national sovereignty , it is a disgrace , really , that Taiwan is not recognised as a fully-fledged member state in all the different international institutions .
The amendment refers to Taiwan 's participation in these institutions in the capacity of observer .
Well , I think that Taiwan should be able to take part as a fully-fledged member state .
Mr President , thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to explain my vote on the EU-China report .
Overall , it was a very balanced report and I am very pleased that the rapporteur , on the whole , was able to stick to the issue - which was trade - rather than focus on a number of other issues that I know a number of colleagues wanted her to focus on .
However , I did have one major concern about this report , which was the reference to trade defence instruments .
We have to recognise that consumers in my country - Britain - and in many other countries across the European Union , have benefited from open trade with China .
It helped us at the time to fight perils such as inflation .
However , protecting uncompetitive EU producers at the expense of other parties who benefit is something that we should tackle with care .
We should make sure that we get the right balance and do not ignore the benefits of trade with China for consumers , companies with globalised supply chains and the retail sector .
On the whole , trade with China is to be welcomed .
Eventually , that will lead to all the other issues being tackled , such as better human rights and labour issues .
Mr President , China is one of our most important trading partners .
It also contains one quarter of the world 's population .
For many years , we have treated China as though it were some sort of small child that needed to be chided and argued about , as though we were some superior institution .
We must not forget that China 's history exceeds ours by thousands of years .
China has maintained her cultural traditions and her values .
We want to have China as a part of our international community , but China is very important for the EU as a trading partner and the way we should treat China is as an equal partner with respect .
If we do that , then China will not only listen to us , but will trade more with us , we will be able to invest more in China and China invest more with us .
At the moment , China has an enormous amount of money which will have to be invested outside China .
The European Union should be the place where they invest it .
Mr President , I supported Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's amendment to consider Taiwan as an economic and commercial entity because Taiwan has been a democracy for a long time and is a viable free market economy .
We must make at least political and moral efforts to support the status of Taiwan , and also to provide it with international access to organisations which are not connected with statehood .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of this report because the information provision measures taken by the Community are a response to a real need on the part of Member States to promote the image of their agricultural products both among Community consumers and consumers in other countries , especially as regards quality and nutritional value , as well as food safety and safe production methods .
It also helps open up new market outlets and has a multiplier effect for national and private sector initiatives .
This legislative amendment will offer interested Member States the possibility to propose information programmes , including when there are no programmes put forward for third countries .
As a result of this amendment , Member States will have the opportunity to expand the area of application of the measures targeted by these programmes and also seek assistance from international organisations in implementing these measures .
in writing . - This proposal aims to extend the reach of Article 9 of Regulation ( EC ) No 3 / 2008 which enables Member States , in the absence of proposals from industry , to propose information and promotion campaigns in third country territories without the requirement of funding from industry .
The present requirements necessitate a 20 % industry contribution to funding when the EU provides a maximum of 50 % of the funding .
This latitude would provide Member States with the ability to self-start promotional and information campaigns without the financial participation of industry .
The potential of this proposal to provide impetus in the fruit and vegetable industry is considerable and also desirable given the current economic conditions .
I am accordingly pleased to support this proposal .
Member States need to promote the image of their agricultural products , both among Community consumers and with the consumers of third countries , particularly with regard to quality and nutritional information , food safety and safe production methods .
I agree that , in the absence of programmes put forward by organisations in the agri-food sector , the Member States must be able to draw up programmes and select , by means of an award , an organisation to implement the programme .
The Commission 's proposal , inasmuch as it enables the Member States to outline national programmes , will improve the existing legislation .
I support the Dumitriu report and welcome the inclusion of the wine sector within the scope of this proposal .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List believes that the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) should be abolished and that agricultural products should be sold on a free market without the EU investing financial resources in information campaigns and sales-promotion measures for these products .
It is a particularly serious matter that the EU is to fund sales-promotion measures in third countries , a policy that will result in unfair competition with the agricultural products of non-EU countries .
What is the EU doing ?
Is it really reasonable for the EU to use European taxpayers ' money in advertising campaigns to convince the same citizens that they should buy the goods that they have already subsidised ?
Of course not .
The whole proposal reeks of concealed protectionism .
In January 2009 , a new advertising campaign was initiated in Sweden , Finland and Denmark in which the Swedish people were urged to buy more tulips .
According to the newspaper Resumé , the EU is investing a total of SEK 14 million over three years in the tulip campaign in the three countries mentioned .
Such a blatant waste of EU money must stop .
I am strongly opposed to this report .
I would observe once again that it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision on EU agricultural policy . Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of heavy subsidies to all of the groups within the agricultural industry .
in writing . - I support this proposal which seeks to simplify and enhance information programmes on agricultural products .
I support this proposal because it will provide funding to third country markets to provide and improve the information on the quality , nutritional value and safety of foodstuffs and the methods of production .
I voted in favour of Mr Dumitriu 's report on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries .
I share the view expressed many times by the Commission that we need to simplify administrative procedures within the European institutional framework .
This regulation in fact allows the Community to provide information about a number of agricultural products on the internal market and on markets in third countries , while tailoring such activities to each location .
I agree with the political break that has been made , which respects the needs of Member States hoping to encourage consumers both within and outside the EU to view their agricultural produce above all in terms of its quality , nutritional characteristics , food safety and production methods .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 3 / 2008 on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries - C6-0313 / 2008 - , because I consider that the population needs to be properly informed about the agricultural products which they are consuming .
I also feel that good promotion of any product can provide consumers with useful information .
in writing . - The status of refugee is that accorded to a person who , owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race , religion , nationality , membership of a particular social group , or political opinion , is outside the country of their nationality , and is unable to or , due to such fear , is unwilling to avail him- or herself of the protection of their own state .
This is a 1951 UN definition .
This review of the 2003 ' Reception Conditions Directive ' , which laid down minimum standards for the reception of people seeking asylum in Europe , aims to enforce the implementation of these rules , such as access to information , education , healthcare and standards regarding reception facilities .
The Directive allows Member States to determine the length of time during which an applicant cannot have access to the labour market .
Ireland unfortunately did not opt into the 2003 Directive , and operates a ' direct provision ' system , providing accommodation , food and EUR 19.10 per week per adult , designed to discourage asylum seekers from choosing Ireland , and keeping them out of the official labour market for the entirety of their application procedure .
Legislation currently before the Oireachtas - the Immigration , Residence and Protection Bill 2008 - seeks to extend this prohibition , despite grave concerns about the impact of such decisions .
Other measures in the Irish legislation include criminalising ' spurious ' appeals and the prospect of fines to legal representatives who take on such cases .
As Ireland is not party to the 2003 Directive , I felt obliged to abstain , but commend the aims of the report .
We are already used to the majority in Parliament approving resolutions without legislative consequences , with content that runs counter to the legislative resolutions it adopts .
This propensity is on the increase as the elections to Parliament draw nearer .
We are faced with an example of these ' two faces ' , the true one and its mask , in this case the latter .
There is no doubt that - and we have consistently maintained this for a long time - it is necessary to guarantee the rights of asylum seekers in terms of their reception , access to information and right to interpretation , free legal aid , healthcare and employment .
It is certainly important to condemn the increase in the number of persons detained within the Dublin System , with the near-routine use of detention measures and limitations on access to reception standards .
It is also necessary , however , to demand the end of detention centres and to reject a Community policy that establishes , by means of the lowest common denominator , reception standards and the procedure for granting asylum .
If Parliament is genuinely concerned about respect for the rights of immigrants and asylum seekers , then it should not have approved the ' Return ' Directive ( which criminalises immigrants and expels them ) , the ' Blue Card ' Directive ( which selects them ) and the ' Employers ' Sanctions ' Directive ( which also punishes the workers ) , which the Portuguese Communist Party rejected .
When it comes to the rights granted to migrants on European Union territory , the rule is certainly one of giving more and more .
The question must be asked as to whether the one-upmanship within the European institutions is not misplaced .
This report is merely a long list of proposals and recommendations aimed at the Member States so that they grant to the hundreds of thousands of people who each year enter their territory legally or illegally rights that are not only equal to those of their nationals , but also more numerous and effective .
Indeed , the Member States of the Union are , for instance , being called on to remove the barriers to labour market access for these immigrants and to adopt national laws which , moreover , promote such access .
Must one conclude from this that , from now on , nationals will have to step aside in favour of the legitimate suffering of people fleeing their countries of origin , be it for economic , political , climatic or family reasons ?
Yes , and this is the meaning of selective immigration , which President Sarkozy wholeheartedly recommends .
In contrast to this , we believe - particularly in times of crisis - that jobs , in Europe , should be reserved for Europeans , and , in France , for French nationals .
The national recovery of the European nations depends on it .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report contains several points that I fully support , such as the fact that asylum seekers should be treated with dignity and that human rights should always be guaranteed .
The criticism directed at a number of so-called reception centres is justified .
A number of European countries fall short when it comes to receiving asylum seekers and refugees in a dignified way .
However , the report contains some points that I am unable to support .
The essential aim of the report is that the EU should have a common immigration and asylum policy .
Among other things , it calls on the other Member States to support those EU countries that are ' most affected by the challenges of immigration ' .
The June List believes that asylum and immigration policy is a matter for the Member States , provided that international conventions and agreements are respected .
A common immigration and asylum policy would run the risk of leading to ' Fortress Europe ' , something that we are already seeing clear signs of today .
in writing . - I abstained in the vote on this report as Ireland did not participate in the adoption of the 2003 Directive .
The principal reason for this position relates to access to the labour market for asylum seekers .
The prohibition on asylum seekers entering the labour market is to be re-enacted in a bill currently before the Dáil .
The report does not reflect the true extent of the miserable conditions experienced by refugees and immigrants in the reception and detention centres in the Member States of the EU .
It confines itself to noting the tragic conditions in which they survive , but ascribes them to the poor application of EU directives .
Thus , on the one hand , it supports the overall anti-immigration legislation and policy of the EU and governments , as laid down in the Immigration Pact and the Dublin System for asylum and , on the other , it protests about its inhumane results .
It is , at the very least , insulting for the political powers of the ' one-way street ' in Europe who voted in the European Parliament for the directive providing , apart from anything else , for the detention of ' illegal ' immigrants for a full 18 months , to express in this report their alleged regret about their inhumane conditions of detention and to call for them not to be detained .
The European Parliament 's ' crocodile tears ' cannot acquit the EU of its inhumane , exploitative policy .
Even the most fundamental measures , let alone measures of proper support for immigrants and refugees and measures to safeguard their rights , can only be implemented by confronting and overturning the policy of the EU and the structure of the EU itself .
The Member States , including Greece , need to do more , by making use of the demands and proposals of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament blames the governments ' attitude towards the poor immigrants who pass daily through the gates of the EU , putting their lives at risk .
Countries , such as Greece , which lie on the external borders of the EU , should take advantage of the potential assistance offered by the EU and , on the basis of respect for the rights of refugees and asylum seekers , try to secure humane conditions of reception for them .
Even with the unacceptable ' discounts ' which the Commission and the Council have been granting recently with respect to immigrants ' rights as they continue on their path towards ' Fortress Europe ' , Greece is well below Community standards for the protection of fundamental rights .
The granting of asylum is the ultimate gesture of a state and an entire community , accepting their inability to defend human rights globally and the will , nevertheless , to act according to that scale of values .
The system governing it must therefore be clearly separate from immigration .
The more we try to broaden the concept , including what is not relevant to it , the less value it will have , and the confusion can only harm legitimate asylum seekers .
It is therefore important for the rules to be clear , the procedures swift , and treatment dignified in all circumstances .
Even though there is a need to coordinate actions and options , asylum , in terms of numbers , size and in conceptual terms , does not raise the same issues as immigration , even in an area without borders .
The Member States have their own traditions with regard to asylum and this difference should not be overlooked within the framework of the aforementioned coordination .
As for asylum seekers whose application is or has to be refused , this concept , the result of a generous but narrow notion of asylum , cannot give rise to any less humanity in the reception and treatment of people who will always be vulnerable by virtue of their condition .
I voted against Mrs Roure 's report on the implementation in the European Union of Directive 2003 / 9 / EC laying down minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers and refugees .
Indeed , although I deplore the fact that some visits have shown that the current directives were poorly implemented or not applied by certain Member States , I do not agree with the rapporteur 's assertion that there are a number of deficiencies regarding the level of reception conditions .
Furthermore , I do not agree that the open accommodation centres set up by certain Member States have low capacity and do not appear to meet migrants ' needs .
Lastly , I disagree with the call for priority to be given to the reception of asylum seekers in open reception centres rather than in closed units .
Thanks to this report , the European Parliament is reaffirming its commitment to fundamental rights , such as the right to dignity .
It is unacceptable that , within the European Union itself , the reception conditions of migrants and asylum seekers are not exemplary .
The detention centre visits by MEPs between 2005 and 2008 have enabled this report to be drafted , under the leadership of Mrs Roure .
The report reveals the extent of the irregularities in the migrant detention system in Europe , pointing the finger at problems to do with legal advice , medical care , hygiene , promiscuity and information .
It is therefore an alarm bell that the European Parliament is today sounding .
Member States must take note of this and , where necessary , must apply the existing ' reception ' and ' procedure ' directives as soon as possible , or make progress in implementing them .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party abstained on this report not because we are opposed to enhancing the role of European SMEs in international trade , but because Mrs Muscardini has produced a Trojan horse that contains within it unacceptable positions on Trade Defence Instruments .
We are disappointed that the Commission has shelved the review because of difficulties in securing a consensus on the way forward .
Our view remains that there is an urgent need to amend the Community 's trade defence regime so that it takes better account of developments in the global economy .
Lack of reform means that our industry is badly placed to take advantage of the benefits of globalisation .
While we welcome the Czech Presidency 's inclusion in the work programme of improving the transparency of Trade Defence Instruments , this is not enough .
We voted in favour of Mrs Muscardini 's report on SMEs .
It is a harsh criticism of the European Union 's trade policy , even though it is worded in the toned-down and technocratic language that this House holds dear .
It covers everything : policies focused on the needs of large enterprises ; the weakness of measures promoting access to foreign markets and ensuring the application of reciprocity by third countries ; difficulties in accessing trade protection instruments for small enterprises ; the fallibility of measures to protect against counterfeiting and the illicit or fraudulent use of geographical indications of origin ; and so on .
Indeed , it is time for the European Union to stop sacrificing its enterprises and its workers on the altar of a form of competitiveness and of free trade that it is the only one in the world to practise .
It is time to support SMEs in the export business , to really protect them against unfair competition , and to do what is reasonable to protect our markets .
The fact is that , by remaining committed to the globalisation of enterprises as an end in itself , the rapporteur continues to promote a system based on the absolute freedom of movement of goods , services , capital and labour , a system that has led us into a profound economic , financial and social crisis , a system with which the European Union absolutely must break .
It is not by chance , with the approach of the elections to Parliament , that resolutions are appearing that attempt to retract the responsibilities of policies adopted by the EU ( in particular in the last 5 years ) concerning the very serious situation in which micro , small and medium-sized enterprises generally find themselves , especially in Portugal .
It is small and medium-sized enterprises , and not the major transnationals , that are the victims of the market liberalisation promoted by the EU ( as if a framework where ' survival of the fittest ' rules could work in their favour ) .
There are many small and medium-sized enterprises that ' participate ' in ' international trade ' by virtue of their dependency on the major transnationals , for which they manufacture at prices that often do not correspond to production costs .
Undoubtedly , it is necessary to provide ( and implement ) trade defence instruments , intellectual property rights , designation of origin and geographic indications of agricultural products , and to support the internationalisation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
So why is it that the majority of political forces represented in Parliament , which correspond to the majority represented in the Commission and the EU Council , do not adopt the regulation on origin marking , do not apply to imported products the same safety and protection standards required of products produced in the EU , do not use the 2007-2013 Financial Framework to protect production and employment , supporting small and medium-sized enterprises ?
I am very pleased that the European Parliament has adopted Mrs Muscardini 's report , on which I had occasion to work as a consultant for the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Much is being said at present about the improvement in conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises in the internal market of the European Union , especially in the context of the proposed Small Business Act .
Small and medium-sized enterprises make up over 99 % of all enterprises in Europe .
However , undertaking business activity which crosses national borders is more the domain of large firms .
Barely 8 % of small and medium-sized enterprises export to destinations beyond their own national borders .
If , however , we are talking about undertaking business activity beyond the borders of the European Union , this step is taken by barely 3 % of enterprises .
We should not forget that internationalised enterprises show great innovative ability .
And innovativeness is the key to competitiveness and growth of the European economy .
I therefore hope that internal market policies will offer SMEs the full range of benefits which the common market brings , and when it is possible , that they will lay the foundations for internationalisation of the activities of SMEs .
Small and medium-sized enterprises should also receive greater support from Member States and the European Commission , in areas including the promotion of exports or the search for potential trade partners , in particular , in relation to market-leading products and services and new technologies .
The report which Mrs Muscardini has presented concerns an important economic and social question .
It is significant especially now , in the face of economic collapse .
The number of SMEs ( up to 250 employees ; turnover ≤ EUR 50 million ) in the EU reaches 23 million , which comprises around 99 % of all firms active in our market .
Over 75 million people work in these SMEs .
The calls directed to the Commission , Member States and regional and local authorities for effective support of these businesses , including unhindered access to loans , are therefore justified .
In addition , trade needs to be made easier and bureaucratic export and import barriers need to be lifted .
In relation to public procurement , whose complicated and not always unequivocal procedures hinder the access of SMEs , the market should be made more open , both inside the EU and in third countries .
As I have shown in my report on innovation policy , the role of SMEs in this sector is difficult to overestimate .
This is because they are more flexible and open to modern technologies and organisational methods .
Special treatment is required for SMEs in the agriculture and food sector , where care needs to be taken over protection of the designations of origin of products , and imitations which are harmful to the health of consumers need to be resisted .
I also endorse the idea of organising European SMP Week in May 2009 .
This should be a good opportunity to make a wide range of information on the subject available throughout the EU .
in writing . - While we all acknowledge and support the role that SMEs play in international trade , it is a real shame that a large part of this report was dedicated to defending so-called Trade Defence Instruments .
In reality , TDIs are being used by inefficient producers as a form of naked protectionism to shelter them from competition , not only from non-EU competitors , but also from more efficient competitors across the EU that have taken advantage of globalisation and established global supply chains .
TDIs punish retailers and consumers who are forced to pay higher prices for goods that they could obtain at better value elsewhere .
They also punish the most efficient and innovative SMEs .
We all know of many SMEs in our constituencies that are punished by the very same TDIs that this report seeks to praise .
It is for this reason that Conservatives reluctantly voted against this report .
SMEs account for 23 million enterprises ( 99 % of the total ) and 75 million jobs ( 70 % ) within the European Union .
I voted in favour of Mrs Muscardini 's report as it reveals the key strategy for the SMEs ' survival during a difficult economic period .
This relates to political and financial support aimed at fostering product and process innovation and improving access to financial and fiscal information , including internationalisation .
It also means the adoption of a firm stance in the negotiations on trade facilitation procedures in order to lower the costs of customs formalities , which can account for up to 15 % of the value of the goods traded , as well as effective recording of the origin of goods and updated customs controls .
As far as Romania is concerned , the internationalisation of SMEs is a solution which , in the current economic crisis , will crucially help them to survive and develop their business , thereby playing an essential role in creating new jobs .
I welcome the organisation of a ' European SME Week ' in May 2009 , the main purpose of which is to provide information to SMEs on how to internationalise their business .
At a time when the world is seeking a response to the global economic crisis , and when protectionist tendencies are proliferating , as was the recent case of the discussion on the ' Buy American ' clause in the United States Congress , it is the duty of the governments and the institutions of the Community to look after the interests and guarantee respect of the rules applicable to small and medium-sized enterprises and international trade .
The value of accessibility to international markets for small and medium-sized enterprises is obvious .
As studies show , when these companies operate on the extra-Community market , they tend to gain good practice , innovate and be more competitive .
Even so , we know that some of them cannot and will not be able to withstand the competition .
Bearing this value in mind , however , and in the knowledge that the bigger companies are better supported in these times of protectionism , it is necessary for the authorities to act in defence of these companies , by monitoring and enforcing compliance with international agreements .
At the same time , this claim has to apply in respect of third countries .
International trade will only be fair if it is so for both parties .
I voted in favour of Mrs Muscardini 's report on enhancing the role of European SMEs in international trade .
For the European Union , a landscape characterised for the most part by small and medium-sized enterprises , the international presence of SMEs holds considerable importance .
Currently , only 8 % of SMEs have an international dimension , and the majority of exports remain within the European Union .
The few SMEs that do export outside of the EU tend to focus on developed and basically saturated markets such as the United States , Canada and Switzerland ; it is rare for them to take their products to emerging countries .
Thus , despite the European Community 's good intentions , such as the SBA project , we still have a long way to go before all European companies can be in a position to acquire a truly international dimension .
E-commerce is an excellent commercial opportunity for small and medium-sized enterprises and for young entrepreneurs .
It helps to overcome traditional non-technical barriers by providing access to otherwise inaccessible markets .
For the same reason , this kind of commerce also guarantees greater participation by the least developed countries in international trade .
Inclusion of these partners , however , depends on the creation of a basic infrastructure , to which we should contribute unconditionally .
We should also take into consideration that piracy , counterfeiting or data violation are not intrinsic to this type of commerce , but rather adaptations of old practices .
With the proper adaptations , we need to provide all the guarantees of traditional commerce .
The legal web surrounding e-commerce is caught up in various aspects , preventing us from viewing it with a critical eye : for example , governance of the Internet is yet to be made subject to a suitable , internationally respected structure , and there are issues of international private law or inspections .
When it comes to the WTO , there is confusion over e-commerce , and despite many persistent requests , negotiations on this type of commerce continue to be relegated to dangerous bilateral compartments .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Internet has assumed an ever more important role in trade relations and also in international trade .
There remain , however , serious failings in terms of the protection of users and consumers , in terms of the protection of their personal data , and guaranteeing the quality of service provided or product purchased .
This report , despite mentioning these facts , does not put forward proposals that would make it possible to enhance user protection and the quality of the service provided , based on the use of a service as imminently public as communications .
While it incorporates some aspects that we view positively , its central objective is to promote the development and use of e-commerce as a tool to facilitate international trade and as an instrument to help overcome current difficulties in opening up more markets .
This means that its main concern is to facilitate and promote e-commerce , that is , the production , promotion , sale and distribution of products through telecommunications networks , in favour of the liberalisation of world trade .
We therefore abstain .
The Internet has given rise to new possibilities in the trade of goods and services .
This also concerns cross-border transactions .
The growth in recent years of transactions made over the Internet engenders optimism concerning the level of confidence which consumers have in the Internet .
However , barriers still exist , such as language , which will be difficult to eliminate .
Another serious threat to international trade over the Internet is the lack of legal certainty and consumer protection .
I hope that the proposed directive on consumer rights will eliminate some of these and will be an additional stimulus to the development of Internet commerce .
It should be noted that the Internet allows small and medium-sized enterprises to participate in international markets with very low costs in comparison with traditional methods , and offers possibilities previously unavailable to them to develop their business .
However , Internet commerce also gives rise to questions , especially about the sale of counterfeit products which are protected by intellectual property rights .
Counterfeit products are a serious problem for Internet trade , especially because people who sell counterfeit products internationally cannot easily be brought to justice .
Consumers who use the Internet are also often the victims of fraud , such as the theft of money by electronic means .
All these phenomena undermine consumer confidence in Internet trade , and this slows down the development of international Internet trade .
in writing . - I commend this report as a wide-ranging and well-balanced report that effectively deals with the influence that the Internet has had on cross-border trading .
The Internet has allowed even the smallest companies access to a global market previously unthinkable only a few years ago , boosting trade and allowing the positive aspects of globalisation to come to light .
It has opened up new markets and broken down barriers to trade .
The report has rightly pointed out that , although there has been a rise in fraud and counterfeiting , this should not be attributed to the Internet itself , but rather regarded as an issue that existed before and that needs tackling in new and innovative ways , as long as this does not impinge on our civil liberties .
It also points out that it should be viewed as an opportunity for cultural diversity rather than a threat .
Finally , it recognises that liberalisation of services connected to the Internet , such as telecoms , has led to a boom in infrastructure investment , so I believe we should be cautious about applying further regulation on such industries , as the Commission seems intent on doing at the moment .
in writing . - I welcome this report which highlights the new opportunities and new markets created by the nature and the technological development of the Internet .
It acknowledges the role which the Internet could play for bridging the trade gap between North and South in opening up new channels connecting developing countries with advanced commercial systems , and increasing their trade flows .
The report states that this should facilitate the harmonious incorporation of developing countries into the world trading system , which I support .
I welcome the report from my colleague on the role played by the Internet in boosting trade .
In view of the ever-growing number of Internet users , better regulation needs to be put in place in this expanding area .
European policies must encourage e-commerce as an effective alternative to the conventional method of doing business and as a way of boosting cross-border trade within the EU .
A series of Community measures is required to eliminate the potential obstacles hampering better use of the Internet for commercial purposes .
This includes measures designed to discourage and prevent fraud and theft of personal data .
These Community measures must also encourage users to have greater trust in the online environment .
At the same time , Community standards must be defined for e-commerce transactions .
The EU needs to facilitate the implementation of these standards , thereby offering e-commerce agents the opportunity to be recognised as reliable suppliers .
Thanks to the global nature of the Internet and the opportunity to carry out beneficial commercial transactions with third countries , I hope that we will see progress too within the WTO in terms of promoting e-commerce worldwide .
I voted in favour of this report because its aim is to highlight the areas of international trade where the Internet has acted as a catalyst , creating new conditions for developing trade globally .
It also recognises the need for open standards and their important contribution to innovation and competition , as well as for the real possibility of choice for the consumer .
The rapporteur proposes that the commercial agreements signed by the EU should promote the open , extensive use of the Internet for e-commerce , provided that consumer access to services , online products and their use are not limited , except where they are banned by national legislation .
I support the rapporteur 's request to the Commission to devise an overall strategy that will help eliminate the obstacles which still exist for SMEs in terms of using e-commerce and creating a database designed to offer information support and advice on managing the new participants without any e-commerce experience .
I voted in favour of Mr Papastamkos 's report on international trade and the Internet .
Indeed , I support the rapporteur 's aim to highlight areas of international trade in which the Internet has acted as a catalyst , creating new conditions for international trade to develop at world level .
It is plain to see that international trade and the Internet are mutually beneficial .
What is more , I firmly believe that the development of online trade holds considerable advantages for consumers .
The main benefits , whether at national , European or world level , are a far wider choice of goods and services , competitive prices , lower living costs and improved quality of life .
Thanks to the increased information available , consumers now have the opportunity to find better goods and services , which can be accessed 24 hours a day , from home or the workplace .
I voted in favour of the compromise reached and I consider the new regulation to be very positive because it will make it possible to harmonise the conditions for the placing on the market and the use of animal feed , and will ensure that adequate information is provided both to livestock farmers and consumers of meat , thereby guaranteeing the proper functioning of the internal market .
I wish to highlight the importance of the ' open declaration ' , a list of substances used in the feed mixture in decreasing order of their relative weight , which will help to maintain a high level of confidence on the part of farmers and consumers .
Furthermore , producers will now have clearer rules for placing animal feed on the market , enabling possible criminal practices to be more easily avoided .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament 's report contains some constructive amendments , such as including on the label the fact that meat and meal is contained in certain compound feed for non-ruminants .
However , the report 's amendments also include details that should be dealt with by officials at authority level and not by politicians .
For example , the wording of the citable text ' oral animal feeding : the introduction of feedingstuffs into an animal 's gastrointestinal tract through the mouth with the aim of meeting the animal 's nutritional needs and / or maintaining the productivity of normally healthy animals ' , ' licking buckets containing minerals ' or of ' faeces , urine as well as separated digestive tract content resulting from the emptying or removal of digestive tract , irrespective of any form of treatment or admixture ' .
These are certainly important issues relating to food safety , but they should be left to national authority experts to take care of .
I have voted in favour of the report , as it contains some proposals that are , in principle , important , but this does not mean that I support its approach in terms of its involvement in specific details .
The Baringdorf report on the placing on the market and use of feed is of major importance to agriculture and the food market , in the light of recent scandals involving animal nutrition , diseases triggered in animals for reasons including a lack of knowledge of the ingredients contained in the feed they were given , the dioxin scandal , mad cow disease , etc .
Greater freedom and responsibility will be given to operators from the fodder sector .
However , this means that if a serious problem occurs involving contamination with poisonous substances or harmful feed , this will hugely affect the animals ' development or the environment .
If the producer does not have sufficient financial resources to resolve the problem , even more serious problems may occur .
I think it is necessary , which is the reason why I have voted in favour of this report , for farmers and agricultural workers in general to be given accurate information about animal feed composition , but also to be sufficiently protected from financial , social and economic loss in the event of a disaster .
I sincerely thank the rapporteur for devoting his attention to such a difficult and controversial subject .
Feed labelling and its coordination at Community level requires reconciliation of the interests of consumers , who have the right to know what product they are buying , whether it is safe and what it is made of , and the rights of producers , who want to defend their right to protect their intellectual property .
The appeal of businesses and Member States against the requirement to place ' specific information on request ' on feed labels shows the fundamental conflict of interests between these interest groups .
The compromise procedure worked out with the help of the European Court of Justice appears , at first glance , to be reasonable , but it is , however , detached from reality , for it is difficult to imagine a farmer who , while already working night and day in principle , is sufficiently interested in the matter to waste time and money on complicated appeal procedures .
Specific information on the composition of feedstuffs should be available on the label , not only because of the inalienable right of the consumer but , above all , because of the basic objective of the directive , which is to protect health .
Who , if not the producer , will guarantee that the feed has not been genetically modified , for example ?
The protection of intellectual property must not favour abuses .
I voted in favour of Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report on the placing on the market and use of feed .
I support the proposal , which calls for a complete overhaul of European legislation on animal feed , to involve not only simplifying existing standards , but also bringing this legislation into line with food law .
Among the main points , I am undoubtedly in favour of the listing of feed materials from which compound feed is composed and of its precise quantities ( the ' open declaration ' ) , which was one of the key demands of the European Parliament following the bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE ) crisis .
Lastly , I agree with the rapporteur on protecting consumers ' rights to information and on the labelling of feed .
The Commission is making EPAs the alpha and omega of its development strategy .
The Schröder report and the European right are doing the same .
Supporting as we do the countries concerned , the European socialists do not endorse this approach .
As far as we are concerned , these EPAs are a con .
There is still time to promote another way of thinking , to make EPAs real development instruments , by supporting the re-opening of negotiations on the points on which there is most conflict , as Mr Barroso and Mrs Ashton have promised to do ; by opting for selective regionalisation , as conducted by the ACP countries themselves ; by honouring our commitments concerning the trade-related assistance pledged in 2005 rather than ' plundering ' the EDF ; by guaranteeing real parliamentary control of the process , with the ACP parliaments taking a leading role , and the involvement of the civil societies in the south ; and by rejecting the ' bulldozer strategy ' aimed at extending the negotiations on services and the ' Singapore ' issues , when the ACP countries are not ready to do so .
This is not the ' road map ' described in the Schröder report .
That is why I shall vote against it .
Once again , particularly owing to the resistance of various countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific ( ACP ) , despite being obliged to use ' politically correct ' language , the majority in Parliament is unable to conceal the true origin and real intentions of the Economic Partnership Agreements between the EU and the ACP countries .
While Article 36 ( 1 ) of the Cotonou Agreement enshrines the conclusion of ' World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) compatible trading arrangements , progressively removing barriers to trade between them and enhancing cooperation in all areas relevant to trade ' , what the EU intends to do is to go beyond what is currently established and reach what , to date , has not yet been achieved in the WTO , even though the 10th European Development Fund is implemented for that purpose while , at the same time , reducing public development aid .
In other words , trying to enter through the window after failing to get in through the door .
The EU 's aim is the liberalisation of trade , on the basis of which the major financial and economic groups endeavour to ensure the opening up of markets , to sell goods and services , exploit raw materials and impose a production model aimed at export , in accordance with their interests .
Another policy is needed to promote effective independence , sovereignty , cooperation , solidarity , development and social justice .
I voted in favour of Mr Schröder 's report on the development impact of Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
The ' stepping stone ' agreements signed thus far are just the beginning of a long and fruitful collaboration with these extra-European countries .
In the case of the EPAs , a liberalisation process of 15 years was considered acceptable by the EU and the ACP countries .
In addition , the minimum requirement for covering ' substantially all trade ' would be not less than 80 % of trade between partners .
I am thus persuaded that the development of further agreements can only improve the economic position of both contracting parties .
in writing . - ( NL ) The own-initiative report about the influence of economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) on development cooperation contains a few valid points .
It calls for more government aid ( after all , ACP countries take the brunt of the financial crisis ) and emphasises that EPAs are a development instrument that should not adversely affect regional integration in the South .
Despite this , I back the alternative resolution tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
It would , after all , be more logical if Parliament waited to show its endorsement of the EPAs until the parliaments of the ACP countries involved had determined their positions .
In my view , the parliamentary body that monitors the EPAs should be the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and not a body that has been set up for this specific purpose .
This would only have a divisive effect and weaken the position of the countries in the South that do not have the financial or personal means at their disposal to attend all these meetings .
Moreover , a separate body is non-transparent and would prevent a holistic approach to development-related topics .
in writing . - ( FR ) Although the Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) give a great deal of structure to the EU 's relations with the countries of Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific ( ACP ) , the European Parliament is sending out a very bad message by adopting this report .
Europe absolutely must reverse the way in which it negotiates and trades with the ACP countries , if it does not wish to contribute to their ruin .
This report validates a system based on an alleged equality between the parties , when the EU is , in reality , the world 's leading economic power , and the ACP countries have a huge amount of catching up to do .
There is now an urgent need to adopt an asymmetric and consensual approach that will finally give these states a chance where global competition is concerned .
My colleagues from the Socialist Party in the European Parliament and I have voted against the report .
Its adoption by Parliament is indeed proof that Europe is governed by the right , and that this must change !
in writing . - The recognition of Kosovo as a sovereign state by many countries has probably created more problems than it will solve .
I am sceptical as to whether Kosovo was ready for independence .
The fact that some EU Member States will not recognise Kosovo 's independence for fear of setting precedents within their own borders has further complicated Kosovo 's future .
The EU has now taken on primary responsibility for assisting Kosovo internally .
This commitment should not be open-ended either in terms of time or financial resources .
Genuine concerns exist about Kosovo 's political stability , the extent of corruption , the influence internally and externally of organised crime and the treatment of minorities , including Serbs .
It is vital that the EU institutions remain vigilant and ready to intervene if Kosovo fails to live up to the high standards that must inevitably accompany sovereign statehood .
Notwithstanding my concerns , I gave my support to this resolution .
There is nothing pleasing about the situation in Kosovo or about the role being played by the European Union there .
EULEX , the Union 's mission in Kosovo , is , in the case in point , merely the UN 's ' military ' arm , in charge of overseeing the implementation of a permanent Kosovar government and administration , in breach of UN Resolution 1244 , which recognises Serbia 's sovereignty over this province .
The good intentions expressed in this House , the advice and the requests have a hard job of hiding a tragic reality : the oppression of the minorities , in particular , the Serb minority , in a territory now given over - because of the international and , in particular , European community - to corruption , organised crime , the Albanian mafia and perhaps even to Islamist terrorist groups .
The purpose of this resolution is to downplay the EU 's support for the illegal unilateral declaration of independence by the Serbian province of Kosovo .
Parliament 's aim is , unacceptably , to ' legitimise ' the creation of a protectorate created and enforced , through aggression and military occupation , by the US , NATO and the EU , guaranteeing their political , economic and military dominance in this highly important region of Europe .
The existence of a ' pseudo-state ' under ' supervised sovereignty ' , protected by the EU / NATO , specifically by means of their ' EULEX ' and ' viceroys ' , the ' International Civilian Representative ' and the ' EU Special Representative ' , who have judicial , police and customs powers , as well as ' executive functions ' and monitoring functions , constitute unacceptable acts of neo-colonialism .
With this resolution , we found out that ' the most important of the European Security and Defence Policy ( of the EU ) missions to date ' is a flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and a dangerous precedent in terms of international law , with unpredictable consequences for the stability of borders , particularly on the European continent .
Some of those who clamoured for respect of international law , and the territorial integrity , sovereignty and independence of Georgia are , in the end , the same ones who promoted and supported the aggression against Yugoslavia .
This resolution merely represents yet another exercise in hypocrisy and cynicism by the majority in Parliament .
For nearly 20 years , this Parliament has stood by and watched while the people of Kosovo gradually bade farewell to Serbia .
In this plenary , debates on Kosovo are usually not about Kosovo itself , but mainly about the effect it has on the rest of the world .
Those in favour and against independence are mainly concerned about each decision setting a precedent for other regions and about the risk of the European Union indulging in self-aggrandisement as a result .
I have been arguing in favour of the opposite for 30 years , both within and outside this Parliament .
Democracy requires us , above all , to look at the needs and desires of the people themselves .
After centuries of Turkish rule and the last century of Serbian rule , the last thing they need is coercion from outside .
If they are not allowed to annex to Albania , they want true independence .
For the past 10 years , I have been advocating politics from the grassroots up , from the viewpoint of the poor , the disadvantaged , the people who suffer as a result of a lack of democracy and public provisions , the victims of environmental disasters or wars , in short , everyone who is disadvantaged due to a lack of equality for all people .
I will be voting against the EULEX project because it does not provide solutions in the interests of the ordinary people of Kosovo .
The resolution by the European Parliament not only recognises Kosovo as a separate state , but also insultingly urges those Member States of the EU which have not yet recognised its independence to do so , in blatant violation of international law and UN Security Council Resolution 1244 itself .
Towards this end , it supports the setting up of a Kosovo Security Force ( KSF ) , in other words , a separate army which , of course , will operate under the aegis of the KFOR occupying NATO force .
The aim of establishing and developing the repressive EULEX police / judicial force in Kosovo and the reforms which it is promoting , such as privatisations and so on , is to impose EU interests and speed up its incorporation into Euro-unifying structures .
This will complete the conversion of Kosovo to a Euro-NATO protectorate .
The first bloody cycle of the break-up of Yugoslavia and the re-drawing of new borders is closing with the opening up of new wounds at Balkan and global level with the imperialist law of divide and rule , which will give rise to new tensions and interventions .
The Communist Party of Greece voted against this unacceptable resolution , highlighting the need to step up the anti-imperialist fight and confront the EU and its policies by demanding that the Greek and all the Euro-NATO occupying armies leave Kosovo and the Balkans as a whole .
I voted against this resolution as Romania does not recognise the independence of the province of Kosovo .
I voted against the motion for a resolution on Kosovo , because I disagree with several points contained in it .
Personally , I do not regard the establishment of a functioning witness-protection programme as essential for effective legal action against high-level offenders in Kosovo , in particular , with regard to war crimes .
Furthermore , I do not believe that it is vitally important for Kosovo to promote projects aimed , for example , at restoring vandalised graveyards with the direct involvement of local actors : the fact is that such projects would have no practical value for the communities in Kosovo and would not contribute to a better inter-ethnic climate .
in writing . - Members of this House will be well aware of my views in the past with regard not only to Kosovo , but to the whole Balkan region .
In my opinion , the issue of Kosovo can only be resolved through a consensual approach involving not only Serbia primarily , but also neighbouring countries .
There is a lot in this report that I can ally myself with , but the insistence that every EU Member State should recognise an independent Kosovo is not an area that I can support .
Independence for Kosovo is something that can only be achieved by consensus and agreement with Serbia .
Failure to recognise this is merely , in my view , harbouring problems for the future and raising an anti-Serbian attitude in this Parliament .
Therefore , the passing of Amendment 3 renders this resolution partisan and seriously undermines the rest of the text .
This means that sadly , I cannot support it .
The vote on Amendment 3 and the final vote were , in my view , extremely important .
I voted against in both cases .
In Amendment 3 , the EP is asking EU countries to recognise the independence of Kosovo .
In my opinion , the entire independence process is hasty and ill-conceived .
I am aware that negotiations between Kosovo and Serbia , even in the presence of international personalities and organisations , were lengthy and many people saw no chance that they would produce a solution or even that they would continue .
That is why most EU countries and the USA accepted the Aktisari plan .
This notwithstanding , I believe that all unilateral declarations of independence are merely a source of future problems and potential conflicts .
The period since the Kosovo declaration of independence only confirms this .
If we are to preserve peace in our region , then any time spent in negotiations is neither long nor pointless .
in writing . - This report reflects China 's growing power as a trading nation .
It also draws attention to trade between China and Taiwan , which looks set to grow following the signature of cross-Straits commercial agreements .
Closer economic ties between China and Taiwan have the potential to facilitate a more positive approach to the wider issue of cross-Straits relations .
However , this détente makes little sense unless it is accompanied by Taiwan 's integration into international organisations , especially those related to trade , like the World Health Assembly and the International Maritime Organisation .
Parliament should voice strong support for the Council 's declared policy of supporting Taiwan 's meaningful participation in international organisations .
Parliament should also press China on its continued reluctance to permit Taiwan a voice on the international stage .
The prosperity and health of the 23 million citizens of Taiwan should not be held hostage for political purposes .
Given my support for Taiwan 's meaningful participation in international organisations , I voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of the Wortmann-Kool report as I support the development of economic relations between the EU and China .
This country has seen dramatic economic growth , making it one of the biggest economic actors on the global market .
Commercial relations between the EU and China have expanded considerably in recent years , making Europe China 's biggest trade partner since 2006 .
China was number two on the EU 's trade partners list in 2007 .
Nowadays , we need exceptional cooperation between the EU and China in order to provide a solution to the current economic and financial crisis .
I think that as China is one of the engines driving global development , it should fully assume responsibility for guaranteeing the sustainable and balanced development of the global economy .
The EU 's commercial relations with China should be based on the principles of reciprocity , sustainable development , protection of the environment , prevention of climate change , fair competition , compliance with the World Trade Organisation 's rules , not forgetting human rights .
The EU must insist on compliance with consumer protection regulations so that European citizens are no longer at risk of buying products which are dangerous to their health , goods with hidden defects or counterfeit products .
Each year , this Parliament adopts a text on trade and economic relations with China , and each year its findings get worse : violations of human rights , unfair trade practices , dumping , non-compliance with China 's international commitments , be it at the WTO or at the ILO ( International Labour Organisation ) , counterfeiting , a patents policy that is as good as theft , and so on .
The list is getting longer and it is frightening .
More frightening still is the rapporteur 's enduring belief in the myth of ' democratic change through trade ' , the sharpest contradiction of which is the current situation in China .
This myth serves as an alibi for all those who put the commercial interests of a few above respect for the values that they proclaim , so as certainly not to have to take the necessary decisions : implementing trade protection and sanction instruments .
You no doubt believe that China should become the world 's workshop , producing at low cost , goods of more or less - the focus being on less - high quality .
We prefer a policy that consists in producing in Europe , with Europeans , the goods that we consume , and in regaining an industrial independence within a European market that is ultimately protected .
Since 2006 , the EU has been China 's leading trading partner , and since 2007 , China has been Europe 's second largest trading partner .
China currently accounts for 6 % of world trade .
The PRC has made great strides since the report that I had the honour of presenting in this House in 2002 .
It appears , however , that many of the aspects that needed to be remedied at the time still persist , even though , in some respects , they have been resolved by remarkable advances .
In terms of social and environmental impact , there is a clear lack of preparation by Chinese industry , and this requires greater European incentive .
China and the EU have been negotiating a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement since October 2007 , with results that have yet to be seen .
In view of European support for many aspects of international trade , China should not breach commitments undertaken within the WTO .
Obstacles have been introduced in the form of rules and regulations , which restrict access by European companies in strategic sectors .
In November , the PRC declared its intention to abandon the system in place since 2007 of dual control of textile and footwear imports .
The available statistics do not facilitate a discussion , but we may be facing a trade controversy .
Since it is not possible to consider the many issues raised by this resolution , we believe it is essential to emphasise that we advocate the strengthening of real and effective cooperation relations between the countries of the EU and China , based on a mutually advantageous response to the needs of the different peoples , and which contribute to reciprocal development , respecting the principle of non-interference and respect for national sovereignties .
On the basis of these principles , and although the resolution contains some aspects that we agree with , we clearly oppose it because it claims the neo-liberal matrix as its own , namely by fighting for the continuation of trade liberalisation , in this case , with China .
The resolution , by disguising the very serious consequences of the liberalisation of world trade , is an incentive to proceed with the opening up of markets between the EU and China , emphasises efforts to accelerate negotiations within the framework of the WTO and ' stresses that the new EU-China PCA should aim to establish free and fair trade ' .
As shown in other similar parliamentary resolutions , the aim is to provide a response to the expansion needs of the EU 's major economic and financial groups , which runs counter to the response to the needs of the workers and small and medium-sized enterprises in various EU countries , particularly Portugal .
in writing . - I support the recommendations in this report on improving market access to China , lifting barriers to trade by increasing accessibility of foreign companies in China and focusing on creating a level economic playing field .
In the current global economic and financial crisis , relations between the EU and its main external economic partners are assuming much greater importance than in the past .
Economic stability and the sustainability of trade flows involving the EU are becoming ever more relevant to our future security .
I voted in favour of Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's report on economic and commercial relations with China because I believe that this is a step towards a better structure of commercial relations between the European Union and a crucial global partner .
The need for this report is highlighted by the hard reality of the trade deficit of EUR 160 billion .
However , most of the elements in this report are not only requests from the European Union in relation to certain aspects of Beijing 's economic and trade policy , but also suggestions whose implementation will bring benefits to China internally , as well as looking ahead to its future development .
Better regulation and protection of intellectual property , the reduction of the social and environmental impact from our Asian partner 's dramatic economic growth and the reduction in the counterfeiting and piracy of goods are areas for action where Beijing has already made notable progress .
If this can be maintained in the future it will only help boost China 's development .
Based also on my own personal experience obtained during a meeting of a delegation from the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee in China between 16 and 21 March 2008 , I voted for the Corien Wortmann-Kool report on commercial and economic relations with China .
Trade between the EU and China has increased dramatically since 2000 .
The EU is China 's largest trading partner and China is the second largest trading partner of the EU .
Although China enjoys significant advantages as a result of its membership of the WTO , European firms must overcome major obstacles in trying to gain access to the Chinese market , the main ones being breaches of patent rights and an ambiguous system of standards .
I welcome the intention of launching a ' Gateway to China ' programme aimed especially at establishing training programmes for managers in China with a view to supporting access to the Chinese market for European SMEs by 2010 .
The report provides recommendations for improving trade relations between Europe and China which must be based on principles of reciprocity , sustainable development , respect for environmental limits , contributions to global targets on combating climate change , fair economic competition and trade that is in accordance with our shared values and with WTO rules .
I welcomed the amended proposal in which the EU regards Taiwan as a commercial and trading entity and supports Taiwanese participation as an observer in relevant international organisations .
The debate on trade relations with China always brings us back to the issue of human rights in that country .
It is understandable .
The objections raised by the relationship with China can be understood in the light of various assessments , which are , in most cases , justifiable .
The perception that Chinese economic growth has no parallel in the respect of human rights and democracy in that country , nor in its actions at international level , the exploitation of workers , a regulatory framework on labour that is incomparably less demanding , disregard for environmental matters and for rules on intellectual property and patents , all these factors are barriers to open trade relations that are marked by respect for international good practice .
Nevertheless , this trade is there , and it is growing .
China 's role in the modern world economy is unequalled and its participation in overcoming the present crisis is vital .
It is therefore necessary to insist on respect for the rules and principles of international trade , for equal access to markets and for the defence of democracy and human rights , without rejecting the reality and our growing interdependency .
In fact , we need to make the most of this situation , if only to better influence this great country .
In the vote on the Report on Trade and Economic Relations with China , I voted for its adoption .
China is the second largest trading partner of the EU , and the EU has been China 's largest trading partner since 2006 .
It is a country which is a driving force of world growth .
It is very important that the trade relations of European countries with China be based , above all , on the principles of reciprocity , sustainable development , respect for environmental limits and fair competition .
Development of trade relations with China should go hand in hand with political dialogue which should include the subject of human rights .
China should increase efforts in the area of enforcement of intellectual property rights and address the problem connected with the production of counterfeit and pirated goods inside China .
The high level of pollution caused by Chinese industry and its growing consumption of natural resources is also disturbing .
The breakdown in negotiations with envoys of the Dalai Lama casts a shadow over relations with China .
China should cease all forms of persecution of the Tibetan people .
In order to guarantee the correct level of trade relations with China , they must be based on engagement and strategic partnership that enshrines the principles of reciprocity , fair competition and trade , according to our common values and adherence to WTO rules .
I do not welcome Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's proposal on Trade and Economic Relations with China , since I disagree with various points made in the report .
For example , with regard to future steps to be taken by the European Union , I do not agree that it is necessary to prevent problems through bilateral dialogue .
The fact is , bringing together senior decision makers from the Chinese leadership and their counterparts from the European Commission cannot adequately address issues of mutual concern , especially in the areas of investment , market access and intellectual property rights protection and other strategic issues related to trade .
This is due to a failure , on the part of the Chinese Government , to abide by the economic agreements put in place with the European Union .
in writing . - This report mentions China 's growing trade with Taiwan , which I welcome .
Under President Ma , Taiwan has made great strides towards normalising its trade relations with China and trying to end the obstructionist attitude that Beijing 's communist rulers have previously taken towards commercial relations with Taiwan .
However , if Taiwan is ever to be fully integrated with the regional economies of south-east Asia , it needs to be accepted into international organisations , regardless of whether or not it is recognised as an independent sovereign state .
Given various health scares in East Asia in recent years related to the movement of goods and people - such as SARS , avian influenza and the melamine milk scandal - it is essential that Taiwan is given the status of observer at the World Health Assembly .
Such a move would strengthen cross-straits trade , drive up quality standards in the region and elevate Taiwan on the international stage .
The way that China has used its disagreements with Taiwan to play politics with matters of public health is to be deprecated .
So too is the shameful silence that so many people in Europe keep in the face of China 's pressure .
I voted in favour of this report .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
1 .
Situation in Sri Lanka
The next item is the debate on four motions for resolutions on the situation in Sri Lanka .
Madam President , a humanitarian disaster is currently taking place in the north of Sri Lanka that is receiving relatively little attention .
The Sri Lankan army is carrying out attacks on the civilian population that could even be described as massacres .
A hospital has even come under fire and , according to humanitarian organisations , the overall situation is disastrous .
The Red Cross has raised the alarm .
The situation in Sri Lanka has escalated , and the European Union is not blameless in this , having torpedoed the negotiations that were held under the leadership of Norway by placing the LTTE on the EU list of terrorist organisations . This meant that negotiations within the European Union were no longer possible .
In Sri Lanka itself , freedom of the press no longer exists .
Recently , a journalist was killed .
The German ambassador , who spoke at his funeral , was described by the President as someone who should leave the country .
All he had done was to describe the situation accurately .
There is talk of thousands of refugees in the north , and I must make it quite clear that the whole situation there is one on which we should be focusing much more attention .
The European Union should be coming out very much more clearly against what the Sri Lankan Government is currently doing .
The attacks by both the Sri Lankan army and the LTTE are wrong ; it is clear that it is mainly civilians who are being hit .
We need to help the people trapped in the north and to achieve an immediate cease-fire , as it is quite clear that very large numbers of civilians are being killed there .
This is unacceptable , and the European Union shares the blame for this if it fails to state much more clearly that the support for the Sri Lankan Government must end .
author . - Madam President , Sri Lanka 's bloody civil war seems finally to be coming to a conclusion .
The LTTE , which has been blacklisted by the EU as a terrorist organisation , must now surely lay down its arms and surrender .
The EU and other Co-chairs have urged the LTTE to do so .
The LTTE 's response will show us whether it really has the best interests of Tamils at heart .
The LTTE is using its front organisations in Europe to maximum propaganda effect and raising money by extortion internationally .
Some LTTE militants may even try to seek asylum within the European Union .
Throughout this ferocious 26-year civil war , the LTTE has pioneered atrocious terrorist tactics , such as suicide bombings , that are now used in many other parts of the world - regrettably .
The Sri Lankan army has had , therefore , to deploy all the means at its disposal to counteract this brutal insurgency .
However , it is clear that the casualty figures claimed by the LTTE have been exaggerated .
Some have now been withdrawn - for instance , the Agence Presse story of 300 civilians killed , after the supposed author denied authorship .
Nevertheless , the death of civilians in a war zone is tragic whenever and wherever it occurs .
Clearly , the Sri Lankan armed forces cannot claim an unblemished record either , but they have not sought to deliberately exploit civilians and put them in harm 's way , like the LTTE has allegedly done .
If the war really is soon to be over , it is essential that Sri Lanka turn its attention now to post-conflict disarmament , demobilisation and reintegration .
The marginalisation of Tamils , at the expense of the majority Sinhalese , needs to be addressed in an urgent and permanent manner in order to ensure a stable and sustainable multiethnic society with regional devolution .
The EU should also ensure resources are put at Sri Lanka 's disposal to support post-conflict development .
Although we should support the Government 's offer of amnesty for the majority of the LTTE , it is vital that no one responsible for the most serious war crimes is allowed to get away with impunity .
author . - Madam President , Sri Lanka has been afflicted by internal fighting for decades .
This tragic situation came about as a result of the armed conflict mainly between separatist insurgent forces in the north and the Sri Lankan army .
During this fighting , thousands of innocent people were killed and injured and much destruction to property , infrastructure and the environment has been caused .
This sorry state of affairs has been exacerbated in recent months mainly due to the Government 's large-scale military offensive against the Tamil Tigers .
Reports coming out of Sri Lanka indicate that the situation in certain areas has , in recent weeks , deteriorated tragically , with hundreds of civilians displaced and caught up in the fighting .
According to Amnesty International , there have been violations of international conventions and human rights by both Government and Tamil Tiger forces .
Admittedly , it is very difficult in such circumstances to be absolutely sure as to who is to be blamed for some of the tragic events in Sri Lanka , but we must call on both sides to exercise restraint and to pay utmost attention and respect to innocent civilians , and to observe the conventions of war .
Since the Sri Lankan Government has the upper hand in the situation and is the internationally-recognised authority in the country , our call must , by necessity and logic , go mostly to them .
At the same time , we must call on the Tamil Tiger leaders to abide by the calls of the international community , take advantage of the Government 's offer of amnesty , renounce violence and seek to achieve their aims through political dialogue .
We must also once again advise emphatically that fighting solves no problems , and that lasting peace and stability can only be achieved at the negotiating table , which will inevitably happen sooner or later .
In these negotiations , compromises will have to be made by both sides and a solution found which will be for the benefit of the citizens of this beautiful country .
We hope that through this resolution we will help to lessen the suffering of the Sri Lankan people and to bring about much-needed peace in that country .
author . - Madam President , the Socialist Group in this Parliament is formally refusing to take part in this vote on Sri Lanka .
Last month , Parliament held a full debate , with Council and Commission statements , on the situation in Gaza .
On this side of the House , we attach the same importance to Sri Lanka and believe it deserved equal and proper discussion , but I regret that not one other group supported us in this stand .
A short debate this afternoon with a handful of people on a Thursday is an insult to the thousands of people under attack and dying in the north of Sri Lanka .
We wanted to call , as in the joint USA and UK declaration from Washington earlier this week , for an immediate and unconditional cease-fire by both sides , but the PPE refused to include that in the text .
We wanted to condemn , unreservedly , the bombing of hospitals and aid workers , but Mr Van Orden , negotiating for the PPE , refused to condemn it .
That is why it is not in the resolution before you .
To him - and presumably to Dr Tannock as well - everything the Government of Sri Lanka says is a fact and just about every aid organisation on the ground , from the Red Cross to the UN , can be dismissed .
Amnesty International today suggests the Sri Lankan army could be guilty of war crimes for its use of cluster bombs on a hospital - a 16-hour bombardment , according to Amnesty International .
The PSE also wanted to condemn the murders of journalists and other media workers by government agents .
Paragraph 4 of the resolution asks the Government - the very same Sri Lankan Government - to investigate their own serious human rights violations .
Colleagues , some of you may want to associate yourselves and your groups with those kinds of sentiments , but we do not .
Vote for this text and you are condoning attacks on hospitals and ignoring allegations of war crimes .
I note that Mr Van Orden has not even had the courage to stand here and defend his bloody handiwork , but I am hardly surprised .
In our negotiations , he just dismissed and laughed off as propaganda allegations of rape by Sri Lankan soldiers , so what you can expect ?
In the Middle East , millions of people - including many Jews - were outraged at what Israel did to Gaza , but that did not make them supporters of Hamas .
Sadly , anyone who does not support the Sri Lankan Government is labelled an apologist for terrorism and a supporter of the LTTE .
However , our motion was critical of the LTTE and their tactics .
We do condemn their attacks and we do want them , the Tamil Tigers , to sit round the negotiating table , but this war must be stopped immediately .
The Government must end its military campaign that has brought - as others have said - humanitarian disaster to hundreds of thousands of ordinary people in the north of the island .
Sadly , this resolution does not call for an immediate end to the fighting , so we will not endorse that approach by taking part in today 's vote .
We dissociate ourselves , President and colleagues , from this motion and I urge anyone else with the same views to do likewise .
I would like to start by saying that the resolution finally agreed is absolutely not one that I would have drafted .
I believe that it suffers from excessive complacency in relation to the government in Colombo .
I fear that it is another case of simplification , criminalisation and continued persecution of a group by simply arguing that it is a terrorist group .
In fact , things are much more complex .
However , I do believe that the current situation is such that Parliament should send out clear messages about certain issues .
For example , one of the key points that I consider important to emphasise is the Tokyo appeal on the need for both sides , namely the LTTE ( Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ) and the government , to understand that a cease-fire must be agreed to allow humanitarian aid to get through and for the wounded and ill to be evacuated .
Secondly , I think that it is essential to remember that there cannot be a military solution , Mr Tannock .
This cannot happen , it is simply impossible .
Now is therefore the time to negotiate terms for the cessation of violence , demobilisation and disarmament .
However , for this to occur , the government must stop seeking a military victory that merely prolongs the suffering of so many people .
A goodwill gesture would be , for example , to allow independent media and humanitarian personnel to enter the north .
Moreover , in relation to the Generalised System of Preferences Plus , the GSP Plus , I am one of those who think that it should never have been granted to a country such as Sri Lanka , given the serious and continuing breaches of fundamental human rights in the country , many of these breaches being instigated by government authorities .
I think that we should seriously consider opening an in-depth debate on the relevance of applying this preferential framework and , above all , on the consequences that it has for many groups , including workers .
For these reasons I call upon the European Commission to carry out an in situ investigation to establish the effects of the measure and to review it if necessary .
Madam President , the civil war in Sri Lanka has lasted 25 years .
Over 70 000 people have died in the conflict .
Today , between the Sri Lankan government army and Tamil Tiger forces , in an area of about 300 km2 , around 250 000 civilians are bearing the drastic costs of this war .
Hundreds of defenceless people have died in the conflict zone since the middle of January .
There were around 500 people in the hospital at the time it was bombarded by artillery .
According to the International Red Cross , the shells hit the paediatric department .
The terrified people are afraid to flee , despite the 48-hour cease-fire announced by the government .
They fear death or injury .
Both sides in the conflict draw attention to human rights violations committed by the other side , and both sides violate these rights .
The government predicts that victory over the Tamils is near .
The people who are trapped between the two armies may not live to see the end of hostilities .
We call on both sides of the conflict to minimise civilian losses and to commence peace negotiations .
Madam President , as a member of the SAARC Delegation , I was able to visit Sri Lanka several times .
I saw for myself on the ground how much the population is suffering as a result of the civil war that has been going on for 25 years and has claimed 70 000 lives .
Fighting between government forces and the LTTE has further escalated .
Large parts of the north have been brought under control and strongholds of the Tamil rebels have been taken .
What human rights organisations in both Colombo and Jaffna told me at the time is unfortunately confirmed time and again : ' war is an institution ' .
The humanitarian situation is alarming .
There are refugees in their thousands .
There is a lack of medical care and of food .
Aid agencies must be given unrestricted access to the civilian population in a cease-fire to be agreed .
The government has set up corridors to facilitate the evacuation of civilians from the combat areas ; it is incomprehensible that the Tamil Tigers have failed to respect this safe zone , are continuing to fire and are using people as human shields .
The Tokyo group , consisting of Japan , the United States , Norway and the European Union , has called on the LTTE leadership to negotiate the details of a cease-fire with the Sri Lankan Government at long last .
The launch of a peace process is in the interests of everyone - including the Tamils .
I expressly welcome the decision by the government to comply with the 13th Amendment to the Sri Lankan Constitution and hand over the competent provincial council to the elected representatives of the north and the east .
We also expect it to respect a guarantee of a careful , neutral investigation into the human rights violations we have just discussed and the violations of press freedom .
Security and stability must not remain a pipe dream for Sri Lankans .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what do we know and what do we see in relation to Sri Lanka ?
What reports do we have to go on when all the NGOs , except the Red Cross , have been evacuated from the country since September ?
Who should we believe ?
The Sri Lankan Government or anonymous witnesses ?
One thing is certain : the situation is developing into a final assault , into a kill for a government set on using force to put a stop to a rebellion that has lasted too long for its liking .
Once again , who is picking up the pieces , ladies and gentlemen ?
All the civilians , women , children , the elderly , of course , who are stuck in the middle and suffering unbearable violence .
This has to stop .
It is high time the international community really put pressure on the Sri Lankan Government so that it stops this escalation of violence and killing .
The European Union must adopt a very clear position and not make the Tamil civilians the people history overlooked and the martyrs of indifference .
Our European Parliament must not stop at this joint resolution .
We must demand an immediate and unconditional cease-fire , which will mark the beginning of a stronger commitment in favour of a peaceful end to this conflict , with respect shown for human rights and cultural identities .
( DE ) Madam President , the dramatic images from Sri Lanka reveal that a brutal civil war that has spanned decades is coming to a head .
As we all know , whilst it may be possible to end a war by means of weapons , it is not possible to establish lasting peace this way .
In addition , there can be no effective , lasting fight against terrorism , in particular , by means of weapons , as terrorism always finds a way .
Therefore , it is important to get to grips with the causes .
The next step must be to reach a peace settlement based on the following fundamental elements .
Firstly , a clear monopoly of power on the part of the unitary State .
No State can allow ethnic groups or sections of the population to arm and engage in armed conflict .
This requires , however , that this State comply with democratic rules and the rule of law and actively seek a political solution along the lines of autonomy , one that finally resolves Sri Lanka 's nationality problems , which are an old historical legacy and also a legacy of colonial times , and which need to be tackled urgently .
Therefore , I wish to appeal quite clearly to the European Union and all the countries of this earth to help with the development of democracy and the rule of law , with the strengthening of autonomy and of minority rights , and of course also with the economic development of a country that has been bled dry so appallingly by the terror of this civil war .
Therefore , if the guns were to fall silent at long last - unfortunately we are not at that stage yet - this would not mean the end of developments , but only the beginning of movement towards a peace based on the rule of law , freedom , human rights , minority rights and national autonomy .
- ( CS ) The Tokyo Conference signalled that the crisis in Sri Lanka might end and that there was hope for peace .
However , a quarter of a million civilians trapped in the conflict zone need safe passage and they must be provided with humanitarian aid .
Foreign observers must have access to the area in order to assess humanitarian needs .
However , the recent attacks on journalists provide no guarantee of safety for humanitarian organisations .
Although the government has promised to investigate the attack on journalists , that is no solution .
We must also put pressure on the Sri Lankan Government to sign up to the Ottawa Convention and to remove land mines .
I am sorry that MEPs from the socialist group preferred to go home instead of taking part in today 's debate and thus defending their different views on how to solve the Sri Lanka problem .
Madam President , I just want to add my support to the approach that Robert Evans has taken .
I think it was Mr Posselt who described the conflict as a civil war and , sadly , the people who tabled this joint motion for a resolution refused , according to my colleague , to term it a civil war .
I want to add support to what previous speakers have said about an immediate cease-fire .
The recent upsurge in fighting between the LTTE and Sri Lankan government forces has exacerbated the situation , and an estimated 230 000 internally displaced persons are trapped in the Wanni region as we speak .
Atrocities such as the shelling of a PTK hospital make the situation on the ground much worse and more perilous .
It is a very sad day , but we cannot support this , and I hope in the next part-session we will see a greater debate with more people participating on this very serious situation in Sri Lanka .
( PL ) Madam President , the scenario of tragic events in Sri Lanka is similar to that of other such cases .
In speaking of the tragedy of poor people , we forget that people are also the cause of the tragedy - not poor people , but people who come from the same environment .
To gain power , they use religious , tribal and ethnic differences , historical misunderstandings and other available means to sow discord between sections of society in the country concerned .
This leads to the destruction of usually very weakly rooted elements of democracy and to civil war with all its cruelties , to a disregard for human rights and for information , and to the total destruction of the opponent .
I endorse the resolution as an expression of disapproval towards those who resurrect civil wars and towards those who give them material and political support .
One kind of warning to the creators of such inhumane scenarios could be the awareness that they will be captured , for example , by international special forces , and sentenced to life imprisonment .
Madam President , Mr Evans makes a speciality of getting his facts wrong and so it has impelled me to stand and correct him .
No hospital has been bombed .
The press agency that filed the report withdrew that story saying it was erroneous .
There are not 230 000 civilians trapped : there are 113 000 who are being used as a human shield by the LTTE .
If they really cared about the Tamil people they would not use Tamil people as a human shield to protect themselves .
What bravery is this ?
Sri Lanka has suffered 25 years of civil war .
We need to help that country to remain what it has always been : one of the oldest democracies in the world .
It has a longer history of democracy than 22 of the 27 Member States of the EU .
It has had 16 general elections , five presidential elections and has conducted itself as a member of the family of nations of democracy .
It is a democracy that fought against a terrorist campaign .
And it has won .
( NL ) I should like to remind you that , a few years back , we held a debate on Sri Lanka in this House and that , at that time , the Sri Lankan Government was in the process of creating room to obtain maximum freedom of movement , including from the European Union , based on the principle of non-interference rather than mediation , to reach a solution .
I note that all the fears I expressed during that debate of what would happen in the future have now come to pass .
I therefore believe that we really should return to the position of mediation and fight for autonomy within Sri Lanka on behalf of the Tamil people in the North East .
If we do not do this , then Europe is partly to blame for the dreadful bloodbath that is currently taking place over there .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , as one of the Tokyo Co-Chairs of the Sri Lanka peace process , the European Commission is closely following developments in Sri Lanka .
We are deeply concerned by the current situation and the tragic humanitarian consequences of the conflict as expressed in the statement issued locally by the Co-Chairs on 3 February 2009 .
We look with concern at the difficult situation of thousands of internally displaced persons trapped by fighting in northern Sri Lanka .
Both Commissioners Ferrero-Waldner and Michel have already communicated publicly their preoccupation about the consequences of the hostilities on the civilian population and have called on both parties , the LTTE and the Sri Lankan authorities , to protect the civil population , as required under international humanitarian law , and to allow the safe and voluntary movement of people away from the combat zone .
The Commission is concerned about the information it has received concerning the conditions in which internally displaced people are living in the so-called ' welfare centres ' once they have escaped from the territory controlled by the Tamil Tigers into Government-controlled areas .
It is also important that international standards be respected in these temporary camps .
UN agencies , the Red Cross and other humanitarian organisations should have full access to these centres in line with international humanitarian law .
The Commission continues to be alarmed about the human rights situation in Sri Lanka , against a background of reports of extrajudicial killings , abductions and serious intimidation of the media .
It is very important that the Government follows up on the most prominent high-profile cases .
In her recent meeting with the Sri Lankan Foreign Minister , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner called upon the Government of Sri Lanka to take decisive action to tackle human rights abuses , including action against the perpetrators , and to guarantee press freedom .
The Commission continues to be convinced that there can be no military solution to Sri Lanka 's ethnic conflict .
An inclusive dialogue is required to agree on a political settlement so that lasting peace and reconciliation can be achieved by addressing the concerns which led to the insurgency in the first place , and to provide adequate space for all communities .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
2 .
Situation of Burmese refugees in Thailand
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the situation of Burmese refugees in Thailand .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , Burma is known as a violent military dictatorship in which a caste of profiteers has been able to hang onto power for many years .
Oppression and poverty have caused many people to flee the country , or to try to do so .
The country 's ethnic diversity both justifies and reinforces this dictatorship .
In large areas , minority peoples are in the majority .
They pursue autonomy and organise protests against the central dictatorship .
The military leaders consider their dictatorship necessary to be able to keep the country together permanently and to subjugate the rebellious people .
They are more interested in the territory than in the people who live in it .
By issuing major exploitation concessions to foreign businesses , vital sources of income are taken from the indigenous people , with nature and the environment being seriously damaged in the process .
The need to flee the country is further reinforced by the fact that no consideration is given to the regional majority peoples .
The regime is keen to eliminate troublesome groups , either by killing them or by chasing them out of the country .
Many flee into the sea in makeshift dinghies , running the considerable risk of drowning .
Burma 's neighbour , Thailand , has seen many refugees cross the border : according to some estimates , as many as two million people have fled over the past 25 years , and tens of thousands who have been refused entry remain homeless in the no man 's land along the border .
Unfortunately , feelings of sympathy or solidarity with refugees are even less well developed in South East Asia than they are in Europe .
Very often , refugees are sent home , even if this means certain death .
Public opinion shows little interest , even if it involves people who share their religion , such as the Muslim boat refugees who ended up in Indonesia from Burma .
Governments also give priority to good relations with their colleagues in dictatorial states , instead of bringing pressure to bear in order to improve the situation there .
Some in Europe even tend towards adopting a similar attitude , and we can see the disastrous impact this has in Asia .
This is another reason why we should urge the Asian countries to find a solution .
author . - Madam President , this case highlights the plight of a minority in a country where minorities are at best marginalised and at worst brutalised .
The Rohingya people have suffered double discrimination for years .
As Muslims , they are being denied the right to practise their faith freely , a right that we in the EU recognise as fundamental , and their mosques have been damaged and desecrated .
As an ethnic minority , the Rohingya people are systematically denied civil rights that most of the rest of the world take for granted : the right to marry , the right to move freely , the right to citizenship of the country they live in , and the right to a proper education .
In praising our own progressive achievements in the field of human rights , we in the EU can tend to lose sight of the fact that many people in the world lack even these basic entitlements .
We in this House are well aware of the plight of the people of Burma generally , but since the riots by Buddhist monks of 2007 , that country has rather faded somewhat from the public consciousness .
The appalling fate of the little-known-about Rohingya people , especially those fleeing by boat as refugees that are the subject of this resolution , has renewed our attention on the despotic regime in Burma , a country so rich in human potential otherwise .
The brutality of the military junta stands in stark contrast to the action of Thailand , which has only partially , in my view , discharged its responsibility for the Rohingya refugees as it unfortunately alleges that most of them are purely economic refugees which I believe to be highly unlikely , and tried sending them back .
Thailand must take more seriously its growing role as a force for stability and humanity in the region .
In contrast , we can expect very little from the brutal Burmese military leaders , impervious as they have been to our many pleas for years .
I hope that the junta generals ' contempt for civilised opinion one day comes back to haunt them , possibly in an international criminal tribunal , when Burma is finally freed of tyranny .
author . - Madam President , the brutal regime governing Burma has , for some time now , been causing thousands of civilians to leave that country in search of a more secure future and a better standard of living in neighbouring Thailand or , via Thailand , in other South-East Asian countries .
Amongst these destitute people are the indigenous Rohingya community of Western Burma who , in recent years , have been the victims of ethnic cleansing carried out by the Burmese Government .
Unfortunately , the Thai authorities have not provided those refugees with the humanitarian assistance they so clearly deserve .
Instead , it is reported that these people have been fiercely persecuted .
We call on the Thai Government to respect the human rights of Burmese refugees and to treat them with respect , compassion , dignity and humanity .
This resolution also gives me the opportunity to deal with the issue of the 41-year-old Australian writer of Cypriot origin , Harry Nicolaides , who was sentenced to three years ' imprisonment in Thailand for allegedly insulting the country 's Royal Family in a novel he wrote in 2005 .
Mr Nicolaides was teaching English at a Thai university at the time , and in his novel he only makes an anonymous reference to a member of the Thai Royal Family , and the incriminated work is clearly fictitious .
During his trial , Mr Nicolaides was paraded in front of the international media in chains and told reporters that he had endured unspeakable suffering .
Mr Nicolaides has apologised to the Thai Royal Family and has made an appeal for royal grace .
We believe that Mr Nicolaides has been subjected to enough punishment and ill-treatment by the Thai authorities , who have handled this case most insensitively and inappropriately , and we call on them , as well as the Royal Family , to effect Mr Nicolaides ' immediate release and return to his home in Australia .
To not do so would be most unwise , pitiful and damaging to Thailand .
Madam President , today we are talking about Sri Lanka , Burma and Thailand .
During other sessions , we have talked about other countries .
However , it is always about unceasing civil wars , about murders , about the violation of basic human rights .
We will never stop these atrocious crimes if we do not recognise the political forces and the unscrupulous external interests which lie behind these wars .
These wars would never be able to last indefinitely in poor countries , which would not be able to afford them at all , if there were not external interests behind it all .
Therefore , we must do two things to check this process .
Firstly , we must recognise what these interests and political forces are and , using political methods , tell them to stop .
Secondly , we must establish an expeditionary , police and military corps which will take preventative measures where political means do not work .
The European Union is able to do this .
author . - Madam President , the treatment and discrimination of the Rohingya people appals us all .
As a Muslim minority in Buddhist Burma , they are not recognised as one of Burma 's ethnic minorities .
They have few legal rights and , as Amendment 3 tabled by Glenys Kinnock highlights , they face deliberate impoverishment , denial of citizenship , denial of freedom of movement , arbitrary taxation , land confiscation and the denial of permission to marry .
It is no wonder that many attempt to leave Burma as they have no other option .
The shocking reports that a thousand Rohingya boat people over a 12-day period , who , instead of being brought to safety by the Thai authorities who discovered them , were instead towed into international waters without navigational equipment , food and water and left to fend for themselves , sickens anyone with an iota of human decency .
Only yesterday , an article in The Guardian highlighted other incidents .
The latest case involved 220 men , who were discovered in an open craft by fishermen .
These refugees claimed they were detained by Thai authorities on a remote island for two months , and that they were beaten before being forced onto boats and left to their fate .
The abuse and lack of international coordinated action to help the Rohingya must be addressed .
Thailand must also take responsibility .
The Thai Prime Minister must act .
The problems of abuse at the hands of Thai officials must be seriously addressed .
The Thai Government must sign the 1951 UN Convention relating to the status of refugees and the 1967 Protocol .
As Joel Chamy , Vice-President of Washington-based Refugees International , said , the Rohingya need protection and asylum .
Thailand has said it is unwilling to grant that , but that is a problem that will not go away .
There are ongoing reports of the treatment of Burmese refugees who enter Malaysia .
Many of these people are sold as slaves , the women and children are forced into sexual slavery and the men are sold as forced labour onto fishing vessels .
Some of this fish may even enter the EU market .
I hope that today , we can highlight the plight of Burmese refugees and particularly the plight of the Rohingya .
Two weeks ago , I had the opportunity to visit the people of Burma and the border between Thailand and Burma .
There I saw with my own eyes the injustice with which we treat some parts of the world in political and media terms .
All too often , we are only moved by headline news .
What we have seen in Burma , which is now no longer on the front pages , is a drama that is not so different from what has mobilised us in many other cases .
We have very clear examples of persecution , torture , illegal detention , rape and other atrocities committed by the Burmese military junta .
One of the most shameful recent actions has been the adoption of a so-called constitution that violates the most basic democratic principles and guarantees almost complete impunity for all the acts I have just mentioned .
It is quite understandable that people flee from this situation , as the Karen population has been doing for several years and , as we are today reporting in the resolution , the Rohingya people has also done , being intercepted in Thailand .
In this respect , I noted during my visit that both Thailand and the international community have assumed a disturbing attitude of submission to the junta .
For example , many lawyers associations , opposition parties , refugees and political prisoners have alerted us to the terrible consequences that would befall the Burmese people if the international community and , in particular , the European Union were to support and endorse the sham elections that have been called by the SPDC for 2010 .
They warn us that this would give carte blanche to the junta to continue committing a wide range of crimes with impunity .
The political and ethnic groups that oppose the junta are very well organised and have drawn up an alternative constitution that is much more in line with the principles that we say we defend in the European Union .
Therefore , for us to abandon them to their fate would be a mistake and would make us accomplices , whether active or passive , to the Burmese dictatorship .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday I saw some images of Rohingya refugees from Burma .
It is human suffering that characterises life on board these makeshift boats .
After a brief detention period , the Thai navy guided them out of their territorial waters and left them destitute .
And yet , Thailand wants to show itself as being welcoming to refugees and asylum seekers .
Moreover , as a direct neighbour of Burma 's , Thailand is well aware of the inhumane living conditions created by the junta , which is driving many Burmese to emigrate , risking their lives during crossings that I would describe as death crossings .
We call on Thailand and the other ASEAN countries to search for a lasting solution for the refugees , and mainly for the Rohingya people , whom we are talking about today .
We should also like to call on Thailand to ratify the 1951 United Nations Convention on Refugees and the 1967 Protocol .
Madam President , the problem of human rights violations in Burma has been discussed several times during the current term of office of the European Parliament .
Burma , a country known for its wonderful Buddhist temples which abound in gold , is also a prison for thousands of Burmese .
They live in one of the biggest political regimes in the world , from which they try to escape - to the USA , Australia , Canada and to European countries and their neighbours .
After adopting resolutions calling for the release of thousands of political prisoners , including many opposition leaders and with a Nobel Prize laureate foremost among them , and after protests from international organisations against the conscription of children in Burma , who are then forced to work and are denied proper care , today we are discussing the problem of human rights violations .
During their flight from this Burmese hell , thousands of people - members of the Muslim minority - have been captured in their boats in Thai territorial waters , towed into international waters and left without navigational equipment or food supplies , and some have been imprisoned .
The Muslim ethnic minority is also being persecuted by the ruling military regime in Burma .
This includes incidents of denial of citizens ' rights , imprisonment , limited access to education , barriers to marriage , restrictions on free movement , and the destruction of mosques , churches and other places of worship .
Although we should appreciate the permission granted by the Thai authorities for the temporary stay of refugees there , and also the declaration of the Prime Minister of Thailand in which he has announced an investigation , recent events are nevertheless an obvious example of the violation of human rights by the Thais .
Of course we endorse the resolution which , however , does not alter the human tragedies in the region , where the background to the conflicts is not only the inhumane military regime and religious conflicts , but also the interests of various forces .
It is therefore necessary to oppose more effectively both the military junta and the separatist tendencies of groups which persecute people who profess a different faith .
( PL ) Madam President , in recent years , thousands of Burmese have left their country for fear of repression by the ruling military regime and because of the spreading hunger , seeking refuge in Thailand or in neighbouring countries of South-East Asia .
This problem mainly concerns the Rohingya ethnic minority , who live in the western part of the country .
They are systematically denied citizenship , their freedom of speech and freedom of movement are limited , and they are denied other basic human rights .
The problem of Burmese refugees has a regional dimension , and neighbouring countries , such as India , Bangladesh and Indonesia , must work more closely together to resolve the problem and to provide the refugees with suitable care and shelter .
International agencies are reporting cases of the inhumane treatment of Burmese refugees and of their brutal deportation , which is synonymous with sentencing them to certain death .
When the Thai Coastguard pushed out to open sea a boat with a thousand refugees but no food supplies on board , it was an inhumane act and led to the deaths of many of the refugees .
In addition , the actions of the Burmese military regime and the acts of violence against the Rohingya minority should be strongly condemned , and calls should be made for them to have full citizens ' rights restored .
( LT ) There are two sides to these tragic events on the Burma-Thailand border .
It is regrettable that the Thai authorities have resorted to indefensible measures , all the more so because Thailand is known as a state which respects human rights and which takes in many refugees .
The Prime Minister has stated that these events will be investigated and that those who behaved improperly towards the Burmese boat refugees will be punished .
Let us hope that these pledges will be fulfilled .
On the other hand , it is not the first time we have discussed the brazen and inadmissible conduct of the Burmese regime .
I think that the European Union should take stricter measures and , certainly , we expect not just words but actions on the part of the larger states .
China , in particular , must put pressure on Burma to respect the rights of the opposition and minorities there .
Madam President , today this House adopted a report on minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers .
This must also be relevant to countries like Burma or Thailand .
It is to the credit of representatives of the European Parliament that we are standing up today in defence of the rights of a Muslim minority in Burma .
The situation has become shocking and alarming , with Thai soldiers forcing these Burmese refugees out into the ocean in boats without engines ; at least 500 are believed to have died .
For Thailand , the survivors ' accounts are damning , to say the least .
Sending refugees back to danger is bad enough , but casting them adrift to die is much worse .
Others have been left to work as slave labour in Thailand .
The Prime Minister , to his credit , has promised a full investigation , but we need to support him in acting independently of his army and following the international norms of human behaviour .
( PL ) Madam President , in this Chamber , we have spoken many times of the situation in Burma .
Therefore it surprises no one that the endangered Burmese people should make such drastic attempts at escape across the Andaman Sea .
Those who reach the coast of Thailand are often treated in an inhumane manner .
They are sent out to sea with tied hands and in boats without engines .
Forty-six members of the Rohingya minority have been taken prisoner by the Thailand Internal Security Operations Command after reaching the island of Phrathong .
They do not have legal assistance , neither do they have contact with lawyers for refugee affairs .
Immediate humanitarian aid and refuge is needed for Burmese refugees .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the European Commission , as a matter of priority , is following the situation in Myanmar and Thailand , including the recent incidents where refugees from Bangladesh and Myanmar were stranded in Thailand .
Thailand hosts approximately 140 000 refugees in nine camps along the border .
More than one million Myanmar citizens constitute an important part of the workforce in Thailand in the agricultural sector , in textiles and in the tourism sector .
The Rohingya boat people trapped in Thailand are part of the multi-faceted , forced or voluntary emigration from Myanmar .
Moreover , Thailand has other refugee issues to settle as well , such as the Hmong people from Laos .
The complexity of these issues requires a comprehensive political , humanitarian , economic and social solution .
The Commission is conducting an intensive debate with the international community and the Thai Government , in a search for possible solutions .
Recent political uncertainties in Thailand interrupted the dialogue with the Government on this issue , but that is temporary .
Thus , the Commission expects that the EU 's initiative vis-à-vis the Government will result in a constructive approach .
On 29 January 2009 , the EU Troika , at ambassador level in Bangkok , expressed its concerns to the Thai authorities .
It welcomed the Thai Government 's intention to investigate the incidents fully , and to share its findings , and urged the Thai Government to treat boat people arriving in Thai waters according to international humanitarian and human rights standards .
The Commission welcomes the Government 's intention to allow the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees access to the boat people .
The Commission encourages the Thai Government to seek regional cooperation , involving also the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , as the Rohingya issue and the other displacement issues mentioned earlier need a comprehensive response .
In conclusion , a sustainable solution cannot be the result of short-term security considerations , but must take into account long-term humanitarian , political and socio-economic concerns .
Despite the fact that Thailand is not party to the 1951 Refugee Convention , the Royal Thai Government has , in the past , displayed a measure of humanitarian concern .
The Commission will continue to remind the Thai authorities to strictly adhere to international human rights standards as a prerequisite for any solution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
3 .
Refusal of the extradition from Brazil of Cesare Battisti
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Brazil 's refusal to extradite Cesare Battisti .
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Antonio Santoro , prison officer , Lino Sabadin , butcher , Perluigi Torregiani , jeweller , and Andrea Campagna , state police officer : these are the names of four citizens who , together with many others , lost their lives between 6 June 1978 and 19 April 1979 , killed by the insane homicide of terrorist organisations that attempted to overthrow the democratic order in Italy .
And the name of one of the murderers is Cesare Battisti .
First of all , I would like to echo the regret expressed by President Napolitano of Italy at the decision made by Mr Lula , the Brazilian president , to grant political refugee status to the Italian terrorist Cesare Battisti , who was sentenced by the courts to life imprisonment for committing those four murders , during the ' Years of Lead ' .

Let me remind you that Battisti was found guilty not only by the Italian judiciary , but also by the French judiciary and by the European Court of Human Rights .
This is an inexplicable and extremely serious act , which cannot and must not go unnoticed by the European institutions .
We have a duty to the relatives of Battisti 's victims , but most importantly , we are also bound because the European Union has , for many years , determined an anti-terrorism strategy to guarantee citizens ' safety and to safeguard democratic institutions .
To stand by and watch would thus be to thwart the efforts made over the years to fight side by side against an ever-present threat .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats also hopes that Brazil will reconsider and think hard about what is a very delicate , but utterly rightful and legitimate request .
Brazil is a great democratic country and has always enjoyed an excellent relationship with Europe and with Italy , which is precisely why we have been taken by surprise by this door slammed in our face .
Indeed , for the sake of the friendship and respect that joins our countries , for the sake of the friendship and cooperation and partnership agreements linking Brazil and the European Union , whether politically or economically , the response of all parties must be decisive and effective .
Europe must unite behind the action of the Italian Government , which is using every legitimate form of political and diplomatic pressure and legal recourse so that justice may be done .
The decision taken by Brazil conflicts appallingly with the image of the European Union , since it appears to presume that political persecution and torture is practised within one of its Member States .
In short , we are dealing with an unacceptable situation which , above all , has no grounding in reality .
Madam President , I think that Mr Mauro has described the facts very well .
This man is a murderer : he has killed four people .
He has also been found guilty by the Italian courts of other acts such as belonging to an armed group , possession of firearms - a serious crime in most European countries - and acts of violence .
This man has been found guilty by an Italian court .
Yet we find that on 17 December , the Brazilian Government , a democratic government , has granted him political refugee status .
As Mr Mauro said , the European Union must express its solidarity with the Italian government and show Brazil , a friendly , democratic country , that a mistake has been made .
The Brazilian authorities inform us that the matter is still awaiting an appeal before the federal supreme court , but it is lamentable that the case has proceeded in this manner .
It must also be remembered that the European Court of Human Rights rejected Mr Battisti 's request for protection and that the European Union now bases its action on the respect of fundamental human rights , which is an essential component of the European Constitution .
Therefore , taking into consideration the bonds of friendship between the European Union and Brazil , the Brazilian authorities should be reminded that the EU is a good ally and friend and that we hope , in return , that they will not act in this manner , as has been the case in the past .
author . - ( SV ) I wish that we had discussed the Philippines instead , where the EU could have made a real contribution to saving the lives of many people .
We are now discussing an individual legal case that is currently being tried in court , in connection with which we have the gall to say that we will stand up for the principle of the rule of law .
Where I come from , one of the most fundamental principles of the rule of law is that a parliament does not interfere in individual court cases .
My group and I think that it is quite wrong to discuss an ongoing individual court case in a parliament .
Unfortunately , this is not even the first or the last time , because we will soon be voting on the Medina report , which does the exact same thing .
In an ongoing copyright case against Pirate Bay in a Swedish court , Parliament commented on the question of guilt while the case was still in progress .
I really hope that this does not become a habit because , if it does , it would be us here in Europe who would be opposing and resisting our own principles of the rule of law and that would be extremely unfortunate . Thank you .
Sorry , I forgot to mention something important .
If we are not happy with how Brazil and Europe are handling extraditions and if we are not happy with how our laws are interpreted in national courts , we should change the laws so that they are the same for everyone .
We should not barge in and try to influence an individual case .
That is the job of the judges , prosecutors and defence lawyers , not of Parliament .
We make the laws , and the principles of the rule of law dictate that it is the courts which subsequently interpret them .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is truly disgraceful that an MEP should take the floor in this House without having even read the text of a resolution written and signed by all the major groups , and so say things that are not true : the proceedings have been closed for many years .

Allow me to examine our problem .
The ravings of a terrorist and multiple murderer , condemned many times , cannot be defended by the government of a friendly country with whom we collaborate .
We want to highlight the need , already expressed in a letter to the President-in-Office of the Union , for a debate in the Council that , starting with this incredible situation and taking account of new , internationalised terrorism , will tackle and decide on a shared rule on extradition , whether within the 27 countries of the Union or between the Union and third countries .
Nobody can allow someone who has killed unarmed people and has used every possible means to evade justice and the victims ' relatives to assume the attitude of a victim of persecution and to create dangerous precedents to the detriment of the law and society .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , those who are found guilty by our courts of law must face the consequences and not be given refuge by any country in the world .
Cesare Battisti is a convicted murderer in Italy , and the stance taken by the Brazilian authorities to protect him from the reach of EU justice is not only unacceptable but also condemnable and deplorable in the strongest possible terms and we , and any other authority and any other body in the EU , have every right to say so .
I hope that the Brazilian Government will come to its senses and , in re-examining this case , will do what is expected of it and extradite Mr Battisti to Italy as soon as possible and before this affair begins to have serious consequences for the otherwise good EU-Brazil relations .
Brazil must not become a safe haven for convicted criminals and the EU must never allow murderers to escape punishment .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with this joint motion for a resolution , this Parliament will make its authoritative voice heard , at international level , for reconsideration of the extradition of Cesare Battisti and , above all , it will pay tribute to the memory of the victims and show its solidarity with their families who , for more than 20 years , have been waiting for their fundamental right to justice , denied for so long , to at last be fulfilled .
There is no need to say more , and so , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to dedicate the few remaining seconds of my speaking time to observe a moment 's silence in remembrance .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you , Mrs Angelilli , for that important gesture , which illustrates how different the attitude of this House is to that of the European Union , which , like Pontius Pilate , is hypocritically washing its hands of the affair , while in fact there are two countries involved in this case : Italy , which has paid an extraordinarily high price for terrorism with its victims and very difficult years , and France , which is involved up to its neck thanks to the woeful interest of the infamous left-wing ' caviar ' lobby , which already distinguished itself in the Petrella case and probably also in the role of the secret services .
In this way , Europe is undermining its anti-terrorism directives and losing all authority in the global strategy for combating terrorism .
I wonder whether the same thing would have happened if it had been perhaps a German terrorist from the Red Army Faction ?
Europe is , however , saying to Brazil that to fail to extradite a common criminal and communist like Battisti , who today even in prison dares to mock his victims , would be to downgrade itself to a country of refuge for the worst criminals and terrorists .
Such behaviour would call into question all partnership agreements and , I believe , participation in the G8 .
We must emphasise quite clearly : it is not acceptable to make agreements with terrorists .
Terrorists , sentenced under lawful proceedings - because our country has a great legal system , where no one is tortured and proceedings are legitimate - must then serve their sentence to the very last day .
Terrorists , murderers and communists !
( DE ) Madam President , I asked to speak because I was Chairman of the German-Brazilian Parliamentarian Group in the lower house of the German Parliament for 10 years and I know Brazil very well .
I am indeed surprised at the refusal of the Lula administration to extradite this convicted murderer to a European Member State .
I hope that the proceedings in Brazil will be concluded very quickly .
The Lula administration has made a particular commitment to human rights .
One aspect of human rights is that convicted murderers be brought to justice , and so I hope that this motion for a resolution receives strong support .
I personally shall make use of my contacts with Brazilian parliamentarians to see to it that pressure is put on the government at domestic level , too , to grant this extradition request .
( PL ) Madam President , after the end of the Second World War in Europe , many Nazi criminals fled to South America to escape from justice .
Attempts to bring them back and to bring them to court have been extremely difficult .
This led to such desperate steps as the actions of Israeli operatives who simply kidnapped Eichmann from South America so that he could be brought to court .
It is evident that the tradition of escapes to South America is not dying out , neither is the conviction that refuge can be found there and that it will be possible to live out one 's days peacefully and with impunity despite the crimes which have been committed .
Actions of this kind , like those of the Brazilian Government , maintain such a conviction and may , unfortunately , cause the feeling of impunity to spread greatly .
Therefore , it is extremely important that this motion for extradition be adopted .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission is aware of the Brazilian Justice Minister 's recent decision to grant political asylum to an Italian citizen , Cesare Battisti , condemned in absentia to a life sentence by the Italian judiciary .
We have carefully considered the Commission 's role in this situation , especially after Italy 's European Affairs Minister , Andrea Ronchi , called on Vice-President Barrot last week for the EU to support Italy 's extradition request to the Brazilian Government .
As was also explained to the Italian Government , there is no scope for an involvement of the Commission in this case .
The EU Treaty is very clear on this matter : the European Union 's and Commission 's legal powers in the field of cooperation in criminal matters are restricted to the legal space of the EU-27 .
The European Union can facilitate extradition between Member States , but has no competences regarding Member States ' relations with third countries on criminal cooperation matters .
Italy 's bilateral relations with Brazil on this matter are governed by a bilateral agreement signed in 1989 .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
1 .
Situation in Sri Lanka ( vote )
Before the vote on paragraph 2 :
I am here at this meeting but , as a result of an agreement made by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I will not participate in the vote .
However , I am here .
author . - Madam President , I am asking for a last-minute change to the wording of the oral amendment - if the House will allow - because we have now managed to establish what the confusion was in the joint resolution .
The wording originally said ' non-fire period ' , and that did not make any sense to us , so we changed it to ' cease-fire ' .
It now transpires that the official text from the Declaration of the Co-Chairs , which includes the European Union , uses the wording - which is strange , but nevertheless they use it in writing - ' no-fire ' period .
So , could we change the ' non-fire ' to ' no-fire ' rather than the word ' cease-fire ' , as this would reflect the official text of the Co-Chairs ?

Madam President , I think there is something else further down the line and I think Mr Tannock should tell us about that as well before we vote .
There is another small change .
author . - Madam President , including the word ' humanitarian ' aid , which is just to make it clear what kind of aid we are talking about .
But the important thing is to declare a ' no-fire period ' , which is the wording in the Co-Chairs ' declaration .
author . - ( ES ) Yes , there is something , but I do not know if this is a misunderstanding or not .
In theory , the version that we have from the oral amendment is that the text should read ' cease-fire ' , not ' non-fire ' .
Is this right or have I misunderstood ?
The text should read ' cease-fire ' .
author . - Madam President , I have just realised that , owing to the order in which the amendments have been printed on the voting list , I was actually reading out the oral amendment to recital K. I apologise for the confusion , but in fact we are now amending paragraph 2 .
That may explain why there was some confusion .
Could we switch the voting list around ?
I do apologise , but I have things down in the wrong order on my list .
I was actually reading out the change I wanted to make to recital K , rather than to paragraph 2 , so that is the one we will be voting on next .
I do apologise for the confusion .
The amendment to paragraph 2 , which should have been the one we took last time , is : ' Believes that a military victory over the LTTE , as envisaged by the Government of Sri Lanka , will not obviate the need to find a political solution in order to ensure a lasting peace ' .
That is as it is on the voting list .
Madam President , in order to be correct , I think we have to vote on recital K now .

author . - Madam President , I will now repeat it correctly for the sake of Mr Romeva i Rueda .
Recital K , as amended orally , should read now : ' whereas the Tokyo Co-Chairs have called jointly on the Government of Sri Lanka and the LTTE to declare a no-fire period to allow for evacuation of the sick and wounded and provision of humanitarian aid to civilians , ' .
2 .
Situation of Burmese refugees in Thailand ( vote )
Before the vote on paragraph 2 :
author . - Madam President , I notice once again that the officials have not actually written the oral amendments in the same order as they are actually voted on , so I will be very careful to pick the right order myself this time .
For paragraph 2 , we want to add the words at the end of the paragraph , ' as well as deliberate impoverishment , arbitrary taxation and land confiscation ' .
author . - Madam President , amended orally as follows for paragraph 5 : ' Welcomes the Thai Government 's cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and calls for immediate and full access to all the detained Rohingya boat people in order to define their protection needs ; calls , at the same time , on the Government of Thailand to sign the 1951 UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol thereto ; ' .
author . - Madam President , I will read out the entire text for paragraph 6 as amended orally : ' Stresses that the boat people issue which affects Thailand and other countries is essentially a regional one ; views positively the efforts of the Thai Government to increase cooperation among regional neighbours to address the Rohingya issue ; welcomes in this respect the meeting held on 23 January by the Permanent Secretary of Foreign Affairs , Kasit Piromya , with the Ambassadors of India , Indonesia , Bangladesh , Malaysia and Burma ; and appeals to 