Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 16 December 2010 .
( The sitting was opened at 17 : 00 )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Statement by the President
I have several things to say as we begin .
There are five brief points .
Thursday , 27 January , will mark the 66th anniversary of the liberation of the Auschwitz-Birkenau German Nazi concentration and extermination camp .
Every year on this day , we honour the memory of the more than 1 million people who were murdered there .
This gives us the strength to work together to build a peaceful future for a united Europe , a Europe which will not experience such nightmares again .
Secondly , on 13 January , the people of Lithuania celebrated the 20th anniversary of ' Bloody Sunday ' , when the Soviet army tried to overthrow the democratically elected government of the independent Lithuania .
Lithuanians defended their liberty , and today enjoy equal rights as members of the Euro-Atlantic community .
In remembering this anniversary , an anniversary which is important for Europe , we express solidarity , today , with the people of Belarus , who are also our neighbours , and who are still waiting for freedom and democracy to come to their country .
Thirdly , on 23 December 2010 , the European Union ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
The Convention , together with the European Commission 's disability strategy , will enable equal civil , political and economic rights to be guaranteed by 2020 to the nearly 80 million citizens of the Union who are affected by some kind of disability .
Fourthly , I would also like to reiterate that we are seriously concerned by the disappearance of the Chinese lawyer , Gao Zhisheng .
According to the latest reports , he is being mistreated and subjected to torture .
The European Parliament has already taken up Mr Zhisheng 's case several times .
Today , I would like to call upon the Chinese authorities to reveal the place where he is being detained and give details of his state of health .
Finally , since our last meeting before Christmas , the Belgian Presidency has ended , and the leadership of the European Union Council has been assumed by Hungary .
We are going to talk about both presidencies during this part-session of Parliament .
Since our last meeting , important political events have also taken place .
I am thinking of the election in Belarus and the recent clashes in Tunisia .
Both of these are on the order of business of our plenary part-session .
I would also like to remind everyone that several serious natural disasters struck in the last weeks of the Christmas period .
We sympathise with the victims ' families , and we would like to express our condolences to them and to the governments of the countries affected .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 13 January 2011 , pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to take the opportunity of the order of business to formally request that Baroness Ashton comes to the Chamber of the European Parliament to report on the actions that have been taken , or that she will take , regarding what is happening to the world 's Christians .
We should like her to come here with a report , so that Parliament may be informed about everything in detail .
I am sorry , Mr Salatto .
We are having an official debate about that on Wednesday at 15 : 00 .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to refer to Rule 173 on compliance with the Rules of Procedure , in order to point out that Rule 116 is being infringed , because this is the third consecutive plenary part-session of the European Parliament which has not included Question Time with the Council in the order of business , as provided for in Rule 116 .
Please could you explain why that is and what the reason is and ensure , in future , that you defend the right of the European Parliament and of its members to exercise parliamentary control over the Council .
We will make a decision about this very soon .
It concerns the Treaty of Lisbon and the new relations between the European Parliament and the Council .
We now have a bicameral parliament in the European Union .
The European Parliament and the Council legislate on equal terms .
Relations in the Union have changed , but I would propose that we do not continue this discussion , because this matter will be clarified in the near future .
Thank you , Mr Chountis , for calling attention to this . It will be clarified very soon .
( DE ) Mr President , what I find questionable is the fact that , with a view to possible future changes , a parliamentary right - namely question time - is being withdrawn without any basis whatsoever .
As you said yourself , the decision has not yet been taken .
That being the case , we should continue with question time until a decision has been taken , rather than pre-emptively acquiescing to a decision that has not yet been made .
I will tell you quite honestly that I think it is wrong because , in matters relating to foreign policy and enlargement policy , the Council is not a second Chamber but a body that , clearly , we must subject to parliamentary scrutiny .
( Applause )
I would like to thank both of you for raising this matter .
I want to assure everyone that I will raise this at the next meeting of the Conference of Presidents this Thursday .
As you know , the order of business is drawn up at these meetings .
We will decide how this matter will be handled in future .
The Conference of Presidents is responsible for the order of business , and we will discuss the matter this Thursday .
Thank you .
We proceed to the order of business .
Monday
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has requested that the debate on the situation in Tunisia be wound up by the adoption of a resolution , which is something we had not been planning .
So there is a proposal to adopt a resolution on the matter .
I understand Mr Cohn-Bendit wants to say something about this request .
Mr President , you are aware that the events in Tunisia have got out of hand , and also we can be pleased that Mr Ben Ali has left the country .
The situation in these next few weeks will therefore be very tense in Tunisia .
I think that Parliament needs to draw up a short resolution to ask some very specific things of the Council and the Commission .
You are aware that elections may be held six to eight weeks from now , so we do not have the time to wait until February .
The Union must act , we must act now , and our action must be based on a resolution that we should vote on on Thursday at noon .
I understand that , in view of the situation , this House will be very enthusiastic about finally being able to approve a resolution on Tunisia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not believe that the resolution will alter the situation in Tunisia , so therefore I am against it .
Concerning debates held pursuant to Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left has made a request for the debate on ' Brazil : extradition of Cesare Battisti ' to be removed from the agenda .
Mr Tavares would like to move this request .
Mr Tavares , you have the floor .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , some colleagues took the initiative of putting an urgency resolution on the agenda on Brazil 's refusal to extradite Cesare Battisti to Italy .
I understand their motives , but as I shall demonstrate , this is not , at present , a human rights case .
It is not an urgent case and it is not even a ' breach of the Rule of Law ' case .
Furthermore , it comes at a terrible moment when Brazil is facing the worst natural disaster in its history .
Cesare Battisti is in prison .
He is awaiting the decision of the Brazilian Supreme Court and the Supreme Court is currently not in session during the southern hemisphere 's summer holiday .
There is no reason to believe that there will not be an independent decision .
I expressed my solidarity with the families of the victims in this case , and rest assured I have no sympathy with political violence either from the right or the left , but we should use the urgencies to debate Southern Sudan , the case of Buchtar Tabuni in Indonesia , or the Palestinian man shot dead in his bed .
Is the Parliament going to allocate to President Dilma Rousseff , just after her groundbreaking election and for no sound formal reason , the kind of debate that we usually reserve for people like Mugabe ?
I would ask you to remove Brazil from the urgencies on the agenda .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group and , I think , all of Parliament , I should like to really emphasise our sympathy with the people and government of Brazil for their real sorrow in relation to the floods of recent days .
Hundreds of people lost their lives and we should like to make our sympathy felt .
At the same time , on behalf of the proposers and , I hope , all of Parliament , I reiterate our firm intention to debate this issue , because the request for justice has still not been heard , and because the Cesare Battisti issue needs to be further deliberated upon by the European Parliament , which must make its voice heard in the international arena .

( NL ) Mr President , I would like to support the request made by Mr Tavares because this is not a matter of urgency .
Mr Battisti is in prison and there is no reason to believe that he will be released any time soon .
We should not , in my view , interfere in the personal matters of people who are still on trial .
Documents received : see Minutes
Statement by the President of the European Parliament on the situation in Tunisia
President . - Ladies and gentlemen , it is with great anxiety , but also with great hope , that we have been watching the events which have unfolded in recent weeks in Tunisia .
Peaceful demonstrations in defence of legitimate demands turned into bloody clashes - which we deplore - when the Tunisian authorities turned against their own citizens .
Today , we pay tribute to the victims of these events .
We extend our profound sympathy to all those who have lost family or friends .
In particular , we remember the first victim of the clashes - a young man named Mohamed Bouazizi .
His tragic gesture has forever become a symbol of Tunisian society 's wave of democratic feeling .
Let us observe a minute 's silence in memory of our Tunisian friends .
Please stand .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Thank you .
Ladies and gentlemen , the ' Jasmine Revolution ' continues .
In many respects , this is a truly historical time .
I would like to express profound respect for the courage and determination of the citizens of Tunisia .
It is they who are the source of the changes .
It is , however , only the beginning of a long road .
As Europeans , we share the aspirations of Tunisians and want to go with them on the road to achieving these aspirations in full .
Europeans are particularly sensitive to social justice , equal opportunities , free speech , democracy , genuine pluralism and the ability to shape one 's own political future .
This is why we do not remain indifferent , today .
In addition , we call for the changes to be peaceful in character .
They must serve justice and the rule of law .
Furthermore , we have some fundamental demands .
Firstly , the release of all those who have been arbitrarily arrested .
Secondly , the conduct of independent investigations into serious charges of corruption , and also into cases of death and the abuse of force .
Thirdly , transparent and truly democratic presidential and parliamentary elections , monitored by local and foreign observers and , fourthly , we support the efforts to create a government of national unity which would represent all Tunisians .
The European Union and Tunisia have been linked by a partnership for many years - they are our neighbours from across the Mediterranean Sea .
This partnership must , above all , be in the interests of our citizens - Tunisians and Europeans .
Our partnership , if it is to be credible and significant , must support the Tunisians on their road to profound change .
We must help Tunisia achieve success .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us support the Tunisians .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the recent popular uprising in Tunisia is unprecedented in the modern history of the country .
On 17 December 2010 , a young university graduate set himself on fire out of sheer desperation after police seized the fruit and vegetables that he was selling for a living .
Less than a month later , nationwide protests have brought about the definitive departure of President Ben Ali .
The European Union has condemned the violence of the repression during the last days of the regime .
As I speak , the security situation remains precarious .
Looting and violence are still being reported .
Tunisia remains in a very delicate phase , although the first news about the formation of a national unity government is just coming in .
Despite some uncertainty , the message of the Tunisian people is loud and clear : Tunisia wants to be a stable democracy that fully respects fundamental rights and freedoms .
It wants free and fair , inclusive elections .
The people want to write a new page in their history and we want to support them in that endeavour .
Respect for the Constitution and the steps being taken , as we speak , to bring together a national solidarity government , are moves in the right direction .
Of course , this is only a start .
The European Union has never ceased to remind Tunisia of its international obligations in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Ever since the start of my term of office - since my hearing before this House in fact - I have repeated that enhanced status clearly means enhanced commitments in all areas of our relationship , including fundamental freedoms and human rights .
I have stressed in all meetings with the Tunisian authorities , on behalf of the European Commission , that they had to deliver on their democratic and human rights commitments .
At the very first session of negotiations on the action plan for statut avancé , I insisted personally , in an unprecedented and extremely clear way , that any use of the new Article 61a of the Penal Code would be seen by us as incompatible with statut avancé and with our shared values .
And , by the way , if there were still sceptics on both sides who thought that these values were shared only in theory , they should listen again and again to the voice of the Tunisian street over the last days and weeks .
What was this if not a solemn demand for democracy and for more economic justice ?
As Catherine Ashton and I stated this morning , the European Union stands ready to support a truly inclusive electoral process with appropriate guarantees .
We hope its modalities can be announced as soon as possible , once the government of national unity has been shaped and starts its work .
We are ready to provide immediate assistance in preparing and organising the electoral process , as well as lasting support for a genuine democratic transition .
We are also working on a broader package to assist - as soon as the situation stabilises - with , inter alia , economic development , close attention to the social problems faced by Tunisia 's youth , and consolidating the rule of law and the judiciary .
We will , of course , continue consulting closely with this House and with the Member States on this process .
The European Neighbourhood Policy is based on essential values shared by the European Union and its partners : democracy , human rights and an open market economy , with a view to building together a shared area of democracy , stability and prosperity .
The Commission has always stressed that these values were an essential component of our neighbourhood policy , towards both our southern and our eastern neighbours .
With its strong middle class , high level of education , closeness to Europe and overall moderation , Tunisia is well placed to take the leap towards democracy that people have now asked for with such force and courage , and I think everyone should agree that the European Union also has a strong interest in a democratic , prosperous and stable Tunisia .
We have a long-standing and robust relationship with Tunisia and close links between our peoples and our business communities .
It is my ambition , and that of the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , that we should now strengthen our bilateral relations on the basis of new commitments by our partners on governance , respect for the rule of law and for fundamental freedoms , and economic and social reforms .
We will do our utmost to help the Tunisian people to turn their aspirations into reality .
Mr President , the recent events in Tunisia should encourage us to reflect with a sense of responsibility on at least two issues .
Firstly , on whether policies to support the status quo in countries that lack democratic freedoms really contribute to stability , in this case , in our immediate vicinity .
Secondly , Mr President , we should reflect on whether the disappearance of Mr Ben Ali from the political scene is sufficient to guarantee that a real democratic transition will be brought about .
In my view , Mr President , the answer to both these questions is no .
Therefore , Mr Füle , there needs to be a thorough reflection around why the Neighbourhood Policy , in the spirit of the Barcelona Process , has not had the intended democratising effects , and how we could or should make adjustments to it .
Secondly , experience has shown us in many cases that , when there is a power vacuum , the most radicalised and extremist parties replace the process , hijack it and want to ruin it .
Mr President , if it is simply to defend freedom , extremism is not a vice ; if it is only to defend justice , moderation is not a virtue .
This ethical imperative means that the European Union must mobilise all its efforts to help ensure that this process is not derailed .
I welcome what Mr Füle said about providing electoral assistance to Tunisia , but I think that it is even more important to go a step further and support Tunisia through a European Union electoral observation mission .
It is not only because of this ethical imperative that is etched in the genetic code of the European Union that we should do this , Mr President , but also in our own interests : because there is no point travelling first class if there is a passenger in economy with a bomb in his suitcase .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we share the concerns about what is happening in Tunisia and express our sadness about the many people who have lost their lives during the protests .
The new and confused situation that began after the flight of former president , Mr Ben Ali , must now lead to the objective that many have asked for : the start of economic and social reforms to match the expectations of the vast majority of the population and the opening up of democratic forums , to ensure that civil society and the various opposition forces are increasingly involved in public life and in government .
Obviously , all countries have the right to determine their own path , but we are keen for these reforms to be carried out and for the changes to be real and not merely window dressing .
What is happening in Tunisia at the moment poses questions for all of us and poses questions for Europe , with all its delays and mistakes .
In 1995 , the European Union launched the partnership programme with the Mediterranean in Barcelona .
This was supposed to include economic , political , military and even social and human cooperation , but not even in the two key objectives has this been achieved .
In terms of the economy , there has been a drastic reduction in regional and infrastructural projects because the funds never arrived from Member States and those from the Commission remain in standby .
The promised free trade zone does not exist , but the most obvious failure is on the political level , and we need to be fully aware of this , Commissioner .
The Union for the Mediterranean was launched in 2008 , but remains a façade .
The summit that was supposed to be held in November 2010 has been postponed indefinitely .
The problem is that the various European governments are not interested and do not see any interest in real cooperation .
They prefer to maintain relationships with questionable regimes that are wedded to the defence of their undemocratically managed national resources , whilst millions of young people live without any future prospects but emigration , which is increasingly difficult .
It is no great surprise then that , spurred on by the economic and social crisis , the protests in Tunisia have turned into a tidal wave capable of having a heavy impact on the existing power structure .
European political realism is no longer useful as a result of the fear of Islamic fundamentalism , and perhaps the time has come to finally shelve that post-colonial attitude that tends to re-emerge every now and then in relations with north African countries .
Indeed , taking Barcelona as a starting point , Europe needs a new vision of its southern reaches and the Mediterranean , which must be more credible than in the past .
This implies a complete overhaul of the partnership and neighbourhood policies that have been followed thus far , and I would insist that you attend to this , Commissioner .
We cannot hide the fact that both the Commission and the Council were even ready to start discussions with Tunisia for an advanced status agreement .
On the basis of what criteria it was thought that all this was possible is still to be explained .
We need to change tack - change gear - and we are telling the Commission and the Council that this can be achieved by showing more conviction in giving Parliament a role in the elaboration and application of a new idea of partnership with the countries of the Mediterranean .
All of this is not solely in the interest of these countries but is , above all , in the interest of Europe .
Many of the problems that Europe appears to have can only be tackled and resolved by a productive and virtuous relationship with all the Maghreb countries .
Supporting economic and democratic reforms , as well as simultaneously deploying all the necessary antidotes to fundamentalism and terrorism , is a difficult road but is the only one to take .
There is reason to hope that the tragic and bitter lesson being imparted by Tunisia can serve to give all of us a better understanding of what is worth doing and what is worth changing in terms of Europe 's actions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Tunisian people for their bravery , courage and persistence in speaking up for opportunities and freedom , and I hope all can refrain from using violence and that there will be free and fair elections soon .
Citizens spoke out against an oppressive regime which has used bullets and killed its youth .
Only weak governments go to such lengths to preserve their artificially obtained corrupt power and wealth .
Regimes derive their legitimacy from providing for the wellbeing of their citizens , not from closing universities and access to information and free communications .
With regard to access to information , the Tunisian opposition used the Internet , and the Internet is becoming more and more important for peaceful opposition across the world .
I learned about the uprising by the citizens ' movement in Tunisia through the Internet and eyewitness accounts that were posted there , but it took about a month of the struggle before mainstream media and political leaders woke up to the realities of the street .
In the same week - last week - the French Minister for Foreign Affairs offered help to the Tunisian Government in the form of riot police and assistance in policing .
What is the Commission 's reaction to that offer , and where was the help for citizens in support of their rights ?
( Applause )
The confrontation between the Tunisian Government and its people took place on the virtual highways of the Internet as much as on the streets .
The Tunisian Government was known for being among the most advanced in the use of filtering and censoring software , and over the past month , it spared no efforts to repress people through these technologies .
Repressive regimes across the world continue to use technologies to silence free speech .
Today is Martin Luther King Day and it was Martin Luther King who said that a time comes when silence becomes betrayal .
Commissioner Füle , that time has arrived .
The United States has lost significantly in terms of credibility in its fight for leadership in Internet freedom .
The EU has a struggle ahead , about which we will speak tonight in relation to the upcoming Hungarian laws .
But the young , freedom-loving generation across the world is looking to the symbolic example that Tunisia has given and is looking to the EU for support , and there is no reason why we should not lead in defending people 's freedoms , including on the Internet .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I admit that I would have liked this Parliament to measure up to the pride of the Tunisians who managed to defeat the dictator Ben Ali .
Ladies and gentlemen , the dictator has fallen , but the dictatorship , the structure of the dictatorship , still exists in Tunisia .
Today , we need to be very careful .
European governments and the majority of this Parliament have , for years , supported the structure of the dictatorship , and the Tunisian dictator .
Just last week , most groups rejected a debate on Tunisia and refused to condemn Ben Ali .
The French Foreign Minister 's actions are just the latest example of the West 's complicity .
Why is this ?
Because of fear ; because people were afraid of Islamism .
We are right to fear Islamist dictatorship , but what do these young people , these Tunisians who were absolutely not Islamists , who were fighting for freedom , have to do with that ?
Mr Bouazizi , who immolated himself , is the Jan Palach of Tunisia , and when Jan Palach immolated himself , this whole Parliament was behind him .
We are not even able to stand behind Mr Bouazizi - that is the truth about this Parliament .
Now the Commission needs to act .
It simply needs to say one thing ; it needs to say to the Tunisians that it will not be possible for a democratic election in a country which has just emerged from dictatorship to take place within two months .
No democratic basis exists in the country .
There is no freedom of expression , and the media , radio and television are not free .
A state printing office is all that exists .
It is for this reason that I ask the Commission to take the money from the association agreement and to use it to support freedom of expression in Tunisia and not to support Tunisian government organisations .
Second , the transitional government is not a government of national unity .
Why ?
Because the majority of those who fought or those who are in exile have not yet returned , and are not recognised .
Time is therefore needed so that democratic forces - not the forces ' recognised ' by Ben Ali , but truly democratic forces - can develop .
The European Union must demonstrate that , for us , what is happening in Tunisia is the key to understanding and hope for all Arab countries .
Democracy and Islam can go together , and if we are able to support the fledgling Tunisian democracy , we will see that in Egypt , Jordan and Syria , and everywhere , the people and peoples will rise against their dictators .
We have a responsibility , all of us here , because in the end , Tunisians - who form part of the Arab world - are showing us that the hope of freedom that we saw in 1989 in the Eastern Bloc is now being born in a country such as Tunisia .
Tomorrow , we will see this in Algeria , and the day after in Egypt and Jordan .
For that reason , therefore , it is unthinkable that this Parliament could remain seated and say : ' Yes , perhaps ; we do not know ' .
We did not know in 1989 how Poland would turn out .
We did not know how Russia would turn out with Gorbachev .
If we ask for an assurance every time people demand freedom - that is , if we ask them to tell us that the situation will definitely progress in a particular direction - we will never support freedom , and that is why I ask the Commission to move , give something , show the Tunisians that the realpolitik now is the policy of supporting democracy and no longer the policy of supporting the dictatorship structure .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the upheaval in Tunisia is undoubtedly a reflection of people 's frustration at the country 's political stagnation and its relative economic stagnation .
The flagrant corruption and wealth of the ruling family elite contrasted sharply with the high levels of poverty and unemployment among ordinary people .
Former President Ben Ali paid the supreme price for failing to meet the expectations and aspirations of his people , but I do not agree with some assessments , particularly in the Green Group , that his government was one of the most repressive in the Arab world .
Tunisia has been an example , in some ways , of a modern , secular and progressive Arab country .
For example , polygamy and veils were banned and foreign direct investment and tourism were encouraged .
Tunisia has managed to resist the efforts of violent Jihadis to undermine the integrity of its secular society .
It is therefore essential that Tunisia 's political leaders - the new leaders that will now emerge - protect that legacy , because Salafist extremists will undoubtedly try to take advantage of the chaos and turmoil that will advance their dangerous agenda , which obviously also threatens European political objectives , including foreign policy objectives .
Tunisia 's new political leadership also needs to understand that poor governance and gross inequality offer a fertile breeding ground for violent radicalism .
I am encouraged that the interim leadership has promised substantial reforms because embarking on such a path will greatly strengthen Tunisia 's relationship with the European Union .
In the meantime , my group calls for maximum restraint by the security forces and for the arrest and trial of the ancien regime 's presidential guard leadership responsible for the shooting , in the last few days , of innocent bystanders , in a futile attempt to destabilise the country .
I congratulate the army on its professionalism in protecting the Republic 's institutions .
We in the EU must give the new Tunisian government of unity every assistance and also afford every assistance to EU citizens , including British citizens , who are stranded , having been in Tunisia on a holiday .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with some pride and much emotion that I speak in this House today on behalf of my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
The reason is that very few of us in this House have denounced the abuses of the Tunisian regime and what people had to go through who dared , against all the odds , to criticise it and denounce its practices , and particularly the torture of human rights defenders .
It took the self-immolation of a young man of 26 to make the Tunisian people rise up and no longer be afraid , because they felt quite alone .
The hope of freedom has been born there .
It took more than 50 deaths before the European Union dared to make a timid statement calling for restraint in the use of force , but without calling into question the sacrosanct EU-Tunisia partnership and without condemning the violence , Mr Füle , until Saturday .
The least that we can say is that the Tunisian regime has hardly heard you since your appointment .
These words about ' restraint in the use of force ' stuck in my throat .
The European Parliament has been mute apart from a timid statement by the Maghreb delegation .
It was only on Saturday that you spoke out on this , Mr President , and today a majority in the European Parliament rejected a written resolution .
However , the European authorities manage to be more vocal towards other regimes .
As a French person , I know what the responsibilities of the French Government are , and I will not revisit the proposals of our Foreign Minister .
Obviously , for some people , the colonial era is not yet over , but let us hope that all of this is consigned to the past .
Thanks to the courage of the Tunisian people , the Tunisian miracle , so dear to some people here , has collapsed within a few days and has shown its true face .
Today , the European Union has a great responsibility to stand by the Tunisian people in their democratic transition , but without interfering in it .
The European Union must monitor the electoral process and make sure that an independent investigating committee sheds full light on what has happened - on the violence and the corruption .
The Tunisian people must no longer be pillaged .
The assets of the Ben Ali and Trabelsi families must not only be monitored ; they must be frozen .
The European Union has failed .
There is a long way to go before the Tunisians regain confidence .
Things are still difficult today , it is true , and what is happening in the country may provide a good example for the Maghreb region .
We know that identical uprisings may take place in all those countries in which the West still puts its own interests above those of the people concerned .
Men have already immolated themselves in Algeria , Egypt and Mauritania .
It is time to move from words to action where democracy and human rights are concerned .
It is time for the European Union to restructure its partnerships with the countries of the South and to finally construct them on the basis of democratic requirements , respect for human rights and equality , or else it will effectively pave the way for fundamentalists .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , you made some remarks at the beginning of the debate about free and fair elections and good representative government and you asked us to support the people of Tunisia .
No democrat could disagree .
People will tolerate a lot from incompetent , corrupt governments , but push them too far and they will rebel .
It is a doctrine of internal security services that any population is only three days away from riots and civil unrest when the food supplies run out .
Are there any parallels to be drawn between what is happening in Tunisia and the European Union ?
The EU gives undemocratic and incompetent government .
It has a political class that is increasingly detached from the wishes of its people .
There is high youth unemployment in many countries in Europe as a direct result of EU policies .
There are already riots and civil unrest in Greece due to its purely ideological commitment to the European single currency .
Countries like Spain , Portugal and Ireland may soon follow Greece as their economies become untenable in the straitjacket of the euro .
Do not think that it cannot happen in European countries .
When governments become the enemies of their own people , then the people will eventually rebel .
I agree with what you said in your introduction but let us see those principles applied in Europe as well as in other countries of the world .
This item is closed .
Harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Mrs Stihler , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products and repealing Council Directive 89 / 106 / EEC [ 10753 / 3 / 2010 - C7-0267 / 2010 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , it is a good way to start the New Year with this debate and tomorrow 's vote on the deal concluded under the Belgian Presidency on this important report on construction products .
I would like to start by thanking all colleagues who made this possible for their hard work , their thoughtfulness and commitment to making this proposal a reality .
I would also like to put on record my thanks to the IMCO Secretariat and to the Belgian Presidency , in particular , to Mr Vertessen and Mr Haerynck for all their dedicated work .
As I said in my report quoting the poet Robert Frost - ' Good fences make good neighbours ' ( with an implied question mark ) .
It is important that we maintain the momentum to complete the internal market and break down barriers to trade .
As Mario Monti in his report on the Single Market acknowledges , ' Europe is still in a phase of ' market construction ' that requires breaking down barriers to cross border activity , cutting dead wood of national administrative and technical barriers and overcoming corporate resistance ' .
With this proposal we have attempted to make the single market work more effectively , we have attempted to have clearer and more transparent systems in place so that products placed on the market are of the highest standards and that the construction industry has a fairer market place to trade within .
Currently , the construction industry is facing the economic challenges caused by the global financial meltdown of 2008 and exacerbated by the slow economic recovery we face across the EU .
We should never forget what an important sector the construction industry is - 12 million EU citizens are directly employed in the sector and 26 million EU citizens are dependent on it - that is 38 million people reliant on the sector .
For economic growth , construction is essential for jobs and employment .
It is also one of the most dangerous sectors to work within .
Taking Germany , whose safety record is second to none , one construction worker in 5 000 will suffer a fatal accident during their lifetime .
The health and safety of those who work at the coalface of construction should always be remembered and it is important to have acknowledgement of this in the report .
It was with this in mind that we successfully managed on both sides to come to some agreement on the issue of labelling hazardous substances , so that the report was in line with REACH but also helps those who work with products which , in the past , have led to chronic conditions and death - conditions such as asbestos-related mesotheliomia and , to an extent , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease caused by working conditions and by inhaling dust .
The proper labelling of hazardous substances can help those with these lung conditions and illustrates how interlinked our work here is .
I am proud of the fact that this report was conducted and concluded under the European Year of the Lung .
Lung health is so often neglected and I was delighted that in this Parliament , we recognised its importance .
I would also like to briefly comment on SMEs .
In Parliament , we are urged to ' think small first ' and this should carry throughout our work .
This is why we have managed to create a second stream for smaller corporations to place their products on the internal market and the system should make it cheaper and more practical for SMEs to reach a larger market place which can only increase their trading potential .
On the separate issue over transparency concerning who serves on technical bodies and how they work , I think that we have moved the bodies which approve products further than was originally foreseen .
The transparency over processes and the approval of products can only help break down the walls and barriers which exist in the European Union today .
This should help companies in the EU and , in particular , the special conditions set for micro-enterprises are also helpful in these tough economic conditions .
In the European Union , we should always strive for better regulation .
Along with my shadow rapporteurs , I have modified the sections of the report which are no longer relevant or which were so unclear that no one was able to follow them or ensure their application .
For an industry such as the construction sector , it is imperative that the rules are clear and I look forward to seeing the difference these particular changes will make .
The scale is huge and the challenges many , but today , these new rules which will come into force through Member States in the next 24 months will help the construction sector as we attempt to create economic growth and , through this , jobs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank the President , who is doing us the honour of chairing a debate on an issue that is so very important for industrial policy and the internal market .
I should also like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Stihler , who worked exhaustively on this proposal and , thanks to her commitment , has enabled us to reach an agreement at second reading .
I also wish to express my sincere thanks to all the shadow rapporteurs and the Chair of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Mr Harbour .
Your collective efforts were crucial in reaching a turning point in negotiations between the European institutions on this extremely technical dossier .
The Commission welcomes the second-reading compromise between Parliament and the Council since , irrespective of its technical nature , this is a dossier of great importance .
The adoption of the regulation on construction products represents an inestimably significant step forward for the entire European construction sector .
Construction products account for 3 % of gross domestic product in Europe and , in terms of employment , activities related to the construction sector account for 6.5 % of Europe 's GDP and 7.5 % of employment .
Altogether , this means that the construction sector accounts for 10 % of the European economy , as the rapporteur noted in her speech .
Furthermore , the adoption of the regulation on construction products constitutes an important step forward in terms of simplifying and improving the legislation , whilst , at the same time , consolidating the internal market for construction products .
This was also the first practical application of the principles enshrined in the Small Business Act .
In effect , EU law will finally provide European enterprises - and particularly micro-enterprises - with tools that help them rather than the exact opposite , that is to say , forms to fill out , bureaucratic procedures and extra obligations .
I cannot but be satisfied by this outcome , particularly with regard to the solutions provided to three issues that had been thought , in the past , to be more complicated .
Firstly , with regard to the issue of hazardous substances , the Commission will draft a report on this important issue , keeping Parliament informed and , if necessary , presenting any further legislative proposals .
Secondly , there is the special treatment reserved for micro-enterprises , which have always been considered essential in order to safeguard the principles of the Small Business Act .
The outcome achieved satisfies this criterion as it retains the possibility for simplified procedures for micro-enterprises .
Lastly , various parts of the text recognise the need to reduce the administrative and testing obligations on enterprises , partly by introducing simplified procedures for CE marking , but also by keeping the use of European Technical Assessments optional .
In any case , as indicated by the Statement by the European Commission annexed to the Council 's position at first reading , we will need to check that the chosen solutions are truly the best to deal with existing needs .
In particular , we will have to avoid subjecting enterprises - and particularly micro-enterprises - to unjustified or , in any case , unnecessary administrative obligations .
We intend to monitor this aspect carefully and will add our conclusions to the report to the European Parliament and the Council , which is to be drawn up five years after the entry into force of this regulation .
I should also like to clarify that the Commission intends to work closely with the European Parliament and , naturally , with the Council , with regard to the implementation of this regulation .
To this end , I have asked my services - whom I thank for the contribution they always make to the legislative work of the Commission - to draw up a road map for implementation , which I intend to send to you as soon as possible .
This looks , in particular , at the so-called comitology aspects .
Parliament is a key partner of the Commission and I can assure you that I intend to continue to work closely with you , including with regard to the next phase in the adoption process .
Besides , 14 years in this Chamber were not spent in vain .
Finally , the Commission felt it necessary to present a statement regarding the departure from the common agreement between the institutions , relating to the deadline to submit an objection to delegated acts .
The Commission is keen to stress that the principle laid down in the draft common agreement provides for a two-month period to submit objections , which may be extended by a further two months .
In this case , the Commission holds the view that there are no special circumstances that can justify the violation of this principle .
The Commission regrets the fact that the principle agreed in the draft common agreement has not been respected and emphasises in its statement that what has happened in the construction products case cannot set a precedent .
I should like to thank Parliament - including through the President , whom I thank again for having participated in this debate - for the interest with which it examined this simplification proposal .
To conclude , I should like to highlight the advantages that we can expect from this new regulation , as well as those created for the producers and users of construction products , as well as national administrations .
We also confirm the Commission 's willingness to adhere to the obligations contained in the text of the regulation , in particular , to draw up the reports that have been requested .
Thank you once again Mr President , and thank you honourable Members for the commitment and cooperation you have shown .

Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to start by expressing my sincere thanks to all those who played an active part in bringing this regulation to second reading .
This regulation - as its title suggests - represents an improvement on the existing directive .
In the past , of course , building regulations were , to some extent , a core domain of national autonomy .
The fact that we have succeeded here in bringing the European internal market to the fore with a regulation is very positive .
Secondly , for small and medium-sized enterprises in particular , the regulation contains a number of important relaxations which will facilitate their economic activity and their dealings in Europe 's internal market .
Finally , consumers will , of course , also benefit from this regulation because it will considerably improve the safety and reliability of construction products .
I can also speak for our shadow rapporteur , Professor Mayer , who , on account of some constituency-related business , has , unfortunately , had to remain in his constituency today .
He asked me to mention that ultimately , at second reading , this regulation represents a compromise , a good compromise in his view , but there are nevertheless still a few issues that will need further work .
I am very grateful to Mr Tajani for pointing out that Parliament will also be involved in the follow-up work that remains to be done .
As shadow rapporteur , Professor Mayer feels it is not enough simply to regulate the behaviour of manufacturers of construction products and the sale of their products ; this regulation must be supplemented by legislation that also establishes the principles and practical rules for the use and installation of construction products .
In this regard , Professor Mayer believes that the Commission should consider giving the European Committee for Standardisation ( CEN ) a mandate to produce a standardised European regulation .
He would also like to point out that the Commission is required to monitor whether the new Construction Products Regulation leads to adequate harmonisation in all areas and does not result in further safety problems and unfair competition .
However , after listening to what Commissioner Tajani has had to say , I am sure that we will achieve this together .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my very sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Stihler , who has done some very important work in this highly technical area .
It is not only a technical report that we have before us ; it is also a highly political report - a report in which high political standards also had to be respected .
It was necessary to balance the various interests of industry , safety and the protection of workers , and , in the view of the European Parliament and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the rapporteur has succeeded admirably in doing this .
It was essential to respect the interests of the industry and to see where their problems are in this area of construction products .
It was also important to find a balance between the large and the small and medium-sized enterprises .
Our view was that the Commission was right to suggest that small enterprises need fewer rules .
However , that does not mean - and this is where the Commission 's proposal was improved upon - that a lower level of safety should be permitted .
The level of the standards must also be genuinely high , something that we managed to achieve in this area .
Of course , it is also important to place safety at the forefront .
This is of particular importance for consumers because , where a construction product is manufactured and installed , it must be ensured that the user of the product is ultimately just as safe as those who worked with it beforehand .
The third point that was particularly important to us , as Social Democrats , was improving worker protection and the fact that this has also been explicitly incorporated once again .
Mrs Stihler also attached a great deal of importance to this in her remarks .
After all , these construction products often involve work with hazardous substances and materials .
It is extremely important to ensure that the highest possible level of protection is indeed achieved in this area .
This level of protection will also need to be considered later - and that is something that we probably still need to work on , Mr Tajani - in connection with the disposal of these products once they are no longer needed .
I would like to thank the rapporteur most sincerely once again for her truly splendid work .
Madam President , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Stihler and all the shadow rapporteurs .
I believe we have achieved a good compromise in this second reading , even if - as is always the case with compromises , of course - not all sides are satisfied .
I would like specifically to pick up on Professor Meyer 's comments , as communicated by Mr Schwab .
I believe that we still have work to do with regard to labelling .
We now have good harmonisation of construction products , by which I mean the manufacture of construction products .
However , the area where we still have work to do is that of the installation and use of construction products .
One option is for the Commission to continue its work in this regard in the area of the Eurocodes and for there then also to be a mandate for this in the area of the Eurocodes in order for progress to be made .
The other option is for us to harmonise the field of application and use so that we do not fall back to the national level in this regard and only have European harmonisation in relation to the products themselves and not in relation to their use .
We need to do more work in this regard , and the Commission will also receive our full support if further measures are necessary .
I would like to mention one further point that was important in the debate regarding whether or not we should vote in favour .
Unfortunately , the Belgian Presidency made an error during the negotiations .
Following the first reading , it introduced new areas in the second reading - Articles 8 ( 3 ) and 8 ( 6 ) - without Parliament 's full consent .
The Hungarian Presidency has now addressed this in a letter .
However , I do not believe that the Hungarian Presidency has truly understood the conflict .
I would like to point out once again that , in future , if it introduces new items in the second reading , I expect the Council to actually approach Parliament and try to reach a good compromise with us .
Nevertheless , in view of the result , we do not believe that it would make sense to reject this compromise on account of a procedural error of this kind .
We will vote in favour of this compromise because we believe that it is an important step towards further harmonisation of the sector , a sector of major economic importance .
The compromise therefore receives our support at this second reading .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Stihler for her hard work .
It has been a very long road .
In Europe today , the construction sector directly employs 12 million EU citizens .
In addition , approximately 92 % of the manufacturers of construction materials are small and medium-sized enterprises - this amounts to over 65 000 individual businesses .
Clearly , the construction sector is vital for the European economy , and we have a responsibility to the industry to help support it , especially after the economic crisis .
There are many aspects of this report which produced something of a stalemate between many of us , such as the nature of EU legislation .
It is not perfect , it is a compromise .
Key issues included the declaration of performance or CE marking , where a successful agreement was made to ensure micro-enterprises do not face the same burdens as larger companies .
On tackling and identifying hazardous substances in construction products , we managed to broker a compromise ensuring no conflict with existing REACH regulations .
I hope that this second-reading agreement will have real results and will encourage the free movement of construction products , improve standards across the EU , and promote the recycling of construction products in future whilst , most importantly , not increasing bureaucratic burdens on businesses or confusing consumers .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the compromise reached in relation to some specific points that I feel are of vital importance to effectively achieve the objectives that we are proposing to reach under this legislative proposal .
I am referring to the retention of the rules on simplified procedures , which are surely designed to lighten the burdens and reduce the costs incurred by enterprises , and particularly small and medium-sized enterprises .
Indeed , I think that in the context of a negative economic situation like the present , it is absolutely essential to recognise the importance of the role played by small and medium-sized enterprises , which make up one of the fundamental foundation blocks on which our economy is based .
Furthermore , by introducing simplified procedural mechanisms and , in particular , by reducing the time it takes to place new products on the market , the new regulation definitely favours innovation .
At the same time , it also protects consumers , allowing them to gain faster access to innovative products without foregoing the guarantees of quality and safety that have to be ensured by CE marking .
Therefore , in my view , the agreement reached represents an excellent compromise that will strike the right balance between the needs of producers and those of consumers , thereby guaranteeing the proper functioning of the market in a sector that is truly the driving force of our European economy .
( EL ) Madam President , I must thank Mrs Stihler for the excellent work she has done .
We have all been talking about a technical issue .
Luckily , Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , has highlighted the fact that this is not just a technical issue ; it is also a highly political and economic issue .
We all know that construction is a basic pillar of the economy .
We all know that small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of our economy , an economy that , within the framework of the European Union , is in an extremely difficult situation .
Thus , Mrs Stihler 's report is also of great political importance and she has made an excellent job of it .
We have managed to achieve a compromise , a good compromise for everyone .
We have managed to strike a balance that will give us simple procedures , which can be applied without compromising the standard of small and medium-sized enterprises and , at the same time , the best possible result .
We have managed to sort out the issue of hazardous substances .
We all remember - and the older ones here remember very well - the issue of asbestos contamination of the Berlaymont building , which was closed for five or six years .
Imagine what would happen to entire states in the European Union if we were unable to handle the question of hazardous substances .
Finally , we still have to deal with the question of safety and transparency .
Here , too , I think that Mrs Stihler has done an excellent job in her report and in the compromise achieved .
To close , I trust that we shall deal as well with the construction of the European state as we have done with construction .
Madam President , as chair of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I want to associate myself very much with many of the remarks - in fact , all the remarks , I think - that people have made on the work that Catherine Stihler has done .
I think that taking over a complex dossier for a second reading and coming into our committee to do that has been a tough task which she has done extremely well .
I would remark that it shows the importance of the second-reading procedure in this House , because we have been able to make significant improvements to the text of the position that we received from the Council .
As Mrs Rühle in particular pointed out , we had some disagreements with them .
We have a letter from the Hungarian Presidency on some of the detailed issues which will be published with the Minutes .
I just want to make two concluding remarks in endorsing this agreement .
The first is to say to you , Commissioner , in thanking you for your work with us , that we need to work very closely with you on the implementation of this proposal .
As you pointed out , there are important aspects of comitology here and my committee is absolutely behind the need to follow up these proposals very seriously .
Secondly , I think that this is an absolutely crucial sector and we do need to keep it under review , as many colleagues have said , to make sure that there are , in effect , no market barriers put in place that are going to stop it contributing vitally to the European economy .
( CS ) Madam President , I am very satisfied with the text of the Construction Products Directive agreed between the rapporteurs and the very helpful Commissioners Tajani and Barnier for today 's second reading .
This should simplify the market for construction products .
It unifies enthusiastically , it simplifies documentation and it removes various unnecessary bureaucratic practices .
The view that the construction of buildings constitutes the provision of building services and not the marketing of products , and that construction activity also includes the incorporation into a building of any non-serial manufactured components , has finally prevailed , which is something I welcome .
Firms in the Czech Republic also applaud this small reform , because the old directive increased their costs without bringing improvements in quality .
The IMCO committee , of which I am a member , has come together and adopted the text unanimously , including the simplifications for micro-enterprises .
I trust that Parliament in its entirety will do the same tomorrow .
It will be another sign that the legal environment in the EU is improving in a way that will support the unified market .
( DE ) Madam President , I am not convinced with regard to all of the points of the compromise , but I know that the new regulation represents a definite improvement on the current legal situation .
First of all , we will get a standardised European technical language for the performance of construction products and streamlined and simplified procedures .
We have made progress with the European internal market and , in so doing , we have benefited the companies and also , through standardised safety requirements , the consumers , too .
In principle , I regard relief from bureaucratic regulations for micro-enterprises to be important and sensible .
However , we also need to take account of the fact that micro-enterprises that process construction products are also users and must also be protected .
I am therefore pleased that my proposal was included in the compromise .
This provides for simplified procedures for micro-enterprises in connection with the evaluation of the performance characteristics of construction products .
However , if they apply such a procedure , they must prove the equivalence of the procedure used with the procedure that is actually provided for throughout Europe .
This is the only way to ensure that the details of the performance characteristics are also accurate and reliable and that the safety of buildings is also ensured throughout Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the words of Mr Harbour when he stresses the importance of the text that we are debating and that will be adopted thanks to this agreement from Parliament .
This is because it is a new piece of legislation that will give important guidance to the market but , at the same time , will establish good rules to allow small and medium-sized enterprises to expand , above all , in this final phase of the current crisis , during which we must do everything possible to ensure that small and medium-sized enterprises can create new jobs and grow .
This is the aim of the European Commission , which is backed up by the real commitment of the European Parliament , partly as a result of the implementation and development of the Small Business Act .
Small and medium-sized enterprises will benefit from simplification , including a reduction in red tape .
However , as Mrs Gebhardt said in her speech , these rules for the liberalisation and development of the market also provide real guidance on safety , which is of great importance for construction sector workers , but also consumers .
I believe that this report is heading in the right direction .
However , the Commission does not intend to stop with the adoption of the legislation that has resulted from the agreement and the compromise between the Council and Parliament .
We want to keep working on this over the coming years , and I should also like to assure Mr Harbour - who stressed the need to move forward - of our commitment to produce a road map for implementation , which I will forward to you as soon as possible .
During this debate , many of the honourable Members have spoken about harmonisation in the construction sector , particularly with regard to safety .
I am fully mindful and aware of the problem and I am pleased to have drawn up the Eurocodes with the European Standards Organisation , since these are harmonised rules specifically relating to construction safety .
As you know , the Commission is currently preparing a communication on standardisation , which will be submitted for the attention of Parliament and the Council within a few weeks .
Therefore , Madam President , honourable Members , I believe that today and tomorrow , we are taking an important step forward .
To reiterate , it is not only a matter of technical rules , though I should like to thank the rapporteur for her patience in dealing with the technical rules , which , in any case , represent a snapshot of a major political commitment .
Behind the technical details there lurks an important economic choice favouring small and medium-sized enterprises , which can create new jobs over the coming years , as well as favouring half a billion European citizens .
rapporteur . - Madam President , thank you to all colleagues who have taken the time to speak this afternoon and evening .
I think Commissioner Tajani 's comments about partnership working , the road map and the issue of Eurocodes , which Mrs Rühle and ( I think ) Mr Schwab also mentioned , are important and that we take forward the good cooperation that we have had .
It is a compromise that we have reached and there are some things colleagues might have liked in this compromise that we did not manage to get in , but Parliament managed to secure 75 % of the amendments that we thought were important within this text , and that is no mean feat .
There is something that struck me throughout this debate .
The construction sector is so vitally important to our economies for future growth , for jobs , that I would like to ask the President whether we can make sure there is an annual debate in this House on the construction sector , to take forward the cooperation that the Commissioner has offered to us and to make sure that we always place the importance on the construction sector that this House should do , given that 38 million people rely on the construction sector for their jobs .
So , thank you , Madam President , thank you , Commissioner , and I look forward to the weeks , months and years ahead , because the construction debate will continue in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and I for one will certainly be following it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 18 January 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for the content of her report .
Construction products is one of the European economy 's sectors which is both vulnerable and important and which we need to harmonise .
I use the term ' vulnerable ' not only because of the way in which this sector has responded to the recession , but also , in particular , because of the number of workers and SMEs it has , 12 million and approximately 65 000 respectively .
I strongly support the notion that we must acknowledge the need for a high level of health and safety at work where construction products are involved .
I am also clearly referring not only to accidents at work , which occur fairly frequently , but also to hazardous substances used in work processes .
I want to add one final point .
The single market for construction products requires support appropriate to its size and specific nature , including for the vulnerable aspects which I mentioned at the start of my speech .
Consequences in the European Union of the dioxin animal feed incident ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the dioxin animal feed incident and its impact on the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , as you are well aware , the New Year started with a serious incident of dioxin contamination of animal feed in Germany .
The Commission services have been monitoring developments closely and in full cooperation with the competent German authorities .
I have already started considering possible measures which will ensure that our high-level food and feed safety system will become even more efficient .
But let me start with the facts of the incident first : the incident came to light when a compound feed manufacturer notified the German competent authorities on 22 December 2010 after having received the analytical result from a laboratory that a sample was found to be non-compliant with EU legislation after self-controlled tests .
Between the middle of November and middle of December of last year , a biodiesel manufacturer delivered seven consignments of fatty acids intended for technical purposes to a feed fat manufacturer who also produces fats for technical use .
This latter company was , at the same time , a registered feed fat manufacturer ; apparently , blending of feed grade fat and technical fat took place .
Four of these consignments delivered in the second half of November were later found to be contaminated with dioxins .
The other three delivered to feed mills in the first half of December 2010 were not contaminated .
However , until this was verified and for purely precautionary reasons , all consignments were regarded and treated as potentially contaminated .
A total of almost 2 300 tonnes of potentially contaminated feed fat was delivered to 25 feed manufacturers in Germany .
No deliveries of feed fat were made outside of Germany .
Between 100 000 and 200 000 tonnes of feed containing 2 % to 10 % of the potentially contaminated fat were delivered to about 4 800 farms in Germany .
As a strictly precautionary measure , all farms were blocked ; their commercial activities suspended ; there were laying hen , fattening poultry , goose , pig , dairy cattle , bovine and rabbit farms .
Some deliveries of potentially contaminated feed for breeding hens were also made to France and Denmark .
No food of animal origin from the blocked farms can be placed on the market until the farms are unblocked .
This can only happen after it is ensured through analytical results and investigations that the farms are not contaminated at levels above those provided by the EU law .
Currently , of these 4 800 farms that were originally blocked , 939 farms - mostly poultry and pig establishments - remain blocked .
It appears that no contaminated food was traded or exported from Germany since the incident was notified , with a few exceptions .
In the end , analytical results showed that the products were compliant with EU legislation .
This is an example of the effectiveness of the EU 's traceability system and we will continue to be vigilant in this respect .
The fortunate element of this incident is that the observed levels of dioxin in food where EU limits were exceeded have not been very high , which means that no immediate health risk for the consumer is expected as a result of the consumption , if any , of the contaminated products during a short period of time .
What has the Commission done to help manage the incident ?
My services have been in constant contact with the German authorities and they immediately disseminated all information to Member States through the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed .
They have also been in touch with the competent authorities in third countries , providing a clear picture of the incident to our trade partners .
Moreover , Commission officials met with stakeholders in the fats and oils industries to explore ways of further strengthening the monitoring of dioxin in feed .
I personally contacted the German Federal Minister for Food , Agriculture and Consumer Protection , Ilse Aigner , on 6 January , and we exchanged views on what needs to be done to avoid similar contamination and incidents in the future .
Today , I again contacted the German Minister , as I was concerned by the recent news from last weekend that a feed manufacturer did not provide a full list of farms which received potentially contaminated feed , and provided incorrect information as regards the use of contaminated feed fat in compound feed , resulting in an additional blocking of several hundred farms .
This concerns a very serious infringement of EU food safety provisions .
Let me say it clearly : the German authorities are fully engaged in dealing with this contamination and are doing their best to deal with it urgently and decisively .
I am informed that they are making available additional capacity for testing so that this is done and finished in the shortest possible time .
However , it is important that the wider implications for the approach towards the safety of animal feed at EU level are also urgently addressed .
For this reason , a team from the Food and Veterinary Office will visit Germany next week to assist the German authorities and to inform our overall knowledge and understanding of how this contamination happened and how it can be avoided in the future .
The German authorities are informed and have agreed to this visit .
I know that we can count on the full cooperation of our German colleagues .
This incident will also be discussed during the Agricultural Council which will take place in Brussels next Monday , 24 January .
As I have already mentioned , we are reflecting on measures including legislative ones .
The incident has highlighted the necessity to ensure the effectiveness of national control systems which underpin the confidence of all EU Member States and third countries in our food and feed safety measures .
In order to address this issue , I am exploring the possibility of establishing a strict segregation of the production of fats and oils intended for feed and food purposes from the production of fats and oils for technical uses , and I am considering the possibility of legal requirements on reinforced controls on dioxins at different stages of the feed chains .
I am confident that these measures , when endorsed and adopted , will bring the necessary improvements to our already solid food and feed safety systems .
Madam President , Commissioner , thank you Commissioner for the factual presentation of this dioxin scandal in Germany .
It makes me extremely angry , including in my capacity as a farmer , that again and again , we have to deal with scandals of this kind where the cause can seemingly be attributed to carelessness , but also to criminal activity .
We can put as many laws and regulations in place as we like - in Europe , we have some of the most stringent laws on the production of food and we have the lowest limit values for ingredients that could harm the health of our consumers - but still we are not immune to such dangers .
That is why it must also be a requirement - and the Member States are also responsible for this - that if the public prosecutor determines that criminal activity is involved , the magnitude of the penalty must be increased substantially .
Such people must not get off with a fine - prison sentences are called for here .
They must be put away so that they cannot cause such a disaster again .
Commissioner , I am very pleased that you have acknowledged that the German authorities took the appropriate sequence of measures - that was also my impression in Germany .
There was a certain amount of political commotion about the matter not being dealt with correctly .
We all need to get together and , where necessary , supplement the strict provisions that we have in place .
You mentioned one particular matter with regard to which you have our full support .
I , too , am in favour - and I am also speaking on behalf of my group - of the introduction of the strict segregation of food production from the production of other products to prevent such mix ups from happening .
You have our support , Commissioner , when it comes to improving our provisions and regulations further to enable us to better prevent such scandals in future .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am rather surprised by your remarks .
My perception of the press - at least in Germany - is somewhat different .
It makes me extremely angry , too , that again and again , we are faced with scandals in the area of food safety .
We cannot allow this to happen .
I am aware that regulations and laws alone cannot prevent criminal activities in this area .
However , we must do everything we can to make it as difficult as possible for those responsible .
The Commission must call on the Member States to urgently review the level of their penalties in this area .
The wilful and negligent handling of food and feed must not be punished with trivial penalties .
Often , the fine is so low compared with the profit that it is paid out of the petty cash .
It is also extremely important to increase the number of state inspectors .
The current example in Germany demonstrates very well that the principle of self-checking has major shortcomings .
I would like to point out that the polluter pays principle needs to be applied consistently throughout the whole chain - from trough to table .
After all , the safety of our food begins with what we feed to our animals .
Innocent people should not have to suffer the consequences of the criminal behaviour of others .
As yet , it is not clear who will pay for the losses suffered by farmers as a result of the dioxin scandal .
One thing is certain : it will not be the polluters that have gone bankrupt , as there is absolutely no money left there .
This is unacceptable .
In this regard , a European fund should be considered that all feedstuff manufacturers would have to pay into .
The problems that keep occurring in connection with food safety continue to make one thing clear : for the whole process chain , for both food as well as feed , we need to ensure complete traceability .
The EU regulation and national legislation need to be improved in this regard .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have experienced four incidents of this type in Europe within 10 years .
While we must be pleased that our rapid alert system has worked properly , it is completely unacceptable for this type of incident to have occurred .
The health of European consumers must not be the adjustment variable in a system which prioritises cost reduction and which essentially indirectly encourages such incidents when the penalties are as weak as they are .
However , Commissioner , we need to have the confidence of our fellow citizens , as you know better than anyone .
What actions are you intending to take , then ?
You spoke just now - and I am pleased about this - of a requirement to segregate the production of industrial oils and oils intended for food .
This must be an obligation , Commissioner , and not simply an option in the manufacturing process ; that way , we will have much more certainty .
Second , it is totally unfair that manufacturers can declare insolvency in this way .
What actions can we take , Commissioner , to ensure that such acts do not go unpunished ?
Responsibility is still the best guardian of security .
Lastly , what actions do you intend to take to improve the supervision established by the Member States ?
The alert was given nearly three weeks after these oils were delivered .
Of course , that is hardly the Commission 's fault , but , quite simply , it is a problem for consumers in the meantime .
Do you think that we can improve the situation in this regard , Commissioner ?
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that the confidence of consumers has been badly shaken once again and consumers are , quite naturally , asking themselves what the national authorities are doing and what is the EU doing to put a stop to the work of these contaminators .
In contrast to the Commissioner , I do not believe that it was an accident or mere chance .
I believe that behind this , there is a system whereby particular companies earn millions from a blend of substances that do not actually belong in feed .
They then evade liability and farmers and consumers pay the price .
I believe that this needs to be our starting point , and we of course also need to ask ourselves whether the checks are being made in the wrong place ?
In Germany , there are a handful of companies in the feed sector that work with fat .
Why do we not apply targeted checks there ?
Why do we rely on self checks and receive values rather randomly that then require state checks to be carried out ex post ?
In other words , we need a risk-based form of monitoring throughout Europe .
Therefore , Commissioner , my question to you is : what is the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) doing in this regard ?
Is this a German case or are there other cases in Europe that are perhaps yet to be discovered ?
I believe we are in agreement that we need a positive list of what feed is actually permitted to contain .
We need strict authorisation rules for the companies and we need a liability obligation and the separation of the commodity flows .
However , I believe - and this needs to be reiterated here - that we also need a fundamental change of course in many policy areas , because , at the end of the day , feed for animals should come from our fields and not from industrial enterprises .
Farmers need to know what they are feeding their animals , and consumers also need to know where the feed comes from .
We need to ensure that this is the case .
We can , and must , start the agricultural reform here , by turning this situation around again , because ultimately , the whole of agriculture suffers as a result of the damage caused here by a few criminals contaminating feed , and that is something that we must prevent as a matter of principle .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I sympathise totally with the position that many German farmers find themselves in at the present time .
I had this experience about two years ago in Northern Ireland when we went through a very similar exercise .
The people who really suffered in this were the farmers who were not actually involved in any way at all .
I think the word ' criminal ' has been mentioned here and there are those with criminal intent who have been involved in this .
We have to ask why they do it , and whether they are doing it to make a lot of extra money , as Mr Häusling says .
If they are , they should be prosecuted for it .
But we should make it very clear that it is not those who are producing food that are responsible .
It is the providers of the feed to those who are producing the food that are responsible .
We must take action against these people to make sure that it does not happen and to restore consumer confidence .
I can well understand why consumer confidence should be shaken at this moment .
As someone said , this has happened before and it should not be allowed to happen again .
Let us not simply go wholesale and bring in new legislation .
Let us implement what we have .
Madam President , grinding , mixing , cheating - these are the three buzzwords of the feed industry in Germany .
Since 1999 , there have been five dioxin scandals in Germany alone .
Feed manufacturers and large food companies are clearly not concerned about EU directives and national legislation when it comes to making large profits with cheap food .
Competition for the lowest price in the food market is fierce in Germany .
Feed for intensive livestock farming is therefore intended to be as cheap as possible .
State checks are rarely carried out on feed and food producers .
The state has increasingly relied on self checking by the manufacturer and saved itself the expense of employing qualified staff .
Under these conditions , technical fat waste contaminated with dioxins was able to find its way into the feed and foodstuffs chain .
The current dioxin scandal could have been prevented if the fat had been tested for dioxins before it was mixed into the feed .
The contamination would then have been detected in time .
Numerous consumers have now been contaminated with additional dioxins once again .
Eighty percent of our intake of dioxins enters our bodies via foodstuffs of animal origin - in other words , meat , milk and eggs .
Foodwatch is rightly demanding that feed manufacturers be placed under obligation to test every batch of feed ingredients for dioxins and PCBs before they mix the feed .
Absolutely no ingredients that do not comply with the limit values may be included in the feed .
Highly contaminated batches must be destroyed , and it must be possible to prove that this has indeed been done .
That is the only way to prevent further adulteration and dilution of contaminants .
Laboratories must also be placed under obligation to report cases where the limit values are exceeded to the national supervisory authorities .
We need to introduce a labelling requirement for meat to enable its traceability .
The current and previous food scandals in Germany have shown that routine state checks on the feed manufacturers and animal producers are essential .
How do you intend to implement that Commissioner ?
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , consumers and farmers must be better protected against irresponsible feed and feed fat adulterators .
We must put a stop to the work of these adulterators throughout Europe .
One fellow Member has just spoken solely about Germany , but we have unfortunately had dioxin and other similar scandals in the past in other Member States , too .
First and foremost , it is a matter for the public prosecutor , because these are criminal acts .
I hope that the public prosecutors in Germany and the organisations from other countries that may perhaps still be involved - there was also mention of the Netherlands being part of the chain - will work faster than the public prosecutors in Ireland .
There , the people responsible for a scandal in 2008 have only now been prosecuted .
We need to be faster in this regard in general .
I would ask that we put this scandal - and it is a scandal - into the right perspective .
The values were a maximum of four times too high .
That is bad , and there are good reasons why we have a precautionary level that must not be exceeded .
However , the precautionary level has been deliberately chosen so that we only reach the range in which long-term damage was seen in animal experiments at 100 times this limit .
Thus , there is no acute risk ; it is a matter of precaution .
In the case of the scandal in Belgium in 1999 , the values were 700 times higher than the current EU limit value .
We have also reduced dioxin contamination in the environment to a tenth of what it was in 1990 through EU measures - for example , through chemicals legislation , improved standards in connection with waste incineration plants and so on .
Nevertheless , we need measures that have to be taken in the foodstuffs chain throughout Europe .
We need dioxin monitoring , we need segregation of the fats , in my opinion , we need an EU-wide purity requirement for feed , and we need better protection for farmers who are not able to prevent such carelessness and criminal scheming from occurring again and again in the feedstuffs chain .
( PT ) Madam President , I cannot stress the point enough that Europe has unquestionably far more rigorous quality standards for food products than anywhere else in the world .
Our consumers , our export markets and our producers alike all demand that we make a huge effort and significant investment to maintain these standards .
If the contamination that occurred recently in Germany had happened in many other parts of the world , the chances are that we would not even have heard of it .
It did not , however .
It happened right here in the European Union .
What happened in Germany is unacceptable , and not only must it be fully investigated , but the perpetrators must also be held responsible for what appears to be a crime rather than an accident .
The origin of the contamination still remains unclear and I find that very alarming .
There appears to be no clear definition of the liability of the German authorities for any failure in their supervisory responsibilities .
It seems that the fact came to light due to a company communication and not through the controls implemented by the authorities .
The people responsible for this have not been identified and the seriousness of the situation demands objective elucidation on the part of the Commission .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the current dioxin incident is more than just a scandal .
The people of Europe have been shown their reflection .
How long have we been complaining that there is an extreme fight for prices and survival going on in agriculture , fuelled by the insatiable demand for ever cheaper food .
For a long time now , this fight has been more than simply a trial of strength .
Individuals are increasingly resorting to criminal means and methods .
However , we will all lose out in the end as a result .
We can enact more laws and directives , we can carry out more checks at even more cost , we can impose more severe penalties - none of these things will succeed against the criminal energy fuelled by such a tough fight for existence .
We must finally tackle the causes of this problem .
We must at last put an end to the constant demand for more and cheaper food .
As a farmer , I have experienced the powerlessness against the criminal activities of certain individuals - as in this case - on my own doorstep .
Together with my professional colleagues , I have shuddered at the thought of who will be next in line and innocently drawn into this maelstrom .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission : what do you and your colleagues intend to do to restore the value of food ?
I welcome your proposals , but with these you will not solve the main problem .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this scandal gives me a real sense of déjà vu , because the course the crisis has taken is , indeed , almost identical to the one that occurred twelve years ago in Belgium .
Far too many incidents over the past ten years have shown that there are quite a few players operating in the animal feed oils and fats industry who , out of unscrupulous greed and in a criminal way , are prepared to commit fraud , fraud that is detrimental to farmers ' income and consumer health .
That is unacceptable .
Hence , there is indeed a need for the existing legislation to undergo a stress test .
I hope that the Agriculture Council will comment on this .
However , there is also a need for monitoring and surveillance .
There is still a great deal of self-monitoring in the industry .
National authorities need to carry out additional , more stringent checks on all forms of self-monitoring .
This should be done in a proportionate way .
Secondly , I think that the Irish Food and Veterinary Office should carry out more monitoring .
We need more monitoring of those doing the monitoring .
I have read that , in the past ten years , the FVO has undertaken only three missions .
That is too few and we need to increase that number .
Commissioner , are you going to instruct the FVO to carry out a number of missions regarding the dioxin problems ?
Madam President , over the many years it has been in operation , the European Union has created an enormously complex structure of various rules and regulations , which ought to give the public the impression that the Union cares about the purity and quality of our food .
In order to reinforce this message , it has employed many different specialists , inspectors , vets and officials , developing a complex institutional behemoth to guarantee European food quality .
Ladies and gentlemen , today we see how well it is doing .
Europe is awash with badly contaminated foods , and our bureaucratic apparatus clearly does not know what to do about it .
In order to understand the seriousness of the situation , let us recall what this wheeler-dealing with food has served up for us .
The scientific community considers dioxins to be the most poisonous chemical that man has ever produced .
They are carcinogens of the most serious category , but they also cause reductions in cell and hormonal immunity , greater susceptibility to infection , reduced fertility , increased abortions , dysfunctional ovaries , childbirth problems , greater infant mortality , problems with the development of the central nervous system , pathological changes to steroid hormones and receptors , and so on .
They do not break down .
They accumulate in the tissues of living organisms , and the World Health Organisation states that if a quantity of dioxin amounting to one grain of rice gets into circulation , it is equivalent to the annual limit for one million people .
We are also finding out today that the German company Harles and Jentzsch has been adding dioxins to animal fodder , and has supplied up to 3 000 tonnes of dioxin-contaminated fat to the market since March 2010 .
According to current findings , contaminated eggs have made their way to the Netherlands and the United Kingdom , and contaminated meat to France and Denmark .
I would therefore like to ask , Commissioner , how is it possible that a company supplying feed mixes to thousands of farmers is not registered in a regulated control system ?
What sort of cooperation can we be getting from state institutions in Germany when a company can produce feed mixes without , at the same time , being registered in a system of control ?
What sort of veterinary controls can there be at farms , when veterinary inspectors have failed to identify the contamination of the fodder since March 2010 ?
Ladies and gentlemen , what is happening about the disposal of these foods ?
We talk about the disposed eggs and the disposed meat and what ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Madam President , we are dealing with a scandal , but calling it a scandal is putting it too mildly .
It is a major threat to the life and health of thousands of people .
I hope those who are responsible will be identified and appropriately punished , but I hope this matter will also be cause for reflection on the model of agriculture which has arisen in the European Union .
Agriculture has become an industry .
We do not have animal husbandry any more - we have meat production .
We have huge farms , we have the animal feed industry and we have animals raised on feed - and the feed contains dioxins .
The feed also contains genetically modified materials which have not been fully tested , and this model of agriculture does not work .
It is a model which does not guarantee food safety .
The solution is greater respect and regard for those farms , which we still have in Europe - in Poland and in other countries - which are based on feed they produce themselves .
We ought to support this .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the company responsible knew as early as March 2010 that it was selling products with dangerously high dioxin levels .
How is it possible that this was not detected by any of the national authority inspections , so that action could be taken at that stage ?
Are the current mechanisms for monitoring the safety of our food really adequate ?
It would appear that they are not because , if they were , this dioxin crisis could have been prevented .
There seems to be any number of food scandals .
Not just the dioxin crisis , but think also of the cloned products that ended up in our shops unnoticed last year .
We have enough rules , but the monitoring of food safety must be more effective and more frequent and , moreover , the results of these inspections should be made public .
This is about the safety of our food and the health of our citizens .
In addition , I call on the Commission to support the claims for damages being brought against the companies responsible by the duped farmers who unknowingly poisoned their own cattle .
Madam President , I would like to declare an interest : I am a British egg producer .
The dioxin contamination appears to be a consequence of the failure to adhere to the more rigorous processing standards needed for animal feed , as opposed to the less demanding process used to convert rapeseed to biofuel .
The EU 's enthusiasm for biofuels can therefore have unintended consequences .
In my view , however , this is not a matter for the EU .
It will not be solved by - and certainly does not need - extra regulation .
The Germans have identified a problem , they have told us about it and they are taking the necessary steps .
In the UK , we have a comprehensive assurance scheme called the Lion Code .
It covers both animal feed production in the mill and egg production on the farm , thus ensuring that incidents like this are highly unlikely .
So , if any of you are insistent on top quality eggs , ' ask for the Lion ' and British producers will be delighted to supply you .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , first of all , I believe that we should be pleased , because we may be talking about a crisis today , but this is because our system has worked .
We have the strongest consumer protection system in the world .
Consumers need to bear that in mind right now .
However , the system did not work properly , and before we come up with another one , I believe that we must carefully and comprehensively look at the reasons why the problem was discovered so late , and we must ask ourselves about the causes of this delay .
However , I think that , apart from denouncing the criminal act itself , we must also question why it happened .
I believe that , because of our actions , the agricultural and agri-food sectors are in a race towards low costs and towards the lowest prices on the supply side , and we are no longer shielded from deviations such as this type of unacceptable behaviour .
So , Commissioner , do you intend to increase the penalties for such acts ?
My second question is about how we will provide immediate support - and I mean immediate - to the breeders concerned .
This is because the margins are so weak that , if some people do not receive support very soon , or even advances on amounts owed to them , these breeders will disappear by the time the procedure reaches a conclusion at what I would call ' normal ' speed .
( DE ) Madam President , may I ask the previous speaker a question ?
He said that , essentially , the system works .
I would be very interested to hear whether he is aware that it was not the system but consumers who helped to discover what had happened here .
Secondly , with regard to the information that the previous speaker is in possession of , I would like to ask him whether he is also aware that there are studies that show that citizens would be happy to pay a bit more if they could be sure that the products are of a high quality and have come from animals that have been kept in a way that is appropriate for their species .
( FR ) Madam President , I think that the Member who asked a question actually had a comment to make on a situation rather than a question to put to me .
Obviously , we know that the system has gone wrong .
However , with regard to European consumers , I would like to emphasise how strict our protection system is .
We cannot let the statement that nothing has been done go unchallenged , given that we have the highest standards in the world .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should also like to thank Commissioner Dalli for coming to the Chamber today to report on this case , which is a source of great concern for European consumers .
Next week , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which I have the honour of chairing , will also meet to look further into the debate on the consequences of this serious episode .
Despite the fact that Europe is very much committed to food safety , further efforts in terms of transparency and checks are needed in order to avoid further cases of food contamination .
I would note that last year , Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on agricultural product quality and , above all , that this Chamber adopted the regulation on the provision of food information to consumers at first reading , introducing obligatory marking of the place of origin of agricultural products on labels .
Unfortunately , this important development stalled on 8 December in the Health Council .
We shall try to reintroduce it at second reading , because it is an important objective for protection and transparency in favour of European consumers .
Parliament is therefore moving in the right direction , showing that it is on the side of consumers .
We hope that the Council and the Commission adopt a similar attitude .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , I have to agree with what several of my fellow Members have already said , namely that , to a large extent , the current legislation is working .
That is not where the problem lies .
The problem lies in compliance , control and sanction systems .
We do not have the right at EU level to interfere in sanction systems , and we have to remember that if we make laws but do not , at the same time , have any sanction systems for them , we are simply enacting a large amount of legislation that will be completely ineffectual .
This will not work .
However , the Commissioner mentioned something that is extremely important .
I was rapporteur for the regulation which forms the basis for the feed checks .
The Commissioner mentioned the issue of the strict separation of raw materials intended for the feed industry and those intended for technical purposes , in this case , fat .
My proposal ten years ago was for all products of uncertain origin to be dyed .
Quite honestly , I think it is a very great shame for the farmers who are affected time and again by toxins in feed but are unable to do anything about it .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to be one of the signatories of this oral question because I believe that it is essential , after the incident of recent weeks , to open a debate on food safety .
To what extent are the products that millions of Europeans consume every day healthy and nutritious ?
Are we really sure that the products on our kitchen tables are safe ?
Quality of raw materials is essential to guarantee the authenticity of the final product .
Constant monitoring , from the field to the table , is the only way to avoid the contamination of food products and immediately identify potential risks .
This latest incident in Germany confirms the need to make origin marking on labels obligatory for all products , including processed products , as Mr De Castro has already emphasised .
We must protect the consumer 's right to know the provenance of every product bought , and the safety of our food can only be guaranteed by all operators sharing the responsibility .
It is true that current European legislation already provides for controls and procedures to guarantee that the food that ends up on our tables is fit for consumption and that the risks of contamination are reduced to a minimum , but we must now aim to make a daily contribution to improving the quality of these measures .
I am proud to point out that tomorrow , the Italian Parliament will approve a law that extends obligatory origin marking to all food products that do not already have it .
Finally , we will know the provenance of products such as pork , long-life milk , fruit , vegetables and some drinks , such as orangeade .
I hope that Europe can take inspiration from this law .
I will make an active commitment to ensure greater transparency , information and protection of consumer rights , which are instruments that I consider essential to promote healthy , wholesome food .
( SV ) Madam President , the important question now is how can we avoid new scandals and new risk situations .
It is a positive thing that the Commissioner is going to Germany , and it is clear that the Council of Agriculture Ministers must discuss the matter .
It would have been a scandal in itself if it had not done so .
There are still things that need to be done in this area .
We need strong sanctions , so that the Member States realise that they have to take a decision in this regard .
Above all , we need to put a stop to the self-controlled tests .
For other sectors and companies , it is absolutely clear that compliance with the legislation is to be monitored by independent authorities , but this does not apply in the sector that produces the very food that we eat .
It is absolutely no good blaming large-scale farming , price competition and whatever else .
As consumers , we do not want to eat contaminated food .
We need to ensure that consumers are informed about it when it does actually happen and that they are made aware of the fact that they should not have to eat contaminated food .
Madam President , the December contamination in Germany which we are discussing today and the blatant breach observed in our food safety chain not only seriously put at risk the health of thousands of consumers , but also revealed remaining weaknesses in our food traceability system .
It is indeed more than worrying that the German authorities , and the Commission itself , were not able to guarantee that none of the contaminated raw products , such as eggs , entered the food chain by being included as ingredients in processed food .
Traceability is quite often seen as a burden for the food industry , but it appears crucial when it comes to an emergency situation such as the one discussed today and should be considered as a prerequisite in protecting consumers ' health and safety .
I would therefore like to put two questions to the Commission .
Firstly , can it now be certain and confirm that none of the contaminated eggs or any single product affected entered the food chain via their utilisation in processed foods ?
Secondly , does it intend to reinforce traceability and information measures in order to guarantee an optimal protection of consumers in future food crises with health implications ?
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the German dioxin scandal has shaken the confidence of European consumers and they are rightly demanding the highest level of safety and complete traceability in food production .
Ultimately , agriculture 's international reputation has been damaged by the negligent behaviour of large animal feed producers .
I call on the Commission urgently to restore confidence in high quality European agricultural production , which meets the highest standards .
Identification of all of those responsible and limitation of the damage in the German dioxin scandal are just the start .
Swift and comprehensive measures need to be taken to prevent such practices by animal feed manufacturers in the future .
The animal feed chain is not somewhere to dispose of waste , and industrial waste products have no place in animal feed .
I call for more stringent , EU-wide rules , particularly with regard to transport .
Even one contamination of animal feed is unacceptable .
However , above all , what is essential is that a full and comprehensive inspection of these companies is carried out .
No farmer who is inspected several times a year can understand the current practice with regard to checks on large animal feed producers .
Nevertheless , it should be noted that in the case we have just been discussing , the ball started rolling as a result of self reporting and the competent authorities responded correctly .
The most important thing , however , is to turn our attention to the farmers who have unfairly suffered damage .
They urgently need support , because the damage that has occurred must not , under any circumstances , be passed on to them .
The existence of thousands of farmers is currently under threat .
Last Friday , the producer price in the pig fattening sector came in at EUR 0.23 per kilogram .
By the end of last year , pig producers had already had to cope with a drop of EUR 0.13 .
The situation is made worse by the fact that the cost of feed has risen sharply in recent weeks .
We need to find solutions to this quickly .
Consumer confidence in agricultural products must not , under any circumstances , be jeopardised by greed and negligence .
Madam President , as we have heard , dioxin is a dangerous chemical which is known to cause cancer , and in this instance , it entered the food chain when chemicals meant for use in biofuels were accidentally used in animal feed .
Some test results from the Agriculture Ministry in Schleswig-Holstein have shown that the fat in the feed contained 77 times the approved amount of dioxin .
The Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed is designed to protect European consumers from exactly these types of contamination .
By the time the alarm was raised , contaminated products were all over Germany and other parts of the EU , even in UK quiches , which were removed from supermarket shelves as a precautionary measure .
This is not the first dioxin scare .
We have had problems with mozzarella from Italy , pork products in Ireland and cattle products in Northern Ireland .
What we want to know from the Commission is why this rapid alert system has again failed to protect consumers , and what the Commission is going to do to put it right .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , twelve years after the Belgian dioxin scandal , dioxins have now been found in feed in Germany , a country with a tradition of discipline and reliable institutions .
This means that the control system is not strict , targeted , transparent and objective enough and is not accompanied by adequate disincentives and penalties .
These gaps must be plugged with a serious sense of responsibility towards consumers , especially at a time when the economic crisis is encouraging people to resort to illegal solutions in order to reduce production costs .
We cannot , especially in times of unfavourable economic conditions , expect problems to be self-regulated on the basis of a system of moral values .
Of course , consumers must have immediate and full information on the risks to which they are exposed .
The European Union is proud of the fact that it has adopted strict terms for safeguarding public health and for protecting the environment and the welfare of animals .
However , it must also ensure that they are applied without derogation , if it does not want its policy to be simply confined to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , let me start by saying that , as far as I am concerned , this is not negligence , it is a deliberate crime .
What is it that we need ?
There are a couple of important things that we need : firstly , a mandatory EU-wide labelling requirement , but it should indicate not only the place of slaughter , but also the place of origin .
Consumers are currently being deliberately misled .
Studies quite clearly show that people would be happy to pay .
They just want the chain - where the product comes from and where it really originates from - to be fully traceable .
Secondly , we need more stringent checks .
At the end of the day , it was not a food inspector or an EU food safety agency that made the discovery , but the company itself .
Thirdly , we need the clear segregation of food fat and fat produced for technical purposes .
I totally agree with Pythagoras , who once again quite aptly said : ' everything that humans do to the animals comes back to them ' .
Madam President , in Ireland two years ago , in December 2008 , we had a problem .
I wonder what the Commission has done in the two years to avoid this current crisis .
I have a specific question : Member State authorities are crying out for guidelines from the Directorate-General for Health and Consumers .
On the feed hygiene regulations , they want guidance and a workshop .
Will you please make a commitment tonight to give them what they are requesting ?
I have three other points to make .
We need very clearly to identify the high-risk products , the high-risk processors and the location and names of the high-risk producers , and , at the very least , we need total segregation of products that are destined for the animal feed chain and , thus , for the food chain .
It is not rocket science .
We also need , as others have said , controls along the way so that we detect those who continue to try and break the rules to make money .
Cutting costs is about cutting corners .
The problem is that it costs Europe billions ; it takes away consumer confidence and ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am not an agricultural romantic ; in other words ; I do not believe the advertising slogans about the happy hens and the happy pigs , because my daily experience is rather different .
However , I do nevertheless believe that consumers in Europe have a right to food that is safe .
Hence , my first major demand is that we need stringent checks and we need tough penalties .
However , I believe today 's discussion has made it clear that we also need a different agricultural structure in Europe .
Commissioner Dalli , who is responsible for health , is with us today and , to some extent , he is the one in the firing line .
We also need to take the lessons we have learned from this scandal and use them in our agricultural reform to provide a structure for the agriculture industry in Europe that , on the one hand , meets the needs of agriculture and farmers and , on the other , also ensures safety for consumers .
I would ask that we truly learn from this scandal .
Madam President , we have had a number of incidents like this over the years .
I would have thought that by now , the importance of traceability and quality assurance would be well understood and that the structures and regulations ought to be in place to prevent incidents like this .
This raises a number of very serious concerns .
Firstly , it is extremely damaging to consumer confidence in the food industry and , secondly , it is always the farmers who are the innocent parties .
It is always the farmers who suffer a disproportionate effect when compared to the consequences for the food processing industry .
I am reasonably satisfied that the German authorities , and the Commissioner and his team , took reasonable , appropriate and swift action when they were aware that there was a problem .
Nevertheless , a number of very serious questions arise - questions about the behaviour of some sectors of the processing industry where , clearly , more needs to be done by way of prevention , more needs to be done by way of punitive powers where the consequence of this action ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , the discovery of products contaminated with dioxins and their distribution through various commercial channels is a most serious occurrence .
Notwithstanding the fact that those responsible for what happened must be properly identified , the consequences clearly established and the destination of the contaminated products properly traced , this incident also requires us to reflect more carefully on the complete failure of the existing regulatory model .
Here we have an example of the consequences of a market-orientated common agricultural policy , which promotes models of intensive production for export , which in turn favours large-scale agro-industry at the cost of small and medium-sized agriculture and family farming .
This renders local production and consumption completely unviable instead of promoting it , as is necessary in order to guarantee a far greater degree of traceability .
This is yet another example of the need for a fundamental change in the current common agricultural policy in the interests of public health and food safety and quality .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , one may note a certain exasperation in relation to these repeated crises , of which there was one in Belgium in 1999 , a large-scale crisis very similar to the current one .
To put it very clearly , we have the strictest measures in the world .
I do not believe that we should make them stricter .
We simply have to make them function better .
Probably one of the first measures we should adopt is to increase the penalties imposed on these criminals , because this is obviously not about a clumsy intermediary - it is a crime organised by white-collar criminals who want to maximise their profits .
Second , another priority could be to strengthen the controls and ensure that they are more in line with the risks posed .
Third , as Mrs Stihler said , the RAPEX rapid exchange system , which normally serves to ensure that all the Member States are warned of a potential risk , has probably shown certain weaknesses in this regard .
I would have liked your opinion on this matter , Commissioner .
( DE ) Madam President , the German animal feed industry has a good system of self-controlled tests .
However , this system does not work in the case of criminal activities and schemes .
If someone intentionally or illegally mixes prohibited substances into animal feed , he will also intentionally avoid these self-controlled tests .
Following on from what my fellow Members have said , I think there are three more important principal conclusions : firstly , we need more state checks .
Secondly , we need it to be a requirement to report all of the results of feed tests , and these must also be produced during the relevant checks .
Thirdly , we need tougher penalties for the criminals .
This is not a minor offence - it was done with intent .
Finally , I would like to point out that , in this animal feed scandal , it is the farmers who are suffering the most , because at the moment , they are not able to sell their products at all , or if they can , it is at a huge loss .
Madam President , when I listen to the comments that have been made - and here I would like to thank all those who participated in the debate - I cannot help but reflect on the criticism we receive , not just with regard to this issue , but on almost everything we do as Europe ; on the additional bureaucracy we impose on everyone when we draw up regulations and require certain control procedures .
Consumers , entrepreneurs and businessmen all accuse us of imposing barriers that impede things from functioning smoothly .
However , when cases such as this one on dioxins occur , it clearly emerges , as we have heard today , that there is , in fact , a need for certain control systems that are currently in place .
Indeed , we come to realise how important they are and how diligent we must be in implementing them .
As a consumer , I would be extremely unhappy to have to experience a situation of this sort , as would all European consumers , because it threatens to shake our trust in the safety of European products .
Moreover , it angers me to find out that this happened because of persons who have intentionally broken the law , and that it was not out of genuine error .
In fact , as the final speaker has just said , no system can function where criminality is present .
Where there are persons who want to break the law , then it is impossible to guarantee a system that will operate smoothly and without a hitch .
This is why we need to do our utmost to ensure that we have the finest of safety nets possible in place , woven with the tiniest mesh possible , in order to avoid these criminals from slipping through the holes .
I have been involved in the drawing up of legislation in my country since 1987 .
In my 23 years of experience in the field , I have always found that the biggest challenge is not deciding on which clauses to enter into a piece of legislation , but trying to anticipate how that law will be broken and therefore to try and counter it from beforehand .
I believe that that is the current reality of the situation .
We do not want another occurrence of this sort to take place and we must do all that we can to guarantee that our system is at least capable of promptly catching those who try to sneak past the rules that are already in place , and the ones which we draw up together .
We can only act when we know what is going on , not when we are in the dark as to what is happening .
Here , I would like to comment on the Rapid Alert System .
I do not believe that this system did not work - indeed , it worked as it should , because the second we were alerted to the situation , the information was sent out to everyone .
That is what the Rapid Alert System is all about , and in that respect it worked very well .
We also need to strengthen our rules and regulations .
I agree with what Ms McGuinness said as regards the importance of establishing guidelines and laying down requirements that ensure the strictest control over food chains that carry health risks .
To this end , one of the things we are trying to do , or are going to suggest , is not to focus solely on certain risk elements and require simple company registrations , such as those of feed mills , and leave it at that .
Instead , post-approval should be granted after certain due diligence exercises have been carried out .
We must ensure that this incident is now kept under control .
I am in constant contact with the competent German authorities and am satisfied that they are doing everything in their power , not only to contain the situation as quickly as possible and to collect all the information necessary to form a clear and whole picture of the situation , but also in terms of the action they are taking .
I have been informed , for example , that the feed mill producer who passed on false information by claiming that he had supplied just ten farms , when in fact he had supplied nine hundred , is already undergoing proceedings that have been initiated by the prosecution authorities in Germany , as this false information could have potentially led to significant consequences .
We can also rest assured that the products that Germany exported , and that were intended for the food manufacturing market , such as eggs , were tested and found to contain very low levels of dioxins , since they were mixed with other non German products in the food manufacturing process .
At this juncture , since my speaking time is up , I would like to make one final comment .
I fully agree that we should impose the harshest of sanctions on those who take advantage of the system .
However , it is necessary to understand that these kinds of measures are not something that we can draw up or lay down in our capacity as the Commission .
Rather , it is up to the Member States to decide to enforce them on a national level .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The EU should urge Germany and all the countries involved in this matter to take the appropriate measures to remedy the situation by imposing sanctions and ensuring that all those involved in the dioxin crisis take full responsibility for the extensive damage caused to the agriculture and manufacturing sectors , and to consumers .
The fact that some animal feed producers have been aware of this dioxin contamination since March 2010 without reporting it to the authorities is completely unacceptable .
I therefore call for the utmost transparency in informing all the Member States and third countries of all the details surrounding the potentially contaminated feed .
All food products that do not conform to EU legislation must be identified and recalled from the market .
It is necessary to ensure that every measure is taken to protect public health , and for rapid and detailed information about the development of the situation to be available ; this must be reported with the utmost accuracy and transparency , so that we can return to normality as soon as possible and restore vital consumer confidence in the food chain .
EU-Cameroon forest law agreement - EU-Republic of Congo forest law agreement - FLEGT voluntary partnership agreements ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate - Forest law ( Cameroon , Republic of Congo )
EU-Cameroon forest law agreement
Recommendation by Yannick Jadot , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade
Recommendation on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of a Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Cameroon on forest law enforcement , governance and trade in timber and derived products to the European Union ( FLEGT )
[ 12796 / 2010 - C7-0339 / 2010 - 2010 / 0217 ( NLE ) ]
EU-Republic of Congo forest law agreement
Recommendation by Yannick Jadot , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade
Recommendation on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of a Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Congo on forest law enforcement , governance and trade in timber and derived products to the European Union ( FLEGT )
[ 10028 / 2010 - C7-0170 / 2010 - 2010 / 0062 ( NLE ) ]
Oral question to the Commission on FLEGT voluntary partnership agreements with Congo and Cameroon and other planned VPAs , by Yannick Jadot , Catherine Bearder , David Martin , Joe Higgins , Daniel Caspary - B7-0802 / 2010 ) on behalf of
the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance
the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe
the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament
the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left
the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , at this early stage , to express my thanks to all my fellow Members for the work that we have carried out together on this issue , which has enabled all the political groups in this Parliament to reach a common position and has allowed them to table an oral question and to draw up a resolution to accompany the voluntary partnership agreements .
The subject is an important one .
As you all know , the forest is receding .
Every two seconds , across the world , the equivalent of a football pitch is destroyed ; within a year , an area the size of Greece is deforested .
Clearly , this is a tragic situation .
It is tragic from the point of view of diversity : a few thousand plant and animal species are threatened , and the forests which are most affected - tropical forests - contain half of the world 's biodiversity .
It is obviously tragic , too , from the point of view of climate change : deforestation is responsible for 20 % of greenhouse gas emissions .
Finally , deforestation puts some hundreds of millions of people in danger - people who either live in the forests or live off them .
Forest exploitation and the forestry industry are among the principal causes of deforestation , particularly in the area on which we are focusing today : the Congo basin .
It is estimated that 20 to 40 % of the timber felled and exchanged in the world is illegal timber .
The issue that we are raising today is therefore obviously a crucial one .
These voluntary partnership agreements have been approved in the context of the approval procedure within the Committee on International Trade .
Thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , this procedure allows the European Parliament to express its view .
At the same time , however , it can only say yes or no .
Hence , this debate is extremely important because it allows us to go into more detail , and it allows you , Commissioner , as a representative of the Commission , to respond to the questions that Parliament is putting to you .
These agreements are important ; they allow us to ensure the traceability of timber .
They also put in place independent verification procedures , and supplement forest policies and governance in the countries concerned .
Today , we are talking about the Republic of the Congo and Cameroon .
However , I would like to make an initial point before going into these agreements and Parliament 's questions : we really must differentiate between legal timber and sustainable timber .
Obviously , we are dealing with the legality of timber here , but legal timber does not necessarily mean sustainable forest exploitation .
Therefore , the first general question that I would ask the Commission is : how will the Commission act to ensure overall consistency on the issue of forests - 2011 is the International Year of Forests - while taking account of what was said in Nagoya and what was decided in Cancún , in particular , on the REDD + mechanism , and taking account too of the trade agreements that have been negotiated , which are sometimes responsible for deforestation through liberalising trade in timber ?
Next , we are still waiting for an answer from the European Commission on the question of biofuels and indirect changes in land use .
As you know , Parliament has asked you to integrate these issues into the criteria for evaluating the sustainability of biofuels .
More specifically , concerning the voluntary partnership agreements , there are many positive elements : we greatly appreciated the negotiation efforts and , in particular , the involvement of members of civil society in Cameroon and the Republic of the Congo .
We know that it is not easy and , from this point of view , these voluntary partnership agreements seemed to be a success .
As I was saying just now , however , a number of questions and requests remain .
Commissioner , are you ready to come , for example , every six months , or six months after the signing of an agreement , to update us on the implementation of the agreement ?
I ask because it is clear that the negotiation and the implementation of the agreement may be of a very different quality .
We would therefore like you to come and tell us if the parties concerned , in particular , the members of civil society , continue to be involved in its implementation .
In countries in which it is still not easy to complain , particularly when corruption exists , have complaint mechanisms been provided for - in particular , independent ones - so that these members of civil society can complain about poor implementation and report that they are no longer being listened to ?
In the same way , we would like you to regularly report on the impacts of the implementation of these agreements , so that you can tell us where we have got to with them , both in terms of the overall consistency of the Commission 's actions on forests , and in terms of their specific implementation on the issue of the legality of timber .
Lastly , a final point : you claim that there is no budget in these agreements .
Yet we will obviously need budgets to support these policies , so can you clarify the budgetary issue in relation to these voluntary partnership agreements ?
author . - Madam President , the tropical rainforests in Cameroon and the Congo are precious and we must welcome this voluntary agreement to address the sustainability of the harvesting of the timber that they contain .
The forests belong not only to the people of these countries but they are part of the ecosystem of the planet , they are key to the life-sustaining systems and they contain billions of tonnes of carbon .
Halting deforestation is one of the ways that we should be tackling climate change , and governments around the globe have been trying to do this for years .
These two countries should be congratulated for their courage and foresight in signing up to these voluntary agreements with the EU .
However , regulating and enforcing these agreements will prove a challenge .
Heaven knows , building in sustainable management of our own continent 's resources is hard enough .
But the will is there and for that we should be very pleased .
Careful management can bring down illegal and unsustainably imported timber .
At the moment , the amount of timber that is illegally harvested and imported into the EU constitutes almost one fifth of the timber products on our markets , despite Parliament and others trying to tackle this .
Enforcement will be made easier with the involvement of local people and civil society in these countries , and we must ensure that their right to be heard and involved is maintained and listened to .
After all , they have the most to lose if their forests are removed .
The widespread removal of tropical timber is driven by an insatiable appetite for products to grace our homes .
We should value this resource better and take greater care of the resource that not only sustains a whole host of plant and animal species but is slow growing and takes many years to reach maturity .
We must take care not to undermine our own efforts to fight deforestation and climate change by simultaneously providing the largest market for illegal timber products in the world .
The result of these agreements may mean that tropical timber reaches a higher price , and that is something that we should not object to .
It is not only a limited resource , but it is the only thing that local people have to sell .
They know the true value of their resource and with this agreement , so will we .
These people are our eyes and ears in the forest and we need their help to enforce the agreements .
They need us to support their ability to voice any concerns .
These agreements are a two-way process and we look to you , Commissioner , to be able to enforce it .
The VPAs ( Voluntary Partnership Agreements ) are good for the planet , good for our partner countries and good for the EU .
We must ensure that the agreements work and that any breaches are monitored and addressed .
Then we must look to other countries in Africa , Asia and South America to sign up to similar agreements as soon as possible and I look forward to working with you and the Commission to achieve this .
author . - Madam President , let me begin by thanking Yannick Jadot for his exemplary cooperation with his shadows .
We all worked extremely well on this report and I am delighted - as he has said - that we managed to reach a broad consensus .
The agreements with Congo and Cameroon , taken together with Ghana , means that some of Africa 's most vulnerable forests are now covered by Voluntary Partnership Agreements .
The existence of these agreements , as the two previous speakers have said , is to be warmly welcomed .
They provide a mechanism for tackling the massive illegal trade in timber .
They provide an opportunity for the better management of a vital natural resource and , hopefully , they will bring greater transparency and help us tackle corruption in the forest sector , which , unfortunately in Africa , is endemic at the moment .
But , while welcoming these agreements , I nevertheless share with the rapporteur a number of concerns .
I would just like to express three this evening .
First and foremost , the danger - it is not the intention , but there is a danger - of agreeing such a framework is that it is seen as providing a framework for large-scale exploitation of our forests , leading to the opposite of the purpose of the agreement , namely , further degradation and further deforestation , thus contributing to the very destruction of the global environment we are trying to avoid .
What we want is an agreement that contributes to the conservation and sustainable management of our biodiversity resources .
I agree with the rapporteur that this means that the Commission has to constantly monitor the situation and report back regularly on how the agreement is progressing .
Secondly , indigenous people , who are so often the victims of environmental exploitation , should benefit from this agreement .
The promise in the Voluntary Partnership Agreement by the Congolese Government to promote a law ensuring that the rights of indigenous people are promoted and respected must be delivered upon .
Again , I urge the Commission , in their contact with the government , to continually press for the delivery of this promise until it is there on the statute book in the Congo .
Thirdly , we must ensure - and I agree with Catherine Bearder who mentioned this - that appropriate funds are available to properly implement this agreement .
No matter how good an agreement is on paper , without the resources to carry it out , it is a meaningless piece of paper .
As has been indicated , there are no financial packages attached to the agreement itself .
It is up to us - both the Commission to propose , and Parliament and Council to put into the budget appropriate budgetary facilities - to make this agreement work .
That means we need to have money to verify the legality of timber coming into the European Union , we need money to train , equip and give the technical expertise to those operating in the African countries we have VPAs with , and we also need resources to carry out the monitoring that I have already mentioned .
So we need to make sure , in the coming months , that we deliver the financial framework to make a success of these agreements .
I repeat that these are good agreements but , like all agreements , they will depend on the goodwill and vigilance of individuals - the non-government organisations , the Member States , the Congolese and Cameroon governments - to deliver on their promises to make sure these agreements work in practice .
They should lead to better management of our forests and better management of vital global resources but , if wrongly handled , they could take us in the opposite direction .
We look to the Commission to keep a beady eye on the progress that is being made .
author . - Madam President , we agree with the general approach of Yannick Jadot to this issue .
I welcome any agreement that guarantees protection of the rainforests of our planet , if such agreements also advance the protection of the indigenous people of the forest and give a better life to the majority of the people in the countries concerned .
It must be said at the start that both the Republic of Congo and Cameroon have highly repressive governments .
Cameroon is very high in the Corruption Index kept by Transparency International , and in the Republic of Congo , there has been horrific exploitation of some sections of the population , notably the pygmy people , although a new law has just been passed and people will wait to see what this does to protect indigenous people .
The logging industry in these countries is implicated in corruption and in the exploitation of workers and the deforestation involved is a huge threat to the livelihoods of the indigenous people .
It is for this reason that the original resolution of the European United Left Group calls for the logging industry to be in public ownership and under democratic control , crucially involving workers in the industry and the indigenous communities in the forests affected by logging .
The Left 's resolution also points out that illegal logging is related to poverty levels in the countries concerned .
It can provide an income for individuals and their families who would otherwise go hungry , and therefore , ending illegal logging is also linked to ending the poverty and deprivation of many communities in the relevant countries .
This will not be done by the corrupt local elites , nor by European multinational corporations whose key motivation is private profit , but by the forestry workers and the indigenous peoples themselves taking democratic ownership of their resources .
In this sense , the people of sub-Saharan Africa can take inspiration from their brothers and sisters in Tunisia in their heroic struggle against a corrupt dictatorship over the past weeks .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , several countries that export tropical hardwood have started to sign voluntary partnership agreements with the EU under the Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade ( FLEGT ) Action Plan .
The European Union will provide support for forest governance reforms and capacity building , in particular , the implementation of traceability and legality verification systems for wood-based products .
There is something I believe to be particularly important : if it helps to improve transparency and prevent environmental damage in connection with forestry activities , then it is a good thing for the partners to commit to amending and improving current legal provisions .
I also expressly welcome the fact that the European Union has made a commitment to provide support for capacity building in the timber producing countries , particularly in connection with the implementation of traceability and legality verification systems for timber and wood-based products .
There are two more points I would like to mention .
The idea behind the voluntary partnership agreements is to put an end to the trade in illegally felled wood and products made from this wood and to help to stop deforestation , forest degradation and their effects in the form of CO2 emissions , as well as the loss of biodiversity , throughout the world .
Further large-scale exploitation of tropical and other particularly species-rich forests with a high carbon storage capacity is irresponsible and may lead to further deforestation and forest degradation , with devastating consequences for the environment worldwide .
These agreements are therefore a small , but positive step in the right direction .
I am in complete agreement with the points made by the previous speakers .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent cooperation and I would be very pleased if we could make real progress with these agreements in order to make our world a little bit better .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Jadot , for his support for the Voluntary Partnership Agreements on Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade with Congo and Cameroon .
I hope this House will follow the recommendations for consent to conclude these two agreements .
This would also encourage the parliaments in both Cameroon and Congo to complete their consideration .
It is important that both the European Union and our partner countries endorse the VPAs , since illegal logging is a problem for all .
I know that illegal logging is just the visible tip of the iceberg .
Basically , we are talking about starting to work together for sustainable management of forestry resources .
And , to answer one of the rapporteur 's suggestions immediately , I could say that , yes , I am ready to come here every six months , as Parliament calls me , to monitor the implementation of these agreements .
It is true that this is a commitment .
There are risks but this is the only way , in my opinion , to achieve really sustainable management of this resource , because if we do not do this , we will not manage to be successful through declarations alone .
For our partner countries , there is a lot of commitment , but I believe that one important factor is the loss that results from illegal logging .
Each year , USD 10-15 billion is lost in revenue .
Illegal logging also has extremely negative consequences for indigenous peoples , for biodiversity and in terms of climate change .
At the same time , it is also important to emphasise that the EU is one of the biggest markets for tropical wood .
This means that our approach is extremely important in how the whole issue is being addressed .
Of the tropical wood arriving in the EU , 20 % comes from illegal sources , so we have an obligation to ensure that we source only legal wood .
The climate change issue is another concern for everyone , and the protection of forests needs to start somewhere .
It is very simple to say that we need to pay to protect forests : it is a simple formula , but applying it requires a lot of commitment from both sides .
I shall try to answer a couple of questions that have been put to me .
On enforcement and implementation , the VPA establishes a joint committee to monitor implementation of the agreement .
It will also establish an independent audit to analyse the legality assurance system and its effectiveness and efficiency .
There is also an annual reporting mechanism , and the annual report will be made public and will definitely be available to the European Parliament .
Moreover , in preparation for the VPAs , we have involved civil society and indigenous peoples .
Until now , they had been completely left out of the process , so we have agreed , under the new agreements , to set up multi-stakeholder committees to monitor , or guide , the implementation process where indigenous people are involved .
In addition , the VPAs include a complaints mechanism , and the independent auditor will have access to , and will rely on , information from a wide array of sources , including civil society and communities .
There is a definite cost in terms of resources .
Between 2002 and 2008 , the EU contributed EUR 544 million to forestry in general in the developing world , some of it directed to FLEGT work in individual countries .
The Commission has so far spent a further EUR 35 million to support FLEGT more generally , and we will spend EUR 35 million more between 2011 and 2013 .
I would emphasise , too , that Member States also make fiscal contributions .
We have also dedicated human resources to the implementation of FLEGT .
I have seven civil servants dealing with this , and they are working closely with the European Forest Institute and national forest authorities .
An additional effort has been made in the form of the Illegal Timber Regulation , adopted in 2010 as a key element of the FLEGT action plan , and this will complement the VPA approach .
It will discourage unregulated , unsustainable exploitation of forests .
The recent agreement in Cancún on action to reduce emissions due to deforestation and forest degradation ( known as ' REDD ' ) will facilitate further Commission support for developing countries .
Our future work on forest governance through VPAs will be helped by the fact that REDD makes provision for governance and for observance of the rights of indigenous peoples and members of local communities .
I take note of the human rights situation in partner countries .
I agree with the draft motion for a resolution that the Commission should continue to focus on these issues .
I can assure you that we keep human rights issues at the centre of our political dialogue with the partner countries , and I can assure you that the fight against corruption is one of the issues we address when dealing with the partner countries .
But I would emphasise one particular point that represents encouragement for the whole process : the fact that partner countries feel engaged .
Without real engagement from our partner countries , given all the weaknesses at administrative level , we cannot protect forests more effectively .
I know that this is the start of the process , but it is a start being made by both sides , and I am always ready to come to Parliament to report on how the implementation is going .
However , with FLEGT , we are definitely not taking a wrong step .
It is a step in the right direction : we are not increasing the risk .
Perhaps we are not providing entirely sufficient solutions , but at least it is a decent step that we can be proud of .
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
EU-Cameroon forest law agreement - EU-Republic of Congo forest law agreement - FLEGT voluntary partnership agreements ( continuation of debate )
We now return to the debate .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these partnership agreements between the European Union , Cameroon and the Republic of the Congo should , in principle , turn out to be good news for these populations , and good news for biodiversity .
However , this is only one stage in a long process which the European Parliament will follow closely .
If we want this agreement to allow for the introduction of a regulated , transparent and environmentally friendly timber trade which benefits local populations , rather than a few groups of dubious legality , the European Union must ensure that the rights of the local and indigenous populations are fully respected and that the latter actually participate in the consultations .
It must help strengthen the capabilities of all those involved ; it must contribute to the fight against corruption and to the introduction of real forest governance .
The agreements must not be a pretext for continuing to pillage the natural resources of developing countries .
Rather , they must help restore a balance in relations between the European Union and these countries .
Madam President , these Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade ( FLEGT ) agreements that we are to vote on tomorrow concerning Congo and Cameroon are important European tools , or weapons , in the fight against illegal logging and , for that reason , I welcome them .
Illegal logging is a huge problem , both in terms of the environment and from an economic and social point of view .
At the same time , it is important to remember that it is rarely the problem itself , in this case illegal logging , that creates the conditions for trade in illegal timber .
Instead , this is a symptom and a consequence of many other problems that , in many cases , are even more serious - poverty , lack of ownership rights , corruption and , in certain cases , war .
The problems are greatest in some of the world 's poorest countries .
I am therefore very pleased that the Commission bore that in mind when drawing up and negotiating the agreements .
We could say that we have provided free trade in exchange for the countries concerned making reforms to strengthen ownership rights , fight corruption and ensure the introduction of reasonable forestry legislation .
That fact that we are tackling the root causes rather than the symptoms is what gives us the best indication that what we are going to do tomorrow is a step in the right direction .
At the same time , it is important to remember , particularly ahead of forthcoming negotiations with other countries , that in our fight against trade in illegally logged timber , we must not prevent poor countries from exporting one of their more valuable raw materials .
We must not make it harder for them to use wood , which is a fantastic natural material .
The good is not the enemy of the best .
I would like to remind you that my country , Sweden , became rich at one time precisely by exporting timber .
We must not prevent the poor countries of today from taking that opportunity .
As you now go further and negotiate the agreements , I hope that you will continue to fight specifically against illegally logged timber and not against the trade in timber .
Madam President , the European Commission has initiated the process of concluding voluntary partnership agreements with countries which export timber to the European Union .
In this context , I think that it is important to set up a structure promoting the active involvement of local communities , with a view both to monitoring the agreement 's implementation and improving the forest governance framework and , last but not least , in order to prevent corruption as much as possible .
Involving civil society in the process of drafting the agreement with Cameroon is a positive indication of this .
At the same time , specific measures are required to continue this kind of dialogue in all the signatory countries .
It is also important to aim at developing a socially and environmentally sustainable timber industry , including through the reduction of deforestation and forest degradation in these countries .
The agreements must comply with the European Union 's international environmental and sustainable development commitments .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , we are debating Voluntary Partnership Agreements .
These are lovely words , they are good words : they represent a European Union that is not trying to impose its will upon developing nations but is trying to lend a helping hand to achieve common goals .
Yet the practicalities of an agreement with a state the size of Congo create all sorts of daunting problems .

The size of the state alone is something akin to that of Europe ; the governance for much of that state is non-existent ; corruption levels are quite extraordinary - Transparency International puts the Republic of Congo almost bottom of its league table .
Then there is the number of staff we have working to ensure that this agreement delivers on its goals - just a handful of people ; the profits of illegal logging are absolutely vast and perhaps greater than anything we can offer by way of compensation ; and the markets for illegal wood are in countries like China , which may not be paying anything like the attention that we pay , and the respect that should be paid , to maintaining forests .
All these problems suggest that voluntary partnerships , however good our intentions , will have difficulty delivering the goals .
So what assurances can the Commission give us that every possible step will be taken to ensure that our high ambitions here will truly be realised , and that we can all have confidence that these voluntary partnership agreements , as we make them in future , will deliver on the goals we have set ?
Madam President , the Earth 's forests are the lungs of the planet , and we must do everything we can to protect them .
At a time of rapid global population growth and , with that , a generally increasing need for resources , jobs moving to distant parts of the world and an economic crisis , I think that in the EU , we need more European timber rather than importing exotic timber from countries where it is difficult to control illegal logging and where we cannot control the corruption either .
By clearing tropical forests , we are reducing the biodiversity in the areas concerned and contributing to the extinction of a long list of endangered species .
We are also altering the climate .
This is completely unnecessary , particularly when there are perfectly good alternatives .
If we learn to plant more forest in Europe again and use more European timber , these problems will disappear .
Why should our garden tables be made of wood from the rainforest and why are exotic parquet floors better than floors made of EU wood ?
However , having said that , and because I cannot stop EU citizens using exotic and tropical timber , it is important that these agreements are adopted .
It is important that we help to ensure that there is an improvement in the control of timber products and the timber we import .
We must try to safeguard ourselves against corruption , which is extremely difficult , as reflected in the agreements .
I am therefore under no illusion that we will succeed in putting an end to all illegal logging in either Cameroon or Congo - unfortunately .
I would have preferred the agreements to be binding rather than voluntary .
However , it is clearly better to have voluntary agreements than no agreements at all and therefore I support them .
In general , however , I hope to see more initiatives to protect the world 's forests , particularly when it comes to the EU 's agreements with countries from problematic parts of the world .
( DE ) Madam President , in my opinion , although the partnership agreement with Cameroon in the forestry sector is indeed praiseworthy and comes during the International Year of Forests , it is also a very convenient way for the EU to improve its image .
However , as to whether the agreement is worth the paper it is written on , I have my doubts , unfortunately .
After all , corruption is a topical issue in Cameroon .
Accusations against the state by environmental organisations claim that the government is very well aware of the environmental crimes of the forestry industry but is preventing monitoring and prosecutions from being carried out .
After all , foreign companies are said to control more than 60 % of the timber production and processing and three quarters of the timber exports .
Only if it can be guaranteed that foreign companies are no longer wiping the floor with local companies , which completely lack forestry and environmental expertise , and if Cameroon gets to grips with the corruption , will this sort of agreement have any meaning .
With all the concern about the destruction of the rainforests , this must not be used as an excuse to prevent forest owners in Europe from exploiting their forests , because forest management in most EU Member States is exemplary .
( PL ) Madam President , a month ago , I was in the Republic of Congo with the delegation of the Committee on Development , where our talks with government representatives and with experts and non-governmental organisations also covered the FLEGT initiative .
The timber industry is a very important one for the country .
After crude oil , it is the second largest source of export income .
It should be remembered that what happens to income from crude oil and how it is used is not completely transparent or clear to us , or at least the information is sent with a long delay .
At the same time , the government of the Republic of Congo is expressing concern about the future of its forest areas and is planning a huge afforestation campaign .
Of course , we still do not know if this afforestation programme will be successful , but we should certainly wish the government of Congo all the best in its endeavours .
This is why it is so important to strengthen legal trade in timber .
It is equally important for FLEGT to operate in neighbouring countries , because otherwise , as a result of smuggling , for example , the agreement may prove to be ineffective in practice .
Neither do we yet know if the standards we are promoting on the legal trade in timber will come into force and operate globally - some speakers have already called attention to this problem .
One way or another , we must try to ensure that the system proves effective .
We must also help in putting pressure on other importers , from outside Europe , to ensure the gradual elimination of illegal trade in timber .
The FLEGT initiative is important , both for reducing poverty and for protecting the environment - for controlling the phenomenon of deforestation and developing a diversified economy in many countries .
In the case of the Republic of Congo , this goes hand-in-hand with another need , which is the need to develop agriculture and reduce food imports .
Thanks to FLEGT , international trade in timber can become fairer , more sustainable and more environmentally friendly .
We hope this will be the case .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , my congratulations on the completion , to all intents and purposes , of negotiations on these two agreements .
However , I should like to express my concern at the fact that the FLEGT negotiations with Indonesia and Malaysia have deadlocked .
Commissioner , the Commission has an important instrument in its hands : the regulation on timber .
This regulation exempts the countries with which a FLEGT agreement has been concluded from the scope of the regulation .
It is an important instrument for giving new impetus to the negotiations .
We really do need to conclude FLEGT agreements with all countries with important tropical forests in either Asia or Latin America and with the major timber dealers , such as Vietnam , Cambodia , Laos , China and numerous other countries .
These countries are taking their own way forward ; they are adopting their own procedures for modernising and monitoring legal logging .
The question is : are we doing what we need to do ?
Are the 27 Member States passing decisions regulating imports of timber from FLEGT countries ?
Finally , a series of delegated acts is needed for the timber regulation .
We have two years until the regulation applies in full .
The Commission needs to speed up the procedures , to issue delegated acts , so that the countries know the details and what they need to do to adapt .
( GA ) Madam President , without a doubt , this is a much more important question than the publicity it will receive .
One of the great scandals of the 20th century was the continuous and systematic chopping down of forests , especially in the Third World , done not by individuals who knew no better and cannot be faulted , but by big greedy businesses and corrupt governments .
That is why this agreement is to be welcomed wholeheartedly and I hope it will be implemented , because if it is not , it will not be worth the paper it is written on .
On the broader front , we also have to ensure that other policies of the European Union do not contribute to continued deforestation .
I am referring to the proposed agreement on Mercosur which many people feel will encourage farmers to chop down the forests in those countries so that they can export agricultural products into Europe .
So we have to be vigilant .
( GA ) Thank you .
( PT ) Madam President , illegal logging in Central African countries , such as Cameroon and the Congo , constitutes a threat to the integrity of resources on which the local communities and indigenous peoples depend for their existence and way of life .
Indeed , it is a threat to an ecosystem that is home to enormous biodiversity and plays a very important role in regulating biogeochemical cycles .
Given the advancing destruction of the tropical rainforest in this region - and let us not forget that it is fed by the demand of operators and importers in industrialised countries , particularly countries in the European Union - the solution cannot possibly be to legalise what is illegal today , the unsustainable exploitation of the rainforest , which would be nothing short of a legitimisation of the theft of land from the local communities and the occupation of vast areas of rainforest by timber companies , as has been occurring .
The European Union 's development cooperation and aid policy has a very important role to play here in supporting the diversification of the economy of these countries and turning a model based heavily on the extraction and export of a small number of raw materials to industrialised countries completely on its head .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that the subject of timber will occupy us even more intensively in future .
For this agreement , it is therefore important that we provide appropriate support in the area of research and , above all , that , in terms of education and training , we make sure that the small and medium-sized enterprises in Cameroon and Congo have the opportunity to develop further in terms of their environmental knowledge in this area .
I am therefore very pleased that this debate is taking place .
It is important for all of us that the demand for timber is satisfied in future , too .
( DE ) Madam President , forty percent of Cameroon 's surface area is covered in forest .
Yet , we have to say , that although Cameroon is the largest exporter of tropical wood in Africa , in no other country are the forests being so extensively cleared .
Experts estimate that , in 10 to 15 years , the ecologically important tree species from the Congo Basin will have disappeared if the logging continues as it has done .
What can we do about this ?
What is important for the protection of Cameroon 's tropical forests is , above all , that corruption is combated , both at the level of the officials and also where the private tenant farmers are concerned , that effective criminal prosecutions continue to be carried out and , of course , that sustainable forestry is practised .
Where a lot of felling takes place , there must also be regeneration .
Something that is very important is better training in logging work in order to avoid premature damage during clearing .
Above all , European companies must take some responsibility , because around 80 % of the yield is shipped to Europe .
The EU must also act accordingly in this regard by taking direct and decisive measures .
A voluntary agreement is all well and good , but in this context , it will not get us anywhere .
We need to make the companies accountable .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the debate definitely went beyond the scope of this Voluntary Partnership Agreement .
It is not only trade that affects forests : the forest is an energy resource for these countries , and population growth also has an impact on the forest .
So I would like to emphasise again that this is a first step in addressing just one of the areas of concern .
I know that it is not a solution , but you have to start somewhere in addressing the issues .
Also , I would not like to discourage you with regard to the level of commitment of the countries concerned .
I know that dealing with these countries is sometimes not simple , but they are countries with a difficult history .
They got their independence 50 years ago , and not exactly in the same circumstances as some of our countries got independence , so things take time .
It takes time to establish state institutions capable of fighting corruption or establishing the management of resources , and they are on the right track .
In Africa , in particular , they have economic growth even in times of crisis , and this means they are getting stronger and getting better .
I realise this is just one indicator , but overall , there has been encouraging news , and the only way we can improve the process is by working together .
That is where we come in with sustainable forest management : we are talking about Congo-Brazzaville ( the Republic of the Congo ) and Cameroon today , but we are also working with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and with Indonesia .
We are still negotiating but we have high hopes of a positive conclusion .
So I would say that the risks here are minimal .
Commitment is the starting point and I look on this process as a very positive one .
We should also consider the global commitment to fight climate change .
Cancún gave some assurances that other parts of the world also take things seriously in that regard .
We are not the only ones who would like the world to be fair and sustainable , and other parts of the world will learn from us .
Let us take , for example , energy efficiency drives .
We made a start , and other parts of the world have followed .
The same applies to resource efficiency .
If we can use less timber , then other parts of the world will definitely learn from our example .
I believe there are a lot of ways in which we can lead .
Last but not least , I would like , once again , to guarantee that the Commission will conduct monitoring , not only by my own staff , but also through the EU delegations and the Member State delegations that we have .
This is one of the processes in which we share our efforts with the Member States .
The Commission does not simply work alone and , in many respects , Member States ' experience has been particularly crucial in concluding this voluntary partnership agreement .
I would ask this House really very much to deal with this consent process because I believe it is a healthy process , it goes in the right direction and , at the same time , does not provide the answers on all the issues that you have raised today .
Madam President , Commissioner , once again , I would like to thank the Members who have spoken .
I believe that we have almost all spoken in the same terms : making this essential point about VPAs , which provide the link between development , the environment and the strengthening of civil society .
I believe that , if there is one tool that we can use today to bring about sustainable development in these countries , particularly the African countries , it is undoubtedly the strengthening of civil society .
As long as the only or the main expression of democracy in those countries is the vote to elect the President , then as we have seen - as the history of Côte d 'Ivoire unfortunately reminds us - we will not make sufficient progress .
Therefore , strengthening civil society - the fact that it plays a constant role in the implementation of these agreements , in the monitoring of forest exploitation , in the discussion on the conditions of this exploitation and in the sharing of revenues linked to this forest exploitation - is essential .
It is through this strengthening of civil society , too , that we will respond best to the argument that we often hear concerning China : ' Why should we meet the criteria for strong cooperation with Europe - social , democratic and environmental criteria - when China makes a mockery of them in terms of corruption and pillaging ? '
Well , strengthening civil society is the best defence against this system which China , in particular , is trying to impose on the countries of the South .
Then , as you said , Commissioner , Europe is a large market for tropical timber , but it is also - and this is essential for all exploiters and for all industry - a stable and lucrative market , and that is also a very important tool in these countries .
Thank you for your desire to work with the European Parliament .
We are very happy about this future collaboration .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday ( 19 January 2011 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I am delighted that , after five years of negotiations , Voluntary Partnership Agreements ( VPAs ) on forest law enforcement , governance and trade ( FLEGT ) have been concluded with Cameroon and with the Republic of the Congo .
These agreements will help ensure good forest governance by granting FLEGT licences to timber products from these countries and thus guaranteeing the sustainable exploitation and management of their forests .
It is essential to have a system by which to monitor movements of timber and derived products from harvesting right up to export .
Twenty to thirty per cent of world industrial timber production is illegal , as is 60 % of the harvesting that has taken place in Africa over the last 10 years .
These VPAs will therefore help preserve the forests in these countries by combating illegal harvesting , which causes significant environmental , economic and social damage .
The main advantage of these VPAs is that they will apply to all exports between the EU and these countries , together with all other timber importing countries .
I hope that this VPA system will be rolled out quickly to other forest countries .
in writing . - FLEGT voluntary partnership agreements were a good basis on which to build international cooperation to tackle the problem of deforestation . And they continue to show their relevance today , especially in the context of last year 's illegal timber regulation .
Countries which adhere to such voluntary schemes are able to give certain guarantees about the legality and environmental sustainability of their timber sources .
There are clear benefits in terms of environmental protection , although we should be mindful of the fact that trade in legally harvested timber is not necessarily sensitive to the needs of indigenous people .
It is important that , as more VPAs are agreed , their effects are closely monitored and that their terms take full account of the needs and human rights of people who are dependent on forests , but who often do not have a voice in the management of those forests .
Interim Partnership Agreement between the EC and the Pacific States - Interim Partnership Agreement between the EC and the Pacific States ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by David Martin , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the recommendation on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Interim Partnership Agreement between the European Community , of the one part , and the Pacific States , of the other part ( 05078 / 2010 - C7-0036 / 2010 - 2008 / 0250 ( NLE ) ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on the Interim Partnership Agreement between the European Community , of the one part , and the Pacific States , of the other part , by Vital Moreira , David Martin , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade - B7-0807 / 2010 ) .
rapporteur . - Madam President , firstly , I would like to say that I know that , for good reasons , Commissioner De Gucht cannot be with us this evening .
I would like to thank him for taking the trouble to call me last week and explain why he is unable to be here , and I would like to thank him and his team at DG Trade for their cooperation and , in particular , Martin Dihm for all his assistance .
I have tried , in my role as rapporteur , to follow on from the good work of the previous rapporteur , my former colleague Glyn Ford .
I am fortunate that the adoption of Glyn 's resolution in 2009 meant that Parliament already had a clear position on the EC-Pacific Interim Economic Partnership Agreement .
Parliament 's formal position then is the one that I have tried to follow in my report and question today .
I would like to thank Donatella Pribaz , who was the committee administrator responsible .
This turned out to be her last report for the committee before her promotion , so I would like to wish her well in her new job and thank her for making my task here easier .
Finally , in terms of acknowledgements , I would also like to welcome the presence here of the Ambassador for Papua New Guinea and to thank him and his staff for their close collaboration .
The insights they provided allowed me to make specific input to the report .
Firstly , I would like to make a few general remarks on the agreement and the regional context .
Secondly , I plan to discuss three specific aspects of the EPA which I believe it is important to highlight : namely , Aid for Trade , the Fijian political situation and fisheries .
Thirdly , I will comment on the future of EC-Pacific trading relations .
In terms of the background and regional integration , this interim - or goods only - EPA has been negotiated with two Pacific states - Papua New Guinea and Fiji .
These are the two Pacific island states that have the highest levels of trade with the EU and have key exports destined for the EU market : tuna and sugar respectively .
The EPA gives Papua New Guinea and Fiji duty-free and quota-free access to the EU market in return for the gradual liberalisation of their markets over a 15-year period .
Papua New Guinea has committed to liberalising 88 % of EU imports on the date of application of this agreement , and Fiji will liberalise 87 % over a 15-year period .
The remaining 12 Pacific states either enjoy duty-free and quota-free access through the Everything But Arms scheme or , because of their low level of trade with the EU , have very little interest in an interim EPA .
Nevertheless , I believe it is important that , as we move towards a full EPA , we should pursue our objective of regional integration and continue to press for a full EPA involving all the Pacific states .
In terms of the content of the resolution , Parliament has to consent to this agreement before it can be ratified .
We will vote on Wednesday - as you have indicated , Madam President - on two different reports , firstly , on consent , which I am recommending that we give , and secondly on the accompanying motion for a resolution .
There are other issues in the motion for a resolution but , as I have said , I want to comment particularly on three .
First , regarding Aid for Trade , funding for implementation is crucial to achieving the agreement 's objectives of economic diversification and poverty alleviation .
It is important that a fair and equitable share of the EUR 2 billion set aside in the 2007 Aid for Trade strategy is directed towards the Pacific region .
It is also important to highlight that this interim EPA was conceived as a short-term measure to safeguard the Pacific 's trade preferences following the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) ruling .
Bearing that in mind , it should not be seen as a sign of EU acceptance of the political regime in Fiji .
I would urge the Fijian Government to make moves towards democracy .
I hope that the necessary reforms can take place to allow financial support for the Fijian sugar industry to be allocated .
On fishing , the fisheries sector plays a key role in Papua New Guinea 's economy and - importantly - provides employment and income to its citizens .
In the three tuna processing plants which export to the EU , there are 5 700 employees , the majority of whom are women .
This is a country where it is sometimes difficult to find good employment for women .
I support the purpose of the flexible rules of origin in this agreement , namely , to develop the processing industry , but it is essential that the industry develops in a sustainable manner .
Environmental considerations are paramount and I have asked , in my report , for the Commission to monitor this aspect and to report back regularly to Parliament on compliance with the regulation on illegal , unreported , and unregulated fishing .
I appreciate that there are some concerns in this House - and specifically in the Committee on Fisheries - about the potential impact of Papua New Guinea 's tuna imports on the EU industry .
However , when we look at the latest figures , we can see that during the period 2003-2009 , imports made up around only 2 % of total preserved and prepared fish imports and around only 3 % of preserved and prepared tuna imports .
I do not believe that this low level of imports will threaten the domestic EU industry , especially if we take into account the limited capacity of the Pacific states ' fishing fleets and the limited on-land processing capacity .
Nevertheless , it is , of course , right that we should continue to monitor the situation and that , if there are any unexpected increases in fishing products coming from Papua New Guinea , the Commission should take appropriate action .
As I mentioned earlier , I hope that the Pacific states can agree a comprehensive regional EPA .
In my report , I have recommended the inclusion of several points of substance in future negotiations , which I hope the Commission will take into account . These include intellectual property .
Too often , we talk about intellectual property from one side only , but I hope that we will look at intellectual property in terms of including traditional knowledge .
I also hope we will add transparency in government procurement as well as provision for issuing working visas of up to 24 months .
As we move towards a full EPA , I hope the Commission will involve all the Pacific states but , in the meantime , let us press ahead and get the interim EPA with PNG and Fiji on the books and working as a demonstration of what we can achieve in the future .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his report and particularly for his positive attitude on consent to the interim Economic Partnership Agreement with the Pacific states of Papua New Guinea and Fiji .
I hope that this House will follow his advice .
Consent by the European Parliament - for the first time on a trade agreement under the Lisbon Treaty - has important political significance because this is a trade agreement with a long-term development focus and because of the momentum it will provide to ongoing negotiations on the comprehensive EPA with the Pacific region .
Back in 2007 , the immediate purpose of the interim agreement was to secure continued access to the EU market for those countries in the Pacific region which most depend on it , given the impending expiry of the Cotonou trade regime .
The Commission 's commitment to concluding negotiations on a comprehensive EPA with the Pacific region as a whole remains unchanged and we are currently engaged in negotiations with our Pacific partners .
We can go forward only if we accept the special nature of the Pacific region and tailor the EPA accordingly .
We are talking about small and remote island states which differ greatly in their economic situation , development needs and relations with the EU .
Some countries have ' least developed country ' status and are therefore covered by the EU 's Everything But Arms trade regime ; some have little , if any , trade with the Union .
We are therefore open to entering into the trade relationships that best suit the Pacific region as a whole , and the ongoing negotiations will inform the ultimate choices .
Whatever approach we opt for , it is absolutely crucial to ensure that any agreement will indeed contribute to the development of the countries concerned .
That is why there is also financial assistance to enhance trade capacity .
That is why we will allow partner countries in the developing world to exclude more sensitive products from the trade agreements : something that we would not allow other countries to do .
In this context , I have duly taken note of the concerns expressed about the derogation in the interim EPA from the standard rules of origin for fisheries products .
It is precisely for development reasons that we granted this derogation and we did so on the basis of our informed judgment that Papua New Guinea 's small market share makes it unlikely that its tuna exports could damage the interests of the EU industry .
The European Union and Papua New Guinea have applied these rules provisionally since 2008 and , whereas export figures have fluctuated , no upward trend has been detected .
Let me also reassure you that the Commission does not intend to offer similar arrangements to any other region .
The Commission will , in any event , closely monitor the implementation of the derogation and will report to Parliament on the basis of a study which will be prepared before the end of 2011 .
Some of you were also present in September last year when the current elected Prime Minister addressed the INTA Committee .
He expressed the readiness of his government to grant EU vessels and investors access to Papua New Guinea 's waters .
We take this oral declaration very seriously and we will continue to engage with our partners till it comes to fruition .
Parliament 's consent will allow us to launch the implementation mechanisms provided for the agreement ; one of these is the Trade Committee , which could be convened this spring and which provides a platform for raising all the issues relating to mutual obligations under the interim EPA .
Your vote is therefore crucial to helping us move forward on this and other important issues .
With regard to Fiji , the country did sign the interim EPA but it does not apply it provisionally .
This makes Papua New Guinea currently the only country provisionally applying the EU-Pacific interim EPA .
Fiji continues , for the time being , to have access to the EU market under the Market Access Regulation , since the Council has not adopted trade sanctions .
As you are aware , the EU decided to suspend development aid to Fiji because of the political situation in the country .
Resumption of aid would presuppose progress in governance in Fiji and , in particular , a return to democratic principles of government , but at the moment , there is no tangible progress in Fiji in this regard .
The EPA we have discussed today is only an interim arrangement to ensure that access to the EU market is not lost .
The Commission is fully committed to continue negotiations on a comprehensive EPA with the Pacific region .
Mr President , Commissioner , exemption from the rules of origin is based on a very serious calculation error by the Commission regarding its impact , not only on the EU tuna sector , which is very serious , but also on the Pacific region , which we are seeking to help .
Meanwhile , the real beneficiaries are almost exclusively the greedy fleets from China and South-East Asia and their processing industries .
The Directorate-General for Trade established this exemption based on the fact that Papua New Guinea does not have the fishing capacity to exploit its resources .
However , according to the most recent data from the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission , there are 41 seiners under Papua New Guinea flags operating in the area , which , in 2009 , had a catch total of almost 500 000 tonnes .
Out of this catch , more than 75 000 tonnes ended up in the European Union ( semi-processed and processed ) , which makes Papua New Guinea one of the six main exporters to the European Union .
It is not , therefore , true , as you say , that in order to develop Papua New Guinea 's fishing sector , other fleets needed to be given free entry .
Under no circumstances can the European Union shirk its commitment to sustainable development .
However , we are seeing that , under the protection of this exemption , and in order to bring in Asian investors , Papua New Guinea has amended its legislation so that it is not possible to make complaints about environmental damage , and has implemented investment rules that allow local workers and cheap labour from Asia to be hired , along with the worst imaginable labour standards .
If we add to this the fact that , in the regional fisheries organisation that I mentioned , Papua New Guinea is leading other countries in flatly refusing to sign up to any international rules to manage and control fisheries , the result is that , while the Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries is going the whole hog to combat illegal fishing , others are opening their doors to it .
Commissioner , I have just come back from the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission , and I am well aware of the position that Papua New Guinea has taken .
I therefore maintain the position of the Committee on Fisheries of asking for the exemption to be suspended in the review of the agreement that we are discussing .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , as shadow rapporteur for the PPE Group , I would like to start by saying that we welcome the increasing role of the EU as a trading power in every region of the world , including the Pacific region .
The agreement , as it is now , is not a perfect one , not least because it is not a comprehensive EPA , but only an interim one .
We hope that the Commission will be in a position to negotiate , in due time , a comprehensive EPA including a larger number of countries in the region .
Secondly , the current agreement concerns only a small part of EU trade , since the share of EU trade accounted for by the whole of the Pacific region is just 0.06 % , and yet some areas have caused us concern , most notably on the issue of the derogation from the rules of origin for fishery products .
In our resolution , we raise our concern that a number of countries , such as the Philippines , Thailand , China , the United States , Australia and others , will be able to take advantage of this derogation and potentially export large quantities of processed fisheries products to the EU , potentially harming the interests of the EU fish processing and canning industry .
We therefore encourage the Commission to act on Parliament 's request for it to conduct an impact assessment study and , in the event that the assessment demonstrates a destabilising effect on the EU 's fish processing and canning industry , for it to initiate the procedure leading to suspension of the exceptional arrangements in this agreement regarding rules of origin .
Mr President , the current Interim Partnership Agreement signed in November 2007 by the European Commission and the states of Papua New Guinea and Fiji was heavily criticised by civil society and politicians in the Pacific region .
They highlighted the adverse impact the agreement has had on the level of regional solidarity and the political desire for economic integration in the region .
The region was split into groupings which negotiated on an individual basis and under pressure to reach an interim agreement with the European Commission .
At the same time , granting originating product status and an exemption from EU customs duties for fish products originating from Papua New Guinea and Fiji is believed to have led to a processing centre for these products , including some non-originating products , being set up by companies from neighbouring countries with the aim of enjoying the benefits of the exemption .
This process would have an adverse impact on the industry , workers and local incomes , given that the fishing industry is one of the most important creators of jobs in these countries .
It would also mean unfair competition for EU products .
As a result , the agreement may have had the opposite to the desired effect .
Therefore , the European Commission must ensure that the future partnership agreement will make a contribution both to the development of a sustainable local fishing industry which creates jobs and to closer regional integration , for instance , through negotiating the future agreement with the entire Pacific region .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , one of the objectives of the EPAs is to promote regional integration .
What we have seen so far is that this is not happening .
On the contrary , in the case of the Pacific , the EU is undermining unity by offering interim agreements to some ACP countries , with special conditions attached .
The derogation from the rules of origin for fish processed in Papua New Guinea and Fiji is an example of this .
I believe that this derogation is potentially hazardous and that it must be thoroughly evaluated in 2011 , as already agreed .
I say this because it is important to have facts when discussing this matter .
What are the effects on global fish stocks , on employment and on the environment in Papua New Guinea ?
What are the social conditions of the workers ?
All this must be fully and transparently assessed , and then the derogation may or may not be abolished on that basis , and not on the basis of complaints from the Spanish fishing industry which , itself , fishes in Papua New Guinea but never lands fish there - and , by the way , does not pay customs duty when it sells the fish as European on the European market .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that it is a slight exaggeration to call the Interim Economic Partnership Agreements ' Pacific Agreements ' , since , of the 15 ACP States in the area , only two are signatories to them .
Obviously , these agreements more often take the form of bilateral agreements than of genuine regional agreements , bilateral agreements which deviate from the much vaunted objective of the EPAs , namely , regional integration .
It is hard not to see in this an illustration of what members of civil society are complaining about , in the Pacific as well as in Africa , namely , the fact that a number of ACP countries have been forced to sign individual agreements because the Commission has not managed to turn the EPAs into a genuine instrument of development partnership .
The strong pressures exerted on the ACP States by the European negotiators were criticised by the ACP countries themselves during the 92nd Session of the ACP Council of Ministers , which took place in Brussels from 8 to 12 November 2010 .
The reality of the EPAs negotiated by the European Commission is so tragic that they failed even before they came into force .
They were such a failure that a number of ACP countries are asking the Member States of the European Union to examine the possibility of revising the negotiating mandate given to the European Commission in June 2002 .
( DE ) Mr President , in conjunction with the current market situation , the reform of the EU sugar market regime will result in the EU sugar price falling below the international price .
With this price situation , the long-term supply commitments with the sugar cane producers in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific will probably be very difficult to maintain .
The fact that farmers in the ACP countries would prefer to sell their goods at higher prices on the world market instead of selling them cheaply in the EU may have contributed to the difficulties experienced in connection with the new ACP agreements .
If this incentive is now being removed and , at the same time , they have to accept a most favoured nation clause , coupled with the fact that the state revenue will fall as a result of the loss of revenue from duties , it is no wonder that the ACP countries were so hesitant .
In this regard , attention surely needs to be paid to fisheries , and not only whether Papua New Guinea and Fiji have granted other trade partners access to their fishing waters .
Perhaps we should also investigate whether the accusations are correct that , for example , on account of the EU restrictions and catch quotas , the Spanish fishing fleet has relocated to the Pacific and is fishing there under a foreign flag .
( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to express my concern regarding the impact of this agreement on the canned tuna fishing sector , which is very important in Spain and particularly in Galicia , my constituency .
This negative impact is , as has been said , due to an unprecedented and ill-founded concession : the exemption from the rules of origin for processed fish products , when requested , due to not having sufficient indigenous raw materials .
That was the first thing that Papua New Guinea did , and the exemption is being applied .
Papua New Guinea is thus becoming a major platform for the processing and export of tuna from the European industry 's major competitors : the Philippines , Thailand , China and the United States .
It is really they who are the major beneficiaries of the agreement .
It is estimated that this tuna production will ultimately amount to 400 000 tonnes per year , destined for the European market , which currently consumes a total of around 710 000 tonnes .
The impact will be very serious , as the prices of the tuna from Papua New Guinea are one third lower than the price of European tuna , due to the country 's low wages and non-existent environmental standards .
In my region , Galicia , this is considered to be unbeatable competition , which will have serious consequences for employment .
I want the impact assessment announced by the European Commission to be as rigorous as possible and to take into account the short and medium-term consequences of this exemption from the rules of origin .
I hope that it will put an end to the application of this exemption as soon as possible .
It is an exceptional and temporary measure , but it appears that in Papua New Guinea , they consider it to be a permanent one : otherwise , the investments would not be made .
I also hope that this exemption is not included in other agreements or in the final agreement .
Currently , however , there is a problem with the provisional agreement , and it must be rectified .
( ES ) Mr President , as is being said here , the partnership agreement with Papua New Guinea and Fiji includes an exemption from the rules of origin .
As the rapporteur said , it particularly affects tuna .
What do we want from this agreement ?
We want the fisheries sector to develop and poverty to be overcome in these archipelagos : in other words , we want development aid .
However , what negative effects are there due to third countries benefiting from this preferential treatment ?
Here , we are hearing the complaints that are being made .
We want a balanced situation .
The Commission has just told us that there is clear research , but the opinion being expressed here is that this is not the case .
In 2008 , it was said that there was no distortion of any kind , and we were told that there would be an impact assessment .
We want a balanced situation .
We want a review , consultation and checks .
We want to know whether this agreement is aiding development in this archipelago .
We also want to know whether health measures - which are very important for imported products - are being complied with , along with sustainable fisheries management , and combating illegal fishing , which is essential .
Another very important element that would show us how the third countries that may be based in Papua New Guinea work is compliance with international employment rules .
We want to maintain this agreement and help it to be fulfilled , but we also want this agreement to be used to benefit the development of Papua New Guinea and Fiji and not to damage the Spanish industry .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to draw your attention to the derogation from the rules of origin granted to Papua New Guinea concerning processed fishery products , especially canned tuna .
I believe that the derogation is extremely dangerous .
This ACP country benefits from preferential access to the European market ; that is , from a total exemption from all customs duties on the canned tuna that it exports to our market .
I am not questioning the development policy implemented by the agreement .
However , the derogation from the rules of origin on canned tuna is totally unacceptable .
This derogation allows external operators to set themselves up in Papua New Guinea , and so it benefits jobs and the local population only to a very limited extent .
We must allow development aid , but fair and effective aid which benefits the regions concerned .
Community imports of tuna increased from 9 200 to 16 200 tonnes between 2008 and 2009 .
They doubled in just one year .
This phenomenon can only get worse if this derogation is maintained .
What is more , these products do not respect the same social , health and preservation standards for resources that are imposed on European products .
In particular , it is impossible to verify the origin of catches .
Ladies and gentlemen , has the European Commission not taken the time to read my report on the origin of imports of fishery and aquaculture products in the European Union ?
If not , the situation is hopeless .
We cannot sacrifice European jobs and the quality of the products sold on the European market in this way .
I do not want a situation which will have a destructive effect on the European processing industry to be introduced indefinitely .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as coordinator for the Committee on Fisheries , I find the fisheries aspect of this interim agreement particularly interesting .
In this regard , there were a few controversial issues at the start with regard to the relaxation of the rules of origin for Papua New Guinea .
I support the Commission 's idea of using this relaxation to stimulate the economy of one of the poorest countries in the world .
I am convinced that this is also something that should be of concern to those of us involved in fisheries policy .
At the same time , I can understand the concerns of the European industry , but I cannot honestly imagine that the relaxations granted will lead to Papua New Guinea becoming a serious competitor of our canning industry .
However , we need to be vigilant , because it will clearly not help anyone if we relocate half our canning industry to the Pacific region .
In this regard , I have to say , however , that during the debate on this agreement , we have been presented with very contradictory information regarding the question of the extent to which investments are being made in Papua New Guinea and which states are profiting indirectly from the relaxation of the rules of origin .
I would therefore urgently call on the Commission to closely monitor the application of this derogation and to submit a report to Parliament in a timely manner on the impact on Papua New Guinea 's development and on the European canning industry .
If this arrangement does not have the desired effect in Papua New Guinea and entails unacceptable losses for European companies , we will have to make a different decision when we come to negotiate the final agreement .
Please keep us informed of developments .
( ES ) Mr President , I would first like to clarify that I am in favour of strengthening trade links between the European Union and Papua New Guinea that promote the development of the region , but it must be sustainable development .
I sincerely believe that this agreement , as it currently stands , is not a good one .
I am entirely against one clause of the agreement , which I consider to be unfair : the exemption from the rules of origin , because not only does it endanger the sustainable development of Papua New Guinea , but , as we have heard here today , it endangers a whole European industry : the canning industry .
This concession should have been absolutely exceptional , and it should not have been applied in the case of Papua New Guinea .
Moreover , let us not forget the serious precedent that this measure is setting , and will set , for future European Union negotiations .
In my opinion , there needed to be a much clearer and firmer resolution in this respect , stating categorically that , at the next review of the Interim Partnership Agreement , the exemption from the rules of origin will be permanently suspended .
I therefore want to ask the Commission to take into account the dramatic consequences that this concession is going to have , firstly , for the European canning industry , and secondly , for the sustainability of the environment and natural resources of Papua New Guinea , and the very negative precedent being set for future negotiations .
However much the Commission has said that it will not be a precedent , the pressure will be there .
I therefore ask the Commission to decide to put an end to the exemption from the rules of origin as soon as possible .
Mr President , I actually came down to participate in the next debate but I have been watching this debate from my office and I am concerned , like others who have spoken in the debate here , about the idea of flexibility on rules of origin .
In the last seven days , there was a programme on British television , part of a whole Channel Four series about the fishing industry , in which , I am afraid , the European Union 's fisheries policy came in for severe criticism , and we are getting lots of e-mails from concerned citizens .
This specific issue did not arise , but I would just like to stand up and support those colleagues who have expressed huge concern about a proposal that is supposed to be positive as a development tool but , in fact , could be quite negative , not just from a European perspective , but also for the very countries we are trying to assist .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this was an extremely interesting debate .
There is poverty in the world .
We need to deal with it .
One way would be the transfer of financial resources , but it is much better to give the people the opportunity to make a decent living from the work they do .
The three tuna processing facilities in Papua New Guinea which are authorised to export tuna to the EU employ around 5 700 people , most of whom are women .
Jobs are at stake in Papua New Guinea , which is one of the most poverty-stricken countries .
When it proposes derogations , the Commission takes due account of the risks involved and looks to create safeguards .
The Commission takes the view that it is highly unlikely that Papua New Guinea 's exports will cause any serious disruption to the EU 's fishing and canning industry given the low volume of trade between Papua New Guinea and the EU , and Papua New Guinea 's low market share in the EU tuna market of around 3 % in recent years .
Provisional application dates from 2008 , and we have some experience with figures .
It will not cause any disruption to Europe 's fishing or canning industries .
The development of trade flows will be further analysed in a study on the effect of the implementation of the special rules of origin for fishery products which will be prepared in 2011 .
In addition , the Commission will monitor trade with PNG and will not hesitate to take appropriate measures if a serious disturbance of the EU market becomes evident .
The Interim Agreement explicitly allows for the application of such measures in its Chapter 2 on trade defence instruments .
There is no indication at this stage of any negative impact of Papua New Guinea 's exports of fishery products on the canning industry in other ACP or GSP + countries .
This aspect will also be looked at in the study I have just mentioned .
I should like to add that , independently of any special rules of origin or preferential trade agreements , countries and companies exporting fish or fishery products to the EU will always have to comply with the regulation on illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing and with the EU 's health and food safety requirements .
I believe that the Commission has considered the matter very carefully before bringing this measure forward .
I shall now turn to a broader issue : the EPA in general .
Trade is far from simple .
As I have said , the only way to eradicate poverty is to allow growth in the developing world .
It is true that regional cooperation is rather difficult at the start .
It is not just trade agreements that make regional development happen .
That is why we have earmarked EUR 45 million for aid for trade in the Oceania region .
This is three times more than was provided for under the ninth EDF .
It is only by facilitating trade flows that you can expect regional trade to take place .
If we look at all developing countries , basically all trade is based on monoculture - one particular export item with a high fluctuation rate .
This has a highly disruptive effect in the countries concerned .
When we talk about migratory flows , security , safety and justice in the world , we cannot just say that we do not care about it .
We should care about it , and our departments have carried out an extensive study .
We are proposing very decent measures which are completely in line with all the European Union 's objectives .
I believe that the measure is right and that the necessary safeguards are in place in case anything goes wrong .
I believe we have judged this correctly and I therefore lend my support to this agreement .
author . - Mr President , I will be brief .
I find myself almost , indeed entirely , in agreement with the Commissioner on this subject .
Firstly , to repeat , it is important that we sign the interim EPA because , if we do not , existing trade preferences for Papua New Guinea and Fiji will disappear , under the WTO ruling .
The interim EPA is precisely that : it is an interim arrangement , and I agree with all the colleagues who say that our objective in the long run should be a full , comprehensive EPA with all the Pacific countries , encouraging regional integration in the Pacific .
But we have to take this step at the moment to ensure the continuation of preferences for the two largest countries in the Pacific region .
On fishing , the Commission has made it very clear that what we have here is an exception .
This will be the only derogation .
There are no other parts of the world to which we intend giving such a derogation .
Why are we giving a derogation to Papua New Guinea ?
I will tell you : it is because Papua New Guinea is literally on the other side of the world , and the likelihood of EU fishing fleets exploiting that area extensively is limited , although they are free to do so .
There is nothing to stop EU fishing fleets fishing in Papua New Guinea waters and landing their catch and getting their catch canned in Papua New Guinea - and , as has been said earlier , that would be very good for development , and indeed we should encourage it .
But the situation at present is that Chinese boats , Thai boats and boats of other Asian nationalities are fishing in Papua New Guinea 's waters and landing their fish back in their own country , giving no opportunity for development in Papua New Guinea .
There is a development opportunity here in terms of providing jobs , particularly for women .
We often complain that we do not do enough in our development policy to encourage downstream activity .
Here , we are actually doing something positive for downstream activity .
As the Commissioner has said , in order to qualify , the fish still needs to meet all the standards under the regulation on illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
It has to meet all our sanitary and phytosanitary conditions .
That is absolutely essential .
The three factories in Papua New Guinea meet these standards at the moment and are providing useful jobs .
If we have a sudden increase in the number of factories , and a sudden surge in imports from Papua New Guinea , then , of course , we will have to revisit the situation and potentially take action .
At the moment , however , the statistics speak for themselves .
This agreement has been in place since 2008 .
There has been no surge .
There is no threat to the European tuna industry .
I have met , as rapporteur , with the leaders of the Spanish tuna industry and they themselves have said to me that there is no current threat .
What they are worried about is the future .
They accept that at the moment , there is no serious threat to the EU industry .
So let us not exaggerate the situation .
Let us not make a poor developing country pay for our preoccupation with our own self-interest .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 19 January 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Interim Partnership Agreement between the European Community and Fiji and Papua New Guinea intercedes in the complicated and complex integration process in the Pacific region .
Unfortunately , it provides almost no development support for either of the two states .
I would like to remind you that the military coup in Fiji in 2006 was unanimously condemned by the European Parliament , the Council and also by the Commission .
With the conclusion of this trade agreement , the dictatorship that has been in place up to now will be recognised as a contracting party of sorts .
The efforts of our partners in Australia , New Zealand and other countries of the region to restore democracy in Fiji will be undermined by this agreement .
When I criticised the suppression of democracy by the military in Fiji in our meeting of the Committee on International Trade , the response from its representatives was : ' But we are in control ! '
What I regard as sheer cynicism , seems now to satisfy the demands of the Commission for the legitimacy of its fellow contracting parties .
My group will vote against this agreement .
I am in favour of suspending the agreement until democracy is restored in Fiji .
International adoption in the European Union ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission , by Mrs Angelilli , on international adoption in the European Union - B7-0670 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over the years , many of my fellow Members and I have become aware of the problem of abandoned children , orphans and street children .
Amongst the associations that contacted me was the Amici dell 'adozione .
There are many abandoned children , not only in the developing world , but also in Europe .
These are children who become invisible and end up in the vicious circle of poverty and social exclusion or , worse still , are exploited by organised crime for begging , illegal work , prostitution , organ trafficking or illegal adoptions .
Often , these children spend their youth shuttling between social workers and orphanages .
We must guarantee these children the right to be adopted and the right to have a family .
A child should spend as little time as possible in an institution .
Obviously , the aim is the best interests of the child , so the ability to be adopted must certainly be granted warily , under the scrupulous supervision of the competent domestic authorities .
However , where suitable conditions exist , children have the right to be adopted , above all at national level , but also at international level , within the European Union .
I know that the Commission is aware of this , even if it is a matter of purely national competence .
However , some sort of cooperation between the Commission and Member States would be desirable to ensure good practices and strategies capable of guaranteeing the utmost transparency and to prevent possible illegal and casual adoptions , but also to ensure the maximum level of cooperation from Member States in guaranteeing the right of adoption and preventing children from being abandoned to themselves or , as I said before , abandoned to an institution .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for bringing forward this important question .
The protection and promotion of children 's rights is a priority for the Commission , especially since the launch of the communication entitled ' Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child ' in 2006 .
The strategy on the rights of the child focuses on the fundamental rights of children , including the protection of the best interests of the child as enshrined in the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Commission is determined to ensure that all fundamental rights encompassed in the Charter are duly respected by all EU actions , both legislative and non-legislative .
This practice will be upheld and further developed in the forthcoming communication on the rights of the child that the Commission will be publishing this year .
As of this year , 2011 , the Commission will also be reporting annually on progress made on the application of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We have to remember that the provisions of the Charter are addressed to the institutions and bodies of the Union , with due regard for the principle of subsidiarity , and to the Member States , only when they are implementing Union law .
We therefore have to remember that , currently , no European Union legislation on international adoption exists .
The subject is regulated by the Hague Convention of 29 May 1993 on protection of children and cooperation in respect of inter-country adoption , as well as by national laws .
All the Member States are party to that Convention , but the EU is not .
Its aim is to implement Article 21 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child by establishing safeguards to ensure that inter-country adoptions take place in the best interests of the child and that the child 's fundamental rights are respected .
Internationally , the Commission supports the accession of third countries to the 1993 Hague Convention on inter-country adoption and its correct implementation by participating in relevant meetings of the contracting parties .
The Commission does not consider specific European rules on intra-EU adoptions to be necessary , as all 27 EU Member States are parties to the Hague Convention .
That being said , the Commission is closely following the issue of international adoption within the European Union , given the link between adoption and children 's rights .
The Commission has taken steps to see how countries are implementing the convention on adoption , and , in November 2009 , provided a forum for an exchange of views on the issue .
The Commission 's Green Paper on the free circulation of public documents , published on 14 December 2010 , addresses the lack of mutual recognition of adoption decisions as civil status acts between Member States and its impact on the freedom of movement of EU citizens .
This is a specific step which addresses the question raised today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the issue of international adoption is particularly important , and Mrs Angelilli has done well to bring it to the attention of the European Parliament in this sitting .
We need leaner , simplified procedures .
The current costs of adoption are particularly significant , ranging from EUR 20 000 to EUR 30 000 per adoption , and there are difficulties in providing a real response to the need for a family and for budding parents to become just that .
We are talking about vulnerable and often abandoned children who sometimes disappear from sight .
I am referring , in particular , to flows of illegal immigrants and the many children who , having been accommodated in immigration centres , are subjected to the disgraceful conditions of the slave trade , in which so many of them are often caught up .
We need to promote the family .
The Italian model , and that of other places , can be followed .
We need to cut the costs related to international adoption , provide favourable loans from banks , introduce those leaner , simplified procedures that I mentioned , with proper supervisory mechanisms for monitoring what is going on in the Member States , ensure real prevention of trafficking in human beings , on which Parliament recently intervened with a specific dossier , take real action to combat illegal adoptions , and ensure transparency .
What is more , if we want to restore the central role of the family - as we often say in this Chamber - we must make sure that the associations , which are very often the key vehicle of these adoptions , are characterised by particularly high standards of guarantee .
I would conclude , Commissioner Georgieva , by saying that if there is a suggestion to be made , then it is the following : why not provide a European system of accreditation for these associations , and ensure that they work transparently , clearly and practically , but with a high level of guarantees to truly protect the inalienable and inviolable rights of children ?
Mr President , we are talking here this evening about a very sensitive topic , since we are talking about the smallest members of society , about those who need our love and need our care .
The problem of abandoned children is becoming more serious in Europe .
The situation that has arisen today is , to a very large extent , due to immediate surroundings .
Through the law on adopting children in an international context , it is possible to avoid a situation where many children are forced to live in children 's homes , where , despite the enormous care they receive , they never feel the real love of a mother or a father 's caress .
It is therefore necessary to make the adoption system more effective , so that the youngest abandoned children can find a replacement family .
It is necessary , for example , to restrict the rights of biological parents who show no genuine interest in a child for a certain period of time .
This would shorten the period which a child spends in a children 's home , as the child is not , so to speak , legally free .
In this way , it would also be possible , to some extent , to eliminate unnecessary delays in the overall adoption process .
Many agreements on the protection of minors provide a legal framework for the efforts of the competent authorities to act for the benefit and in the interests of these children .
Protecting children 's rights is also one of the main aims of the European Union .
It is therefore necessary to continue taking appropriate steps to ensure , in particular , that the best interests of children are protected under all circumstances .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Angelilli for this initiative and Commissioner Georgieva for her response .
This is an important debate .
Very many children throughout Europe today lack a home to call their own and a family to protect them and to keep these vulnerable little children warm and safe .
This is a dream for those children who grow up in institutions .
All of us must now do our utmost to make sure that orphan or abandoned children do not have to grow up in children 's homes and other institutions , but in families where they will receive the affection that can carry them right through to their adult lives , so that they will become healthy , rather than damaged adults .
We have differing views in our Member States about who can form a family .
I nevertheless believe we could all agree that , although a family may look different , what is important is that the child receives love and care .
I hope that we will also be able to agree about the importance of cooperation on political strategies and instruments for international adoptions .
I assume that the Commission will take the lead in this work .
I am also looking forward to working together with my fellow Members to draw up a joint resolution on this matter .
If we are able to help to bring together an abandoned orphan child and a family that is longing for children , we will have made a very important contribution .
We must also remember how important it is that our smallest brothers and sisters are well treated .
If we give them love , we will make life a little brighter on this planet .
I believe that is something that all of us must do throughout our lives , regardless of our role in society .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , adoption is a positive way of providing a new family for children who cannot be brought up by their birth parents , or children who lose their parents .
To adopt a child in the UK , checks and vetting procedures are robust , and prospective parents need to be accepted by an adoption agency .
The welfare of the child is , and should be , at the heart of the adoption process .
The issue of inter-country adoptions is more complex than national adoption , but I am very grateful to the PPE Group for bringing this issue forward .
Whilst it is to be commended that we try and move forward in it , I have concerns that international adoption does bring risks - risks that have already been mentioned , such as child abuse and malpractice , that undermine the welfare of the child .
That is why I believe that all Member States need to ensure that their adoption laws are regulated in a way that promotes the interests of the child .
Member States must work together to ensure that the legal process of adoption between the providing and receiving countries is transparent , robust and holds the child 's welfare as its priority .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner Georgieva , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give the example of Bulgaria , where the problem of abandoned children is becoming increasingly serious and urgent measures are needed to resolve the situation .
Systems like Bulgaria 's , which give a large percentage of children for international adoption are damaging .
Having said that , the childcare systems being what they are , international adoption may be the only opportunity many of the children in children 's homes have for a family and a normal life .
When improving the overall system , we should be careful not to deprive them of that opportunity .
We need measures which will not only make the international adoption procedure easier , but also guarantee our children 's interests , and that the so-called ' adoptive parents ' are not just after European citizenship , which is something that is possible at the moment .
It should not be my job to ask whether they are doing it for altruistic reasons or for their own benefit .
That is the job of those who conduct adoption interviews , who will have to look out for our children 's interests .
The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and its underlying philosophy must be the basis for international adoption laws within the European Union .
( RO ) Mr President , I welcome the interest shown by my Italian fellow Members in the situation of abandoned children , an interest which we all actually share .
Nevertheless , this issue comes under national jurisdiction only .
I asked to take part in this debate as I come from a country which is being subjected to pressure to resume international adoptions and amend the legislation currently in force .
However , in Romania , there are more families wishing to adopt than children available for adoption .
Our legislation , which numerous international experts were also involved in drafting , is completely in line with European legislation .
Turning now to this resolution , I must say that the phrase ' the right of the child to be adopted internationally ' , as specified in point d , is not recognised by the UN and Hague conventions .
International adoption is just one option .
These children end up in the system due to the precarious situation in which the families they come from find themselves , which , according to international legislation and conventions , should not constitute grounds for adoption .
This explains the large number of children in care homes .
However , 22 966 children do have a parent .
Romanian legislation provides for parental rights to be revoked only in the case of abuse .
Therefore , these children are not eligible for adoption .
This also applies to the 22 285 children in foster care .
The rationale behind the resolution must be focused on the best interests of the child , as my fellow Members before me have also said , and not on those of the adopter .
It is the duty of each state and not of anybody else to choose the most appropriate outcomes for its children .
Finally , I recommend that everyone becomes more familiar with national legislations .
I am referring by this , for example , to a number of children 's courts in Italy which issued seven adoption judgments in 2009 relating to children from Romania , with complete disregard for our legislation .
( RO ) Mr President , I welcome this debate during the European Parliament plenary session , starting with the assumption that the protection of children 's rights is and must be a priority for every Member State in our Union .
The ultimate goal of everyone in this Chamber is to promote children 's interests .
It goes without saying that common , strict criteria implemented by Member States are required to improve the care and living conditions for children living in institutions and who have been abandoned and to ensure their protection when they are adopted , especially in the current climate , where budget austerity seems to be the only thought which the European Union 's right-wing governments have .
Therefore , the first step is to provide appropriate care for these children .
The second step is to combat child trafficking and prostitution .
The third step is for us not to forget , for the children 's sake , that priority must be given to adoptions by family members and national adoptions .
The fourth step is that only then should international adoptions be considered .
On this matter , we can but learn the lessons from the past , as opening the gates to international adoptions in Romania led to the creation of unprecedented child trafficking networks and cases involving children being abducted and sold to the West , in cooperation with European and international organisations .
Between 1997 and 2000 , Commissioner , Romania ' exported ' 9 150 children .
My country will never accept such an abomination again .
Finally , I would like to ask , through your good self , for Commissioner Reding to explain the allegations which have appeared in the Romanian and international media concerning the European Agency for Monitoring International Adoptions , a proposal which also seems to feature in the study commissioned by the European Commission .
A fellow Member is still waiting for Commissioner Reding 's reply to a question .
( DE ) Mr President , only recently , we held an international workshop in the large plenary chamber of our Parliamentary building in Brussels on Parental Responsibility and the Protection of Children , which I had the honour of leading .
In Europe , there are more and more vulnerable and abandoned children who should not be living permanently in orphanages .
It is therefore our duty as legislators to strengthen the right to international adoption within the EU in order to help these children .
Article 24 of our Charter of Fundamental Rights also demands this when it states : ' Children shall have the right to such protection and care as is necessary for their wellbeing ' .
Although we have the Hague Adoption Convention and a Council of Europe convention , these are not enough .
In practice , major legal problems still arise in connection with international adoptions .
In these cases , only international regulations which eliminate the differences in national regulations that still exist and replace them with clear and simple principles can help .
In this regard , and with all our legislative zeal , we must not lose sight of the fact that the EU must cooperate with the Hague Conference on International Private Law in order to ensure a coordinated procedure .
Thus , the EU should not reinvent the wheel in this area .
I welcome the Commissioner 's statements in this regard .
( PL ) Mr President , this is a very important subject , but also a sensitive one .
As you know , during the previous parliamentary term , we discussed the issue of the adoption of Romanian children by parents in Israel , and this caused serious problems , including of a political nature .
Now we have another initiative .
It is , I think , motivated by good intentions , but , as can be seen , it is causing a lot of emotion .
I think we need to be very careful here not to throw the baby out with the bathwater , so that in our concern for a good future life for children , we do not cause a situation in which we take a short cut and open the door to hasty adoptions and , in fact , allow children to be taken away from their parents .
I would like to warn very strongly against this .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that the topic of inter-country adoption and of abandoned children was included in the European Parliament 's agenda .
I find it extremely important that high priority is given to child protection issues across the board , in the European Parliament as well as in the European Union .
We must all set an example when it comes to abandoned and neglected children .
They also have the right to grow up to become healthy adults , both in body and soul .
To achieve this , it is imperative that these abandoned , neglected and orphaned children grow up in a family and in a healthy environment .
We must do everything in our power to ensure that as few children as possible end up in orphanages .
The issue of abandoned children becomes particularly relevant when we think of an ageing Europe where every child is also a keystone of our own future .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your thorough answer .
While we know that the Hague Convention essentially governs inter-country adoption , we also know that 26 of the 27 Member States are signatories to it .
You are also correct when you say that how this international convention is implemented is a question of subsidiarity .
At the same time , I feel that we cannot afford to be ambiguous .
Life forces us to concern ourselves with the issue of children not only when scandals erupt or when it is discovered that a hundred children were sold here , or several hundred or more than a thousand children were sold there .
The other side of the coin is that we must ensure that the thousands of children we know about in the European Union can be put up for adoption .
This topic cannot be avoided because the European Union has a responsibility to protect children 's rights while , at the same time , we are also seeing that the issue of adoption and , as a matter of fact , as its direct consequence , international legislation and international practice , blow certain rights out of proportion , making the adoption of children impossible and thereby curtailing their other rights .
Commissioner , I really would like to ask that we move forward as regards your comments in your introduction concerning the lack of an international law that could already exist in the European Union on accepting adoption documents in Member States .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the question of inter-country adoption is at least as important as the issue of cross-border divorces and also deserves the same level of attention , particularly because it most often concerns children who are emotionally , financially and , in every other possible sense , at the mercy of decisions made by adults .
These children deserve the highest degree of protection by the Community .
The interest of those who submitted verbal questions as regards the issue of inter-country adoption was concerned primarily with the legislative environment .
The overview of the practice is at least as important as legislation .
A new or even a good policy decision and a new legislative environment can be created only with access to reliable data and statistics , as well as actual practice .
Establishing whether it is even necessary to touch the legislation is possible only by relying on precise data , which is why I consider the question posed by my fellow Members to be of key significance .
However , because , in my opinion , the range of issues must be treated in a truly comprehensive manner , I would like to move a further step back than those who asked the question .
I would like to ask the Commission the following questions : do we have accurate statistical data on inter-country adoption cases within the EU or involving third countries ?
Exactly what kind of data are we collecting about this topic ?
What methods do we use ?
Who is collecting the data , and if it is the Member States , do they use the same methodology ?
If an inter-country adoption takes place , whether within the EU or with the involvement of a third party , what is the process for the selection and preparation of children and parents ?
How do we supervise the preparation process ?
Do we have common rules for this ?
What are the differences in Member State practices ?
Is there an age limit as regards the child or the adoptive parent ?
Do adoptive parents receive continuous professional support ?
Is reliable and regular follow-up available ?
Do we know how often adoptive parents encounter problems and what these problems are ?
What kind of support do Member States provide in problematic cases ?
Thank you for your attention and thank you , Commissioner , for your outstanding work .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for a number of years , many families in Italy and just as many Romanian children have been suffering the consequences of Romania 's block on international adoptions .
The Hague Convention is the benchmark framework to be implemented uniformly in all countries of the European Union , and Romania needs to make an effort to adjust to it .
If Romania believes that the block on international adoptions works to protect children - for example , from the risk that a market for the illegal trafficking of children would be created - it must also deal with this problem with the help of the European Union , by toughening up controls and introducing strict regulations .
However , we need to make an effort to ensure that many respectable families can adopt children , who deserve a second chance for a happy childhood .
I would therefore ask the Commission how it intends to support a possible commitment from Romania to remove the moratorium on international adoptions and , furthermore , I should like to know the Commission 's position on the possibility of creating a European adoption agency , including in the light of the studies carried out .
( PL ) Mr President , adoption can , and often does , work for the good of the child , but the procedures related to adoption can also give rise to abuses , such as the trafficking of children and taking children for adoption from families which have not abandoned their children at all , but which often , because of poverty , are not able to give their children the right environment .
The high number of children in orphanages , which we are talking about in today 's debate , often does not mean children who have been abandoned , but in fact represents children of poor parents who are not coping with their difficult personal situation .
Such families should be helped .
State authorities could help these families for far lower sums without placing the children in an orphanage at all and without then giving them up for adoption .
We should adopt an unequivocal principle - it should be obligatory in the European Union - never take children from their families because of poverty .
Give help , and do not take children from their families .
Poverty must not be the reason for depriving a child of its biological family .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today , we find ourselves discussing what is a terrible contradiction for the European Union , which aims to ensure full freedom of movement for its citizens and to work for their needs .
This contradiction reveals some people 's genuine need for help and the inability of others to offer the help requested .
The paradox of the difficulties and obstacles that hinder international adoption translates into a tragedy for thousands of children and families in the European Union .
The numerous international conventions have shown that they can only partially deal with the problems related to adoption .
On the one hand , this is down to the specific provisions of each convention and their exclusive nature .
However , on the other hand , the limited efforts made thus far are a result of the intergovernmental nature of the existing decision-making structures and processes .
The Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights today form the legal benchmarks and , naturally , the political approach is changing .
The protection and wellbeing of children is one of the cornerstones of the rights safeguarded by the Union .
This is the basis of today 's debate and the oral question submitted , which forms the backdrop for a broader discussion that should be very dear to the heart of Parliament and should be carried out swiftly and carefully by this Parliament , and followed with the tenacity that Mrs Angelilli has shown .
Allow me to recall Antoine de Saint-Exupéry , who said : ' All grown-ups were children once - although few of them remember it ' .
( RO ) Mr President , the oral question which has provided the basis for the resolution on international adoptions places an item of paramount importance on the European Parliament 's agenda .
International adoption can only be considered as an alternative after all the measures for arranging a national adoption have been exhausted .
International adoption also raises a series of specific issues and difficulties , largely arising from the limited interaction between a child and adoptive parents in the period prior to adoption , as well as from problems encountered by the child after adoption relating to linguistic and cultural adjustment .
The principle of acting in the best interests of the child and not the adopter , as stipulated in the UN and Hague Conventions , must form the basis of the European Parliament 's resolution , with the focus on the child 's development in a family environment which ensures continuity in the child 's upbringing , taking into account the child 's ethnic , religious , cultural and linguistic background .
The key consideration when examining the subject of adoptions and drafting the resolution is the principle of reintegrating the child from the protection system into a biological or extended family .
I would like to highlight a confusion which is often made between the number of children who have been separated from their parents , but are in the care of the protection system , and the number of children available for adoption .
Children separated from their parents enjoy protection from the state for a limited period of time and are not available for adoption .
I think that we do not need control mechanisms and that the existing principles applied internationally which are linked to them are adequate .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this evening , we are tackling a debate that is partly the fruit of the work of many associations across the continent and the European Union that turned to us precisely in order to deal with this delicate topic , which was initiated by Mrs Angelilli , and which we have turned into this oral question .
From a dialectical point of view , they have presented us with a very simple problem , or so it would seem .
There are many children in institutions across Europe and there are many families that want to adopt children .
However , these two paths do not often seem to cross and the children remain in care and the families remain childless .
Clearly , these children are our priority .
They have our attention and they need us to take all the precautions that the situation requires .
However , when these children remain in care for too long , they are often targeted by traders in prostitution and organ trafficking for these new slave traders .
All this is happening whilst , meanwhile , many families would like to open their homes to these children .
I am therefore very happy to have heard the Commissioner outline the measures that she intends to adopt .
However , we must also add the possibility for greater cooperation between the Member States for collaboration in international adoptions , as well as supervision in relation to the protection of adopted children , obviously .
We therefore ask for more streamlined procedures for the families and the children , because in a few years ' time , these former children and young people will have become men and women and will ask themselves why a Europe full of potential host families left them in their condition .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to present a slightly different view on adoption .
Children deserve the best .
First of all , this means that they deserve a family . Either their own family or a replacement family , with a loving mother and father .
Neither the European Union nor national borders must stand in the way of such a family .
Although Member States have the final say in adoption issues , it is our duty to facilitate the process .
We must not forget , however , that efforts for the good of the child come first .
This means efforts to help the child 's parents if they get into difficulties .
The social situation of parents must not be a reason for deciding that their children should be adopted .
It is simple to take a child away from impoverished parents , but at the same time , it is the worst thing we can do to a child .
This applies twice over to international adoptions .
As one of those who signed the question we put to the Commission on international adoptions , I am delighted that many Members are addressing this topic .
I would be even more delighted if we could bring the same energy and sense of urgency to bear in attending to the good of families and their needs in all European policies .
( ES ) Mr President , international adoption that is inspired by the principles of prevalence of the interests of the child and respect for his fundamental rights is an appropriate means of finding a family for children for whom a family cannot be found in their country of origin .
People trafficking , sexual exploitation and work slavery are a terrible reality affecting hundreds of millions of minors .



Let us look at some of the statistics : there are more than 145 million abandoned children in the world ; in Russia alone , more than 600 000 live on the streets ; since 1980 , more than 2 million children have died in armed conflicts ; more than 600 million children live in extreme poverty ; more than 5 million die every year ; more than 130 million children in developed countries grow up without access to a basic education due to their poverty , and 60 % of them are girls ; 7 million children worldwide are subject to sexual slavery .

For all these reasons , we must foster mechanisms to promote an international adoption instrument inspired by protecting children , harmonising the different requirements and procedures laid down in the legislation of the Member States , in particular , applying Article 21 of the European Charter of Children 's Rights and taking into consideration Article 24 of our Charter of Fundamental Rights .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I signed the oral question tabled by Mrs Angelilli because I think that the European Union cannot but make the protection of children one of its priorities , particularly in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In my opinion , adoption procedures are only the litmus test of a social issue that we are duty bound to tackle and impose some boundaries upon .
In the best cases , the children become objects of commercial exchanges that certainly offend our dignity , but unfortunately , they are often also victims of exploitation and violence .
Beyond the phenomenon of so-called ghost children - meaning those born illegally or abandoned and never picked up by the system - there is an undetermined number of children who can be adopted and who are matched by an equal number of couples hoping to adopt , who never cross paths due to legislative interpretation and cumbersome bureaucracy .
The United Nations Children 's Fund recently published a study containing some alarming figures , including with regard to many European countries .
As Chair of the Committee on Petitions , I have often run up against legal conflicts between Member States which result in negative or even tragic consequences for the children alone .
The complex procedures involved in many national systems do not always turn out to be beneficial for the child .
The long timeframes involved are at odds with the need to have the child placed within the first year of his or her life to reduce the trauma of the upheaval and to avoid long stays in orphanages , and also because we should consider that above a certain age , there is lower market demand , unfortunately .
In the light of these figures , I believe that the green light should be given to the long-heralded need for Europe-wide coordination of national laws which , firstly , will help simplify inter-European adoption procedures and , secondly , will guarantee that the fundamental principles of adoption are observed when children are adopted from third countries .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly congratulate Mrs Angelilli on the timeliness of this oral question .
I am one of those that consider that we need to develop more effective child protection policies to prevent situations of poverty , abuse and child abandonment , along with alternatives to their confinement in institutions , among which adoption should play a key role .
UNICEF recognises that there has been no reduction in the number of children in institutions , and the increase in adoptions falls far short of the growth in the number of institutionalised children , a clear implication that we need to have a good , hard look at ourselves .
It is vital that we carry out a general evaluation of the law and of administrative and legal practice regarding the existing adoption processes in the various Member States in order to identify anything that prevents them from working properly .
Also , as regards non-EU countries , we need to monitor the problem of irregular or illegal adoption , which mainly occurs in the poorest regions .
Take , for example , Guinea-Bissau , where more than 50 % of children are not registered .
This clearly facilitates the development of criminal activities by child trafficking networks .
I therefore believe that a European strategy for the protection of the children 's interests in the area of international adoption procedures is necessary in order to avoid and prevent abduction and the sale and trafficking of human beings .
Mr President , in Ireland , the motto of the International Adoption Association is that families are made in many ways .
The debate tonight reflects the interest that there is in adoption .
There are over 1 200 members of that Association : many have adopted and some wish to adopt .
Our attitudes to adoption have changed utterly .
In Ireland , we come from a past where mothers - particularly single mothers - had their babies taken from them and given away to others to be adopted .
That is not a good history , but it is certainly one that has now conditioned how we think of adoption : the child must be at the centre of it .
Certainly , the birth families are very important in all of this .
Equally , we have a duty and a responsibility to give the very best possible home to all our children .
Each Member State - and that is the level on which this should operate - needs to protect children within its own borders .
Europe should provide a coordinating role .
I hope that in Ireland , we will have a referendum on the rights of the child .
We talk about it a lot , but we are not so effective in actually dealing with it .
I am hopeful that the referendum will happen .
The situation will certainly improve then .
This has been a really useful debate and I thank colleagues for it .
Mr President , the greatest gift that we can give to any child is that of a happy home .
Most children find that in their own home with their natural parents .
Many though , get this with their adoptive parents .
Either is preferable to an institutional life , provided , of course , that there is no corruption or exploitation involved .
To find the balance is very difficult , but I think that we need - while taking into consideration the Hague Convention , etc . - where there are prospective adoptive parents who are bona fide and beyond reproach , to facilitate them more in giving the gift of a happy home to a child who has not otherwise got one , and not encumbering them with lengthy , expensive , drawn-out processes .
We need to get the balance right because , as a teacher , I came across many adopted children and the vast majority were in very good homes .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Angelilli , ladies and gentlemen , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the protection and care of children has become one of the fundamental rights that Europe is legally bound to protect .
Even so , there are still too many cases in Europe of children being abandoned who , in the best scenario , end up in orphanages .
This is a tragic situation which our democracies cannot tolerate .
This is why we need to make all the efforts required to prevent this situation from becoming unmanageable , adopting a strategy to raise the level of awareness and favouring the right to adopt children at international level as much as possible .
To make this happen , we first of all need an accurate picture of the situation in all the Member States , with constant monitoring which could also be carried out by creating a permanent observatory on children 's rights .
In addition , we need a comprehensive overview of the existing measures taken by the European Union and those that could be developed to protect children in need of adoption by European citizens as much as possible .
Mr President , the wide range of instruments which currently govern international adoptions has led to confusion over whose role it is to safeguard the rights of children subject to international adoptions .
The Commission needs to focus further on the competent authorities , and ensure that those regulating the adopters ' and the adopted children 's rights are making sure that basic minimum standards are adhered to , and that , in the longer term , the child is able to maintain a link to its birth country and its culture .
Specifically , urgent measures must be taken to react to the abuse and trafficking of children , which , as a report in my own country today shows , is alarmingly on the rise both within and across European borders .
Child trafficking and child laundering - the stealing of children who are subsequently sold to adoptive parents as legitimate orphans - is a phenomenon which does not receive adequate attention at an international level .
I would call on the Commission to play a more active role in the field of international adoption , to take concrete steps to improve the convoluted and confused legislative framework which currently governs international adoption in the EU , and to protect those most vulnerable young people .
( SK ) Mr President , we are talking at this moment about international adoptions because there are children in every country who , for various reasons , cannot be placed in functioning families or in replacement families in the same country .
It is not acceptable to have a repeat of the situation we witnessed in the recent past when a more affluent country such as Italy enjoyed greater opportunities to adopt children from the less affluent Romania .
Surely , as a number of Members have already said this evening , poverty cannot be a sufficient reason for taking a child away from the family and allowing an international adoption .
I would like to emphasise strongly that we must take great care in this situation to uphold not only national laws but also international laws , in order to prevent the risk of abuse , trafficking and the abduction of children .
( RO ) Mr President , I , too , would like to refer to the UN Convention , which states that international adoptions can only offer an alternative means of supporting the child when the child cannot be placed in an adoptive family or cannot be cared for in a suitable manner in his or her country of origin .
The liberalisation of international adoption entails numerous risks .
On the one hand , it increases the possibility of child trafficking and abuse caused as a result of financial interests and difficulties in monitoring the situation after adoption takes place .
On the other hand , separating children from their biological parents and place of origin can have adverse psychological , social and educational repercussions .
When we discuss adoption , our main consideration must be to safeguard the child 's welfare .
Therefore , pressure must not be exerted on EU Member States with diverse traditions and legal procedures relating to adoption to liberalise international adoption .
Mr President , I would again like to draw your attention to the practice of illegal adoption .
There is an organised crime network in Europe - and especially in south-eastern Europe - which deals in this .
Hundreds of children are being illegally adopted or put up for trade .
After everything that we have succeeded in doing here in Parliament , we should not have just one small recital on this issue in the Human Trafficking Directive .
I call on the Commission to take special measures to prevent this horrible crime , and also to punish the perpetrators .
We could not cope , country by country , at national level , with this very vicious practice .
It constitutes organised crime , and I therefore insist that it should be dealt with at EU level .
( RO ) Mr President , the resolution on international adoption in the EU must clearly mention the following points : families intending to resort to international adoption must obtain the opinion of the competent national institution in their country of origin , and international adoption must be carried out only under the responsibility of the competent authorities in the two Member States , that of the family and the child .
In addition , the monitoring of children adopted via the international adoption procedure must be carried out by the national institution with the relevant powers .
Last but not least , the competent national authorities must provide regular reports to the original Member State of the child adopted via the international adoption procedure concerning the child 's progress .
Mr President , I just wanted to add something about kinship care , and support to kinship carers .
Most kinship carers are grandparents and find themselves being the main caregivers for their grandchildren , normally because the parent either has a drug addiction or has died through that drug addiction .
The issue I wanted to bring to this House 's attention is the good work that Mentor UK has been doing on the rights of kinship carers .
Some kinship carers adopt their grandchildren .
Others do not , but are in a caring relationship with that child and provide a stable and safe home for them .
However , the rights of kinship children are often actually less than those of children who are in proper care .
This is something which I felt people had touched upon in this debate , but I would urge you , if you are interested in the issue of kinship carers , to look at the work of Mentor UK and the help that is given to kinship carers in different countries .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first echo the sentiments of those who expressed thanks to Ms Angelilli for initiating a very rich debate this evening .
I have five points to make in summing up the debate .
First , the Commission fully agrees with the views that have been expressed on the importance of protecting and promoting the rights of children in inter-country adoptions .
This is , and will remain , the main objective of the Commission as we participate in discussions on this topic , both in the context of the Hague Convention and in our work on the rights of children in Europe .
On this issue , I would point out that in the forthcoming communication on children 's rights , we will present actions to promote the rights of the child for the period between 2011 and 2014 .
These will include actions aimed at improving the support the Commission provides to Member States in the implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child .
As I mentioned with reference to the Green Paper , we are also taking steps that will facilitate the circulation of civil status acts as adoption decisions - in other words , the mutual recognition of national adoption decisions within the EU .
With regard to MEPs ' concerns that the issue is sensitive and should be seen in the context of national needs and national legislation , the Commission would like to underline that the Romanian law on international adoptions is the sole responsibility of the Romanian Government .
The measure that has been taken must be seen in connection with the abusive practices in inter-country adoption in Romania in the past .
The Commission is closely following developments in Romanian legislation , but I would like to stress again that it is Romania 's sole responsibility to further develop this law .
On monitoring , it is our strong belief that the appropriate institution is the Special Commission of the Hague Convention on the Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter-Country Adoption .
The Commission participates in that monitoring body .
We will take many of the points that have been made this evening into account when we think about how we participate in the work of this body .
The Commission considers accreditation to be a matter of national authority .
It relates to family laws that Member States have and develop , and therefore it is appropriate that it should be addressed at that level .
Finally , I will convey to Vice-President Reding the points that have been made here this evening , including the question raised by one Member in relation to which an answer is expected .
As the godmother of an adopted boy , I have seen how emotional and difficult the issue of adoption can be , and how many factors are involved in a decision to adopt .
I have listened to the debate this evening not only with great interest , but also with a sense that it is a matter not just of legislation , but also of hearts and minds .
Therefore , let us pray that hearts and minds are brought into play in a way that best protects the interests of children , both our children and children in other countries .
I have received five motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 19 January 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - The resolution being discussed is basically stating the fundamental principles of the rights of children to be adopted and safeguards for their welfare .
It is deficient in putting forward concrete proposals to make the adoption procedures more efficient and less bureaucratic , without compromising on the safeguards .
There are thousands of orphaned or abandoned children who live in substandard conditions .
There are thousands of childless couples who could give a future to these children .
It is not enough to call on EU institutions to play an active role at the Hague conference to exert pressure to improve , streamline and facilitate international adoption procedures .
It would be more meaningful if concrete proposals are made on how to streamline and facilitate international adoption procedures .
It may be admirable if the issue of international adoptions is seen within the wider context of adoption itself .
National governments need to legislate so as to give a fresh impetus to the relevant laws and enable the adoption of children who have been abandoned by their parents .
In many legislations , the assent of the biological parents is still necessary , even if these have completely abandoned their children .
Children are among those in our society who are most in need of protection , particularly if they are orphans , vulnerable or abused children .
In the case of international adoptions , children who are taken away from the environment that they are used to often suffer a huge amount of damage as a result .
Therefore , the welfare of the child must always take priority .
That is something that the United Nations also needs to take into account .
Last year , a campaign was launched in Mexico City on subway tickets aimed at promoting the right of homosexual couples to adopt .
According to media reports , this campaign was supported by the United Nations , even though psychologists confirm that growing up with a father AND a mother as role models is of key importance for a child 's development .
Stable family relationships are especially important in the case of adopted children who , as such , have already not had the best start in life .
There can be difficulties in any partnership , but , for the sake of the welfare of the children , we should not make problems a foregone conclusion right from the start .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament is looking at the question of adoption in the Union today , because this is something which is especially dear to me .
The particular references to children in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union make it possible for us to take up this question , and they also oblige us to do so .
International adoption can mean the chance of a normal life and a happy family for many abandoned children who , because of their age or health , have no chance of being adopted in their own country .
In Europe today , we are facing a situation in which in countries where abortion has been accepted and is widely available , there are not many children for adoption , while in other countries , there are many such children , and apart from the youngest of them , they have no chance of finding a family of their own .
Furthermore , there is a growing number of couples who find it difficult to have their own children or who are affected by fertility problems which cannot be treated .
So I am very enthusiastic about the work of the European Commission in this area .
The Member States should come to an agreement on the question of simplifying procedures so that they will not be too complicated or protracted .
We must not , however , forget to put in place systems for protection and monitoring , in order to prevent child trafficking .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( CS ) Mr President , it is now 19 months since Canada suddenly and unilaterally introduced visa requirements for citizens of the Czech Republic , which , as a Member of the EU , is not allowed to introduce a reciprocal visa requirement for all Canadians .
President Barroso immediately stated that it was a Union and not a bilateral issue , but Commissioner Malmström is unfortunately not addressing it as a priority , but only passively monitoring the bilateral negotiations .
In response to my intervention , the Council said that the Union is not discussing reciprocity , as it has not yet received any proposals from the Commissioner .
Czech citizens are thus de facto second class citizens of the EU as far as their rights are concerned , and it is surprising that Canadians continue to travel to the Czech Republic without visas .
I would like to point out that the tardiness of the Commission also increases the risk that the Czech Republic will delay ratification of agreements between the Union and Canada .
It has no other option for defending the rights of its citizens , since the EU is failing to put pressure on Canada .
I would therefore like to demand , together with you , that the Commissioner deals with Canada without delay , and also stands up for Romania and Bulgaria .
Are a common visa policy and the principle of solidarity no longer European values ?
Is the Commissioner aware of what is at stake today ?
( RO ) Mr President , the taking of psychotropic and psychoactive substances , which generally lies in a legislative grey area , is having much more harmful effects than the drugs which are currently known .
These substances are frequently encountered in Europe in dream stores and are known as ' ethnobotanicals ' , a term invented to make drug dealing and taking seem harmless .
Countries like Poland , Israel , Sweden , Denmark , England and Germany have already banned a considerable number of substances identified as psychotropic and psychoactive .
The substances available on the market , although not included in the list of banned substances , are very difficult to control , making it impossible for medical staff to provide assistance as the chemical combinations used have unknown reactions .
The only measure that we can take is to ban these stores from operating , after which we need to focus our efforts on halting the online sale of these substances .
( EL ) Mr President , the continuing crisis in the euro area has brought all of us - European institutions , Member States and political leaders - face to face with our responsibilities .
We must take the initiative away from the markets ; we must provide an integrated and convincing response to the crisis by supplementing - not replacing or overlooking - the responsibilities that the Member States have assumed to honour their obligations .
Within this context , high-profile Europeans , political parties , the public in their demonstrations and European trade unions are arguing that Eurobonds can play a key role in overcoming the debt crisis and safeguarding the stability of the euro .
I should therefore like to point out that the Council needs to respond immediately to the demand formulated by the European Parliament in its resolution of 16 December 2010 and send a clear signal to the European Commission , so that it can study the matter in detail and submit specific proposals .
Mr President , I rise to make a statement about the plight of hundreds of thousands of airline passengers in Europe in the 10 days before Christmas and the chaos in the arrangements for transporting them and their baggage to their intended destinations .
The failure of our airlines and our airports to deal with a few centimetres of snow in a few Member States caused devastating delay , disruption and despair for travellers .
I call on Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism , the Union 's Transport Commissioner and transport ministers in the Council to conduct an inquiry into the disruption , to make provisions to prevent its recurrence , to ensure that those affected are properly compensated , and to study a sharing of the burden of compensation in future between the airline companies and others involved , such as airport operators .
Unusual snowfalls and uncommonly low temperatures , as predicted in 2009 by the Potsdam Institute , arise from the melting of the Arctic ice cap .
They will become more frequent .
We cannot prevent them , however much we must try to limit them , but we can - and we must - be prepared for them .
( PL ) Mr President , the special commission investigating the cause of the crash of a Polish aircraft near the Russian town of Smolensk on 10 April last year has published the conclusions of its report in Moscow .
In the disaster , the President of Poland was killed , along with 96 other passengers , including many of the most important people in the country .
The report is absolutely scandalous .
It contains numerous lies , and clearly shifts responsibility for the disaster onto the Polish side , completely ignoring the serious errors made on the Russian side , such as the improper way in which the flight controllers in the Smolensk control tower guided the aircraft during its descent .
In the report , the Russian side has not taken account of a great many of Poland 's comments - 20 pages of comments have simply been ignored .
This is a most unsatisfactory state of affairs , and the European Union should look into it .
( PT ) Mr President , 2010 , which was declared the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , is over .
It was a year in which the European Union , with unprecedented cynicism and hypocrisy , implemented policies and guidelines that resulted in the significant increase in poverty and social exclusion that we can see today .
The state budget for 2011 in Portugal , drawn up and approved under enormous pressure and applause from the European Union , will lead the country into economic recession and a complete regression on the social level , with a rise in unemployment to record levels and widespread poverty and social exclusion .
Added to all that are the unacceptable levels of pressure and blackmail to which the country has been subjected over the past few weeks and to which we strongly object here : the increasingly bullying tones of financial capitalism and the institutions in its service to force the country and its people to submit to and accept injustice and plundering , to accept the draining of the country 's resources into the pockets of the financial capitalists .
One thing is certain : we can expect a year of much fighting if they continue on this path .
Mr President , with regard to Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , and to Article 10 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , I was informed that , on Christmas Day , a massive abuse of religious freedom took place in the Church of St. Synesios in the occupied town of Rizokarpaso .
The so-called authorities , supported by Turkey , had stopped the Saturday service on the pretext that no application had been made to hold the mass that day , although according to the Church of Cyprus , such permission was requested at the beginning of December , as has been the case for the last 36 years .
Mr President , I strongly encourage you to take the appropriate steps to guarantee religious freedom on the soil of a European Union Member State .
Mr President , on Christmas Day , the Turkish Security forces in Rizokarpaso , in the occupied part of Cyprus , interrupted by force the Christmas mass being celebrated by the few remaining - elderly - Christians there , evicted the priests from the church and ordered the congregation to leave .
The excuse was that they had been given written permission for Sunday mass , but that Christmas was on a Saturday .
Demanding written permission for mass is a restriction of the freedom of religion in itself , let alone to interrupt a Christmas Day mass on the grounds of a petty bureaucratic excuse - all this in a Member State of the Union , by ordinance of a country aspiring to join it .
Under the Vienna Agreement , 12 000 Greek Cypriots enclaved in the Karpass Peninsula were allowed to live there after the Turkish invasion .
Today there are 300 .
Now you understand why .
( SV ) Mr President , I believe it would be extremely worthwhile for the EU to start an inter-faith dialogue from the highest level .
I would like to see the EU attempt to get Turkey to host such a dialogue .
We all know how Christians are treated throughout the world - in various different places in the Middle East , the Copts in Egypt , Christian Iraqis in Iraq and so on .
It is my firm view that we cannot simply report on this and hear about it and watch it happening ; we must do something tangible .
The first thing we need to do as far as I can see is to establish a dialogue .
It would be very worthwhile if Turkey , with the bridge-building spirit that I believe exists there , in spite of everything , was able to host this type of dialogue .
This is about Jews , Christians and Muslims .
Let us establish a broad inter-faith dialogue under the auspices of the EU .
( FR ) Mr President , in Iraq and in Egypt , the Christians say that they are truly suffering .
Soon , ladies and gentlemen , there will no longer be any Christians on the lands that gave birth to Christianity .
As was said a few moments ago , in Turkey , a secular Muslim country and a country which is knocking at our door , 20 % of the population were Christian 100 years ago ; today , the figure is less than 1 % .
The movement which we are witnessing is , in fact , a groundswell .
The Arab and Muslim world is persecuting its Christians , condemning them , preventing them from converting , punishing them and killing them .
We are clearly seeing Islam becoming a state religion .
The result is there for everyone to see - Christianity is the most persecuted religion in the world .
Yet , ladies and gentlemen , defending Christians in the Middle East increases the chances of counterbalancing the rise of Islamic extremism .
The presence of Christians everywhere is a balancing factor .
Therefore , we really must defend it .
I genuinely wonder , ladies and gentlemen , where the human rights defenders have gone who are happy , as we are , that the West is secular and pluralist , and who shamefully avert their gaze before a Middle East that , little by little , is being reserved for a single religion .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Hungarian Government decided , at the close of 2010 , to stop subsidising the institute for young children established in Budapest by Emmi Pikler .
This Hungarian scientist created the centre to develop scientifically-based teaching methods for very young children .
The effectiveness of these methods for the psychomotor development of children has been internationally recognised .
Institutions for young children based on this model have proliferated across Europe , including in my own city in Belgium .
It is a shame that , at the end of the European Year for Combating Poverty - in particular , child poverty - Hungary is sending out this kind of signal .
This decision is surprising given the international influence of the Pikler Institute and the fact that the Hungarian administrative authorities have said that they want it to keep going .
I therefore wonder , although I am not biased in any way , about the motives behind this decision by the Hungarian Government .
Mr President , I would like to express concerns over the agreement between the EU and Morocco .
The future of the agriculture sectors in the Euro-Mediterranean countries will be seriously affected if this agreement remains as it is now .
We have to open our borders and reach an agreement with the European agricultural sectors , and not one behind their backs .
The Commission has carried out studies that clearly show that the Euro-Mediterranean countries will be the most negatively affected by the EU-Morocco Agreement .
I would not ratify this agreement without the inclusion of some clauses concerning the labour market , the social dimension and the environment in Morocco .
If we do nothing , it is our farming activity and food chain industry that will risk losing out , especially in the Euro-Mediterranean countries .
These are the concerns I wanted to share with you tonight .
( FR ) Mr President , like several of our fellow Members , I wanted to address the issue of the persecution of Christians throughout the world , particularly Christians in the Middle East .
I do not need to remind you about the horrible acts that have been perpetrated recently .
I would like to say again quite solemnly that defending Christians in the Middle East and across the world , and calling for religious freedom and diversity of beliefs , means calling for freedom , democracy and human rights , which are values at the heart of the European project , and which are also , of course , universal values - or at least , all of us here believe so .
It is really time now to move beyond indignation , emotion and solemn condemnations ; to move from words to action .
I therefore urge the European Union authorities - the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , but also all our leaders and the Ministers of Foreign Affairs - to take specific measures and introduce a specific and concrete action plan to make respect for religious diversity and the fight against all forms of religious persecution a priority .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , until last May , a coalition of socialists and liberals had been in power in Hungary for eight years .
Throughout those eight years , democracy continued to grow weaker , human rights violations became endemic , and the freedom of the press was increasingly curtailed .
Neither the European socialists nor the European liberals had anything to say about this .
Last May a sweeping majority of Hungarian citizens voted against this social-liberal government and , in a landslide election unprecedented in Europe , voted into power a Fidesz-Social Democrat government .
At the end of last year , this government adopted a new media law that guarantees freedom of the press .
These are the circumstances under which Hungary and the Hungarian Government currently holding the EU Presidency are being fiercely attacked .
This double standard cannot be reconciled with European values and we must speak out against it .
( SK ) Mr President , three years ago , the Schengen area expanded to include new member countries .
Restrictive measures are still in place , however , on the borders between old and new Member States .
For example , on the border crossing of Rusovce - Kittsee , which is a highway crossing between Slovakia and Austria , the Austrians are imposing a tough speed limit of 30 km / h .
At the same time , the crossing is still narrowed dramatically by a concrete barrier .
It is by no means exceptional for regular speed checks to be imposed on passing vehicles at this border , as well as frequent police checks on documents and vehicle luggage .
Schengen membership surely means the free movement of people and goods .
A person should notice that he is crossing an EU Member State border only from a standard information board .
The previously mentioned behaviour , which does not only apply to Austria , is a violation of the Schengen rules , and the European Commission should mount a principled response to it .
( PL ) Mr President , previous speakers have talked about discrimination against Christians .
I , too , would like to talk about a certain form of deprecation of some countries in Europe .
Over the past couple of weeks , at the outset of the Hungarian Presidency , a great many critical words have been said about the Hungarians , and very often these words have been unfounded and unjustified .
Unfortunately , besides the words of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg , other words , which were also very unfair and which were , I think , offensive to the Hungarians , have come from the mouths of politicians of this House , including from Mr Schulz .
I think this is a symptom of a certain belief that the Member States of the European Union are divided into categories of ' better ' and ' worse ' .
The better ones are those which have been here for a long time now , and the worse ones are those which have only been here since 2004 .
I think that this kind of discrimination should end , and that everyone needs to get used to the fact that the new Member States are full members of the European Union - this is necessary particularly in this Chamber .
Therefore , I would ask that those people in this Chamber who permit themselves to indulge in this type of discrimination should be disciplined and punished .
( HU ) Mr President , along with many others , I also welcome Hungary 's EU Presidency .
It fills me with pride that this Central European Member State is the third amongst the 2004 accession states to have the opportunity to carry out this honourable and responsible mission .
There is no doubt that Hungary has always been on the frontline in the fight for democracy .
Who would ever question 1956 , 1989 or the autumn of 2006 ?
This is why I am extremely shocked by the negative campaign launched by certain political forces against the current EU President , including under the pretence of the Hungarian media law .
It is completely obvious that this is not a question of legislation but of an attack by political losers .
They are the ones who are attempting to corrode the unified European spirit .
As for the map of Hungary depicted on the cultural history carpet , I would just like to say that those who cannot face history cannot see clearly the future either .
Just as the people of France , Germany or Poland can speak about their nations ' past , so can those of Hungary .
I consider it an irresponsible and dangerous act to discredit our presiding country , particularly at a time when the need for the closest collaboration is greater than ever .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Greece is the main gateway for illegal immigrants into the whole of Europe .
According to Frontex , 90 % of illegal immigrants who come to Europe enter via Greece .
Greece therefore faces a massive crisis as far as this issue is concerned .
The Greek Government recently announced its intention to build a fence along our land border with Turkey .
One asks oneself if such a solution suffices as a strategy to help to resolve the problem .
Of course , it does not .
However many fences we put up , whatever efforts we make , we need a global strategy and solidarity between the European states .
If we are to get off on the right foot , the first thing we need to do is to establish solid cooperation on these issues with Turkey , as the basic country of origin .
We are still waiting for an EU-Turkey agreement to be signed .
As we all know , it takes eighteen months to two years to achieve and then apply an agreement ; until then , therefore , let us apply the bilateral agreement which has existed with Greece since 2002 , as other countries in the south have done to resolve the problem .
Mr President , next week , all across the world , people will be celebrating the life of Scotland 's national poet , Robert Burns .
As many of you know , a central part of a Burns supper is a haggis .
Currently , there is a ban in the USA on importing Scottish haggis , yet one in three Americans claim Scottish ancestry and would like to try some authentic Scottish haggis .
What action can the Commission and the Council take in their transatlantic dialogues to put Scottish haggis back , not just on the agenda , but also on the menu when it comes to American traditional Scottish Burns suppers ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 13 and 14 January , a referendum was held at the Fiat plant at Mirafiori in which both blue- and white-collar workers were asked to vote for or against the recovery plan for the plant in Turin .
The plan is based on a new collective agreement that undermines workers ' fundamental rights relating to illness and strike action , and even the midday break during eight hours ' work on an assembly line .
The referendum is illegitimate because the chief executive officer , Mr Marchionne , has threatened workers that if the agreement is rejected , the business is likely to abandon manufacturing in Italy and move elsewhere .
This strategy of fear , of unbridled capitalism without consideration for rules or rights , was supported by the government and even by much of the Democratic Party , an opposition party that has its roots in the Italian Communist Party .
The only unions to oppose the agreement were the Italian Federation of Metalworkers ( FIOM ) and the Italian General Confederation of Labour ( CGIL ) , and they were ousted from the union representation .
In any case , the referendum passed with just 54 % of the votes .
As a result of this agreement , workers ' rights in Italy have slipped back several decades .
Europe should know this and bear it in mind .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to raise the question of the worrying situation in Mediterranean partner countries and the impact that this situation may have on our relations and on security and prosperity in the region .
This afternoon , we debated the serious reversals in Tunisia .
There is social unrest in countries in the Maghreb and Mashreq , with renewed political instability in Lebanon and the continuing stalemate in the peace process .
We must pay serious heed to this situation , because the Mediterranean countries are partner countries , not just neighbouring countries .
May I remind you that , since 1995 , Tunisia has received direct aid of over EUR 1 billion , in addition to soft loans from the European Investment Bank , and that we have programmed large sums in direct aid up to 2013 .
I should like to make a suggestion .
We need a serious multilateral debate , in order to take stock of our relations and consider the prospects and the procedures we need to follow , and I call on the High Representative to present an integrated neighbourhood plan , within the framework of the Union for the Mediterranean , so that these crises can be addressed together with the partner countries .
Mr President , in December , Commission President Barroso told me by letter that his meeting with President Nazarbayev last October would help advance respect for human rights in Kazakhstan .
The same was said about granting Kazakhstan the chair of the OSCE in 2010 and holding a major OSCE summit in Astana in December .
However , world leaders had scarcely left that summit when it was announced that a referendum was to be held in March to cancel the presidential election in 2012 , thus keeping Nazarbayev in power until 2020 .
Harassment of the opposition press and of human rights defenders is being stepped up .
Activists from the left-wing movement ' Kazakhstan 2012 ' are being harassed and jailed .
I demand that the EU stop boosting the Nazarbayev dictatorship .
The independent trade union and social movements in Kazakhstan must be fully supported so that they can lead mobilisation to end this dictatorship - just as people power in Tunisia ended the Ben Ali dictatorship - and put in place structures to bring the wealth of Kazakhstan into the democratic ownership of the majority .
( HU ) ( the speaker 's microphone was switched off and the beginning of the sentence is inaudible ) ... extraordinary meeting of the Commission .
The topic could not have been anything other than the Hungarian media law .
I could not believe my ears when influential socialist and liberal fellow Members demanded that the EU launch so-called serious infringement proceedings - the most severe of available sanctions - against Hungary , the holder of the current EU Presidency .
Neither this , nor any other type of sanction , had been imposed between 2002 and 2010 when the socialist and liberal regime in Hungary violently broke up every single protest , summarily imprisoned hundreds of people , fired bullets into people 's eyes and caused severe injuries .
If , after all this , the European Union launches infringement proceedings against the current Hungarian Government and state , it will finally open the eyes of those who have ever had any illusions concerning the European Union 's attitude towards Hungary , and I believe that the Hungarian nation will demand our secession from the European Union , and there will be some who will follow our example .
Mr President , I also want to raise the issue of respect for religious freedom for all , without discrimination , because this is a basic human right .
That human right was violated in my country for the few Christians attending Christmas mass at the church of Agios Synesios in the occupied village of Rizokarpaso .
The so-called police of the Turkish occupying regime entered the church and forced the priest to terminate the Christmas Day service and then forced the enclaved Greek Cypriots attending the mass to evacuate the church .
The European Parliament must strongly condemn such actions , which reveal the ugly and oppressive face of the Turkish occupation of the northern part of Cyprus , in violation of European law and human rights and the Third Vienna agreement of 1975 .
The EU must stop Turkey and its subordinate local administration in the occupied part of Cyprus from committing further violations , and from continuing the ethnic cleansing of the remaining 300 Christian Greek Cypriots .
Mr President , the Food Supplements Directive was adopted in 2002 but , almost nine years later , it has still not been fully implemented .
The Commission has yet to produce a proposal to harmonise the maximum amounts of vitamins and minerals that can be included in food supplements as required by the directive .
This failure means that companies have to produce multiple product formulations to comply with different national laws .
This is unfair and expensive , especially as a scientific model for setting maximum amounts is available .
The Commission itself cited this in a paper in 2006 .
It begs the question of why the proposal has not been produced ?
Perhaps , to paraphrase Robbie Burns , whom somebody mentioned a minute ago , ' The best laid plans of mice and men and the Commission gang aft agley ' .
It needs to happen very soon , because EU legislation is intended to make it easier for companies to compete in the internal market by standardising requirements .
The sooner it happens , the better .
I urge the Commission to get a move on .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Bulgarian public has recently witnessed a series of publications about the use of special surveillance equipment to eavesdrop on people in high government positions .
Who divulged this information , where it came from , and whether it is true remains unknown , and nobody has taken responsibility for publicising it .
The government 's clearly stated desire for reform and the fight against organised crime , its unwillingness to be influenced by the former State Security Service , and the fact that this year , Bulgaria will be holding presidential and local elections , were the trigger for this campaign , which created tension and sowed mistrust in those in power .
The only circles who have an interest in this state of affairs are those who nurtured and benefited from the blurred distinctions between criminality and the state .
They are now seeking to avenge their hurt interests .
I would like to assure you that Bulgaria is governed by the rule of law , that methods of this kind are only used by the authorities within the scope of the law , and that the governing coalition will proceed along its road to reform and not allow illegitimate interests to undermine the fight against crime .
( BG ) Mr President , in recent months , there has been growing concern in Bulgaria in the escalation of the use of special surveillance methods .
However , there is another aspect to this problem : eavesdropping is becoming an obsession among some politicians and the upper ranks of the current special services .
There has been no improvement in the effectiveness of the fight against crime .
The burgeoning paranoia about the use of such eavesdropping is even more unacceptable .
Who the instigators of this bacchanalia are is not clear : whether they are figures from the security sector or their former colleagues , or underground structures whose aim is to destabilise the situation .
The contents of recorded conversations mysteriously circulate in the media .
The Bulgarian Prime Minister also figured in one of the recorded conversations .
The contents were discrediting , but he claims it was manipulated .
Beyond these unpleasant facts , and the feeling among Bulgarians is that their institutions are not working properly and that human rights are being brutally undermined .
For these reasons , Bulgaria , as a recent member of the European Union , needs help to restructure its special services .
This item is closed .
European Consensus on humanitarian aid ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Striffler , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the implementation of the European consensus on humanitarian aid : the mid-term review of its Action Plan and the way forward .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the global humanitarian context has got worse ; the humanitarian challenges and needs are immense , and there are now countless areas in which intervention is required .
The European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid is a fundamental instrument which is as relevant as ever in this massively changing humanitarian context .
By strictly applying the Consensus and its associated action plan , we can respond to humanitarian challenges .
However , the humanitarian partners apart , too many people are still unaware of the Consensus .
We should therefore make an effort to increase its visibility and to raise its profile among the Member States and the actors involved .
We must ask for this Consensus to be distributed , understood and applied within the European External Action Service and by military personnel .
In 2009 , the Working Party on Humanitarian Aid and Food Aid was established within the Council .
It has become an important forum , but its role should be strengthened in terms of coordination between Member States and the monitoring of the implementation of the Consensus , and in terms of advocating humanitarian aid in relation to the other working parties of the Political and Security Committee .
The mid-term review of the action plan is a unique opportunity to strengthen action in areas deserving more attention , such as , firstly , the promotion of humanitarian principles and international humanitarian law , because humanitarian aid is not a crisis management instrument , and we should deplore the increasing politicisation of humanitarian aid and its consequences in terms of respect for the ' humanitarian space ' .
A second area concerns the issues of quality , coordination and consistency in the delivery of EU humanitarian aid , and a third aspect is the clarification of the use of military and civil protection capabilities in conformity with the Humanitarian Consensus and United Nations guidelines .
A very clear distinction needs to be maintained between the remits of military and humanitarian bodies , and a dialogue between military and humanitarian bodies is necessary in order to encourage mutual understanding .
Moreover , in my report , I invite the European Commission to present some very ambitious legislative proposals for the creation of a European protection force , and I am pleased at the recent communication by the Commission on strengthening the European Union 's disaster response capabilities .
Finally , we must strengthen the ' disaster risk reduction ' dimension and the link between emergency aid , reconstruction and development .
The Treaty of Lisbon established the European External Action Service .
We have therefore endeavoured , in the course of negotiations , to defend the independence of DG ECHO and to prevent any attempts to use humanitarian aid for foreign policy purposes .
Strict and transparent rules on cooperation and coordination between the European External Action Service and the Commission in the management of large-scale crises must be introduced .
To finish , I would like to draw your attention to the proliferation of sexual violence - I am thinking in particular of the East of the Republic of the Congo , of the Kivu region - and to the importance of systematically integrating gender and reproductive health into the emergency healthcare aspect of the humanitarian response .
( FR ) Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Striffler on her report .
However , it fails to mention actors whose involvement is based on religion , particularly Christianity .
The text of the European Consensus does mention the Red Cross , but it ignores other actors that have the same status in international law but which are based on Christianity , such as , for example , the Order of Malta .
This report thus provides new evidence of the disregard with which the European institutions greet the involvement of Christian actors in humanitarian intervention .
Religions have not just the obligation , but also the competence necessary to intervene rapidly in crisis and natural disaster situations .
I invite the rapporteur to table an oral amendment to recognise the usefulness and effectiveness of actors who base their work on the Christian faith .
( SK ) Mr President , the European Union and its Member States are major global donors of humanitarian aid .
This is our moral obligation .
The European consensus on humanitarian aid has become a significant milestone , a fact which is confirmed by the analysis of the action plan on the implementation of humanitarian aid .
The report also points out specific weak points in the system , however , and other obstacles preventing the effective and rapid movement of humanitarian goods and services for the most vulnerable people in crisis areas .
I hope that the Treaty of Lisbon , which brings a whole series of innovations in the area of EU humanitarian aid , and which is now a separate policy area , will be appropriately and promptly used to achieve tangible results in accordance with respect for human dignity , human values and adherence to human rights , as established in international law , including , for example , rapid assistance in disasters .
( CS ) Mr President , the ever increasing number and scale of humanitarian disasters in third countries , which , apart from anything else , is also a result of climate change , requires increases both in the quantity and the quality of humanitarian aid .
I therefore fully support the measures mentioned in the report , including the transformation of the civil defence of the Member States , so that it , too , can provide effective , coordinated EU aid .
I also consider it an urgent matter , of course , to improve the safety of humanitarian workers .
In my opinion , the Commission should also assign resources for disseminating information , especially in Haiti , so that the inhabitants affected can understand the causes and resulting circumstances of their disaster , and help protect the safety of humanitarian workers , instead of the opposite being the case .
Otherwise , it will be necessary - and not in the least undesirable - to employ the protection of the armed forces .
Mr President , I should briefly like to ask some questions .
Regarding the European Union , I know that we are wonderful for donating aid to where it is needed , but it often goes through NGOs .
Are there any NGOs that have not been up to scratch , or that have been the subject of complaints in the countries in which they operate , or that the European Union itself might have reservations about ?
In other words , do we just give the aid and the supplements - let us put it that way - to the NGOs annually ?
Where is the accountability ?
In the light of some programmes I have seen recently , I was rather concerned about allegations being made as to what some of the NGOs were doing and their lack of accountability .
Having said that , I know that the vast majority are doing good work and are properly motivated .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the fact that we are able to discuss this problem here in this House today .
I have two further comments or questions that always concern me when it comes to humanitarian aid .
Firstly , it is clearly indisputable and important that we should provide assistance if people are in need , but - as the previous speaker has already said - we must always ask the question : will these funds actually be used properly and appropriately ?
Secondly , there is something else that we must not ignore . It is right to provide humanitarian aid for people in need .
This could be a result of a natural disaster , but it is increasingly also a result of disasters that have been caused by people themselves . This includes , in particular , political or armed conflicts .
We need to bear in mind that , although humanitarian aid provides emergency relief , at the same time , we must also eliminate the causes , namely , the political acts of violence .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I very much welcome Mrs Striffler 's report , as well as Parliament 's involvement in and continued strong advocacy for effective European humanitarian action .
The consensus was adopted in 2007 .
It provides an essential common policy framework for the EU - a common vision accompanied by an action plan .
Both the Member States and the Commission have a shared responsibility to make sure that the consensus is well implemented .
I want to stress that what comes very clearly out of the report is the message that humanitarian principles , international humanitarian law and protection of the humanitarian space have to be at the centre of our action on the consensus .
Four-fifths of our humanitarian aid goes to people in need in conflict-related , man-made emergencies .
For us to be able to reach these people , it is critical that our aid is independent and neutral and that it is perceived in this way .
I would like to give you one example of this .
I have just come back from Yemen where , together with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , Antonio Gutierrez , we engaged on the humanitarian access issue with high-level government officials and representatives of the al-Houthi rebel movement .
For the first time , we obtained a commitment on their part to facilitate humanitarian access and respect delivery of aid to all Yemeni people in need , in line with the humanitarian principles of neutrality and independence .
Having spent a number of hours with men with Kalashnikovs , I would like to observe that we in Europe do bring this value of neutrality that is a bridge to people in need .
In the Yemeni case , there are 300 000 internally displaced people and many more hundred thousands affected by six wars in six years in the north of Yemen .
Of course , for a long-lasting impact , humanitarian aid is not the right instrument .
It is development that can lay the foundation for lasting peace .
We in the Commission have completed a year-long review process of the European consensus action plan , in close liaison with our Member State and humanitarian partners .
On 8 December , the Commission adopted a Communication on this .
The review shows that over the past three years , we have made significant contributions to strengthening the humanitarian response in terms of advocacy and humanitarian action , as well as by bringing humanitarian aid and civil protection together .
We also concluded that there is scope for further improvement in three areas .
Firstly , we need to promote the quality and effectiveness of aid by good assessment , a well-coordinated response and investment in disaster risk reduction and local capacity .
At a time when needs are growing and budgets are constrained , this is critical .
Let me just respond here to the question of accountability .
Obviously , we need to stretch every euro to the full and deliver it with the highest possible quality and in the most effective way .
In order to ensure that our partners - UN agencies and NGOs - are accountable , we review one-third of all partners and one-third of all projects every year .
We have our own humanitarian aid offices in all the hotspot areas of the planet to be the ears and the eyes of our taxpayers , including in Yemen , because of increasing humanitarian needs .
I recently cut the ribbon of our humanitarian aid office there .
The second issue concerning which we can see room for improvement is the strengthening of the European voice .
We are the largest donor and have to make sure that we speak very clearly with one voice .
We must also reach out to other donors so that we play our leadership role , vis-à-vis traditional donors , but also by engaging new donors .
Thirdly , we need to ensure coherence which means working , together with the External Action Service , with military actors to make sure that a principled humanitarian approach is safeguarded and is also promoted in Europe .
Let me finish by once again thanking Mrs Striffler for her work on this issue and calling upon Parliament to continue the discussion on this topic .
The world has changed .
Unfortunately , there will be more and more natural and man-made disasters .
Whatever action we take will determine not only the lives of the people affected , but also the moral standing and the capacity of the EU to lead in the world .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 18 January 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Humanitarian aid is an expression of universal human solidarity and is our moral obligation .
Today , we are seeing a systematic growth in the need for humanitarian aid because of the growing number of natural disasters being brought to our attention .
This is due in part to climate change , but is also due to the development of technology which enables us to realise that a catastrophe has occurred and to communicate the fact of its occurrence .
Important criteria for the provision of humanitarian aid should be speed , responsibility and administrative costs which are as low as possible .
The development of transport is a factor which facilitates the delivery of aid . This means that we can reach the victims faster and give aid to a greater number of people .
This is why getting businesses involved is so important .
I am thinking of corporations and concerns , but also of small enterprises , and not only those operating in the field of transport and logistics .
We need to build networks of entities which work together in a particular geographical area , in order to be effective in delivering aid and to improve the system of rapid reaction to impending crises .
On the basis of inter-sectoral partnerships between businesses , organisations and institutions , it would be possible to set up bases , special units and offices with funds , storage space , volunteers , food , essential materials and equipment and means of transport .
Cooperation of this kind can bring measurable benefits in the face of human tragedy , particularly when it is necessary to react quickly and not to first have to start by collecting money .
Agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Sârbu , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security .
Mr President , it is an honour for me to present my report to you , which deals with the strategic importance of agriculture in ensuring the European Union 's food security .
Agriculture is a neglected topic in the discussions about the European Union 's strategy and future .
This report will show that Europe has not achieved food security , that farmers and whole rural areas are in danger of disappearing , and that new challenges , such as climate change , are likely to destabilise already dwindling food stocks , not only in Europe , but also worldwide .
Against a background where food production needs to increase by a minimum of 70 % by 2050 in order to meet the world population 's food demands , food security must be the topic at the heart of the debates conducted at both global and European level .
The European Union must respond robustly to these challenges and this report is our attempt to propose today a number of specific courses of action .
First of all , we need a strong common agricultural policy aimed at guaranteeing food security for as many EU citizens as possible and also at helping ensure global food security in the context of limited resources and the impact from climate change .
We cannot talk about food security if we do not tackle two crucial issues , specifically : market and price volatility and dwindling global food stocks .
On the subject of price volatility , I have called on the Commission , as part of the new CAP , to enhance the role of market intervention instruments and adopt more consistent measures for restricting speculation on agricultural markets .
Global food stocks are much more restricted nowadays than in the past .
According to estimates , they can cover the world 's food requirements for just a month and a half .
This is why I thought that the creation of a global food stock system would be beneficial , comprising both emergency stocks to reduce hunger and stocks to be used to regulate prices on agricultural markets , which comes under the international aegis and is supported by the expertise of existing institutions such as the UN or FAO .
I believe that the European Union must initiate this action , which is why I have asked the Commission to take on this role .
Another important issue touched on in this report is the situation of young farmers .
If we are reflecting on the future of European agriculture , we must focus more attention on young farmers .
Just 7 % of farmers across Europe are under the age of 35 . This is why I have asked the Commission for measures to be provided to encourage them .
On the other hand , I have stressed the need to preserve European agriculture 's diversity .
In this regard , I mentioned that traditional agricultural practices , family farming , small-scale farms and organic farming can make a valuable contribution to food security .
I also called for the development of EU-level programmes to support these forms of agriculture .
However , we must not forget that poverty and hunger persist in the European Union and that millions of Europeans have requested food aid from the EU this winter .
Consequently , in the current economic crisis , it is of paramount importance to use EU funding to maintain the EU 's ' Food Aid for the Most Deprived Persons ' programme .
Finally , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and my other colleagues from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their good cooperation and the contributions they made to the drafting of this report , as well as the Secretariat of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I hope that tomorrow , we will adopt together a report which meets European citizens ' expectations .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Sârbu , our rapporteur , for the excellent work she has done on this report and for her cooperation with all the shadows .
This follows work which I carried out in the previous mandate on the role of the common agricultural policy and global food security .
I regret that we are debating this report just before midnight .
Perhaps it will be at a minute to midnight that Europe and the world wake up to the realities of how insecure we are when it comes to food production .
This report is extremely welcome in our overall debate on this issue and in the context of our debate on reform of the common agricultural policy .
I had some concerns , but I think they are reflected in the final text .
The idea that one form of production system is better than another - that organic , small , local is better - is not a good argument .
We need all production systems to contribute to our food security .
We do need to address market volatility and speculation and I do not think we have all the answers yet .
The single key problem with agriculture is low incomes for farmers .
Young farmers will not work for nothing , and we have to address the low income problem if we want security of food supply .
( SK ) Mr President , due to constant population growth , we are obliged to adopt a more intensive approach to the issue of food security , and access to an adequate , healthy and nutritious diet .
In order to ensure food security , it is essential to increase transparency and fairness in the actual food chain , so that we can secure a fair return for farmers , with profits and price controls , and a viable agricultural sector .
In my opinion , it is extremely important to apply a resolute policy on rural development , by means of which we can maintain the viability of rural Europe and boost the competitiveness of agriculture , support innovation and , ultimately , employment as well .
Agriculture is enormously important , particularly in disadvantaged areas , and it is therefore necessary to adopt stimulus measures to support agriculture in rural areas , attract more young people into agriculture , and help to reduce regional differences and secure sustainable development .
( PT ) Mr President , I would like to offer my sincerest congratulations to my colleague , Mrs Sârbu , on the excellent job done on the report .
I strongly recommend that the Commission take it into consideration , particularly in those aspects in which the complex dimension of agricultural issues - which extend well beyond the narrow boundaries of agriculture itself - requires the involvement of other areas , such as competition on the internal market and financial regulation , and merits attention on stages outside the EU , such as the G20 or the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
The crucial determining issues for agriculture , for farmers , and for supplying sufficient good quality food to the people of Europe and the rest of the world , can only be tackled in reality if they are considered from all angles .
The ambitious objectives of common agricultural policy reform can only be achieved if the reforms extend beyond the narrow boundaries of agriculture and if the objectives are also taken into account in the action required in other policy areas and in other global bodies .
This report makes this patently clear and I take my hat off to it for doing so .
( PL ) Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mrs Sârbu for an excellent report , which I consider to be one of the most important in this parliamentary term .
There are increasing numbers of people in the world , while the amount of arable land available is falling .
Food is becoming , to an ever greater degree , a strategic product .
While crude oil can be replaced by solar or nuclear energy , there is nothing which can replace the food our planet produces .
In the European Union , we sometimes behave as if we were continually struggling with the problem of overproduction of food .
The entire agricultural policy of the European Union in recent years has been based on ways of limiting and reducing agricultural production .
We can already see on the horizon , today , that the time is coming when there will be a shortage of food .
It is very good that this signal , in the form of the Sârbu report , has come from Parliament , saying that the situation has changed and that the European Union 's agricultural policy has to change , too .
We must respect agriculture - it is the guarantee of our food security .
( DE ) Mr President , it is the case in politics as it is in daily life : we do not fully appreciate what we have .
Thus , it also clearly seems to be the case that we in the European Union have an excess of food , and there is , of course , always plenty to buy .
If we compensate for animal feed exports , we have in the European Union a self-sufficiency rate of 88 % .
That means that , in the European Union , we , too , must endeavour to ensure that we maintain this self-sufficiency rate in terms of agricultural products and foodstuffs .
I am therefore very grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Sârbu , for bringing this problem into the spotlight once again .
In the European Union , we also need a common agricultural policy that can supply our citizens with sufficient food .
In view of the increasing global population , the effects of climate change and increasing energy prices , it is clear that farmers in Europe will not be able to manage this alone in future .
For this , we also need strategic coordination on a global scale .
( HU ) Mr President , security of food supply in the EU will be one of the most serious challenges facing security policy in the coming decades .
Herein lies the key asset of the Sârbu Report , which highlights the fact that in one or two decades , food and fresh water will be strategic products just as oil and natural gas are today .
The timing of the report is particularly fortuitous because discussions are currently under way about the future of the common agricultural policy , the post-2014 budget is being planned , and many are keen on curtailing the budget of the common agricultural policy .
It is very important that this common agricultural policy has adequate resources in the future , and to guarantee that it does , the finance ministers and decision makers must be convinced that the agricultural economy in the European Union produces not only food but also public goods , including public environmental goods , which we would not be able to guarantee or produce without agriculture .
( HU ) Mr President , speaking of the food security issue , I am bothered by the fact that the report is treating EU countries as a single integrated unit .
The situation in new Member States is entirely different from that in older ones .
For instance , let me ask one question with regard to Hungary : how is it possible that we are talking about childhood starvation in a country with exceptional agricultural resources ?
Children and adults alike are starving in the centre of the European Union .
My other question : how is it possible that our agriculture has taken such a dysfunctional turn that we are producing raw agricultural products on vast areas on an industrial scale , primarily in some - forgive me for the expression - colonial way , only to have them processed abroad , where the profits are made , and then returned to Hungary , where they are sold at high prices ?
Something is fundamentally wrong here .
( GA ) Mr President , like other speakers I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Sârbu , for her good work on this subject .
In four minutes , Mrs Sârbu covered a multitude of issues .
I am not going to go over all the things she mentioned , but I would like to reiterate two points .
First , there is a need for a well-funded CAP .
I hope this Parliament will play a key role in ensuring that the CAP is not demeaned or diminished in any way .
Second , we need to ensure that young people are encouraged to go into farming as a livelihood .
Furthermore , we have a policy of encouraging the growth of energy crops on good agricultural land .
In view of the fact that we may be facing a food shortage worldwide , with a population increasing at a rate of 80 million per year , should we reassess that policy ?
Are we robbing Peter to pay Paul , or perhaps robbing Paul and Peter and finishing up with nothing ?
That is the question I would like to ask .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear from the report that things in agriculture cannot continue as they are , either .
We , or rather , large enterprises , cannot continue to transport agricultural products from one end of the world to another .
Of course , we can carry on without any compelling logic. apples , peppers , tomatoes and meat products are transported into Europe , including into Hungary - but mostly not from Spain or from the Netherlands , but from China and from Brazil .
We could certainly continue on this path , but the products must be loaded onto transportation equipment such as ships , on which they travel for weeks or months .
These products must be kept fresh with various preservatives that are toxic when consumed in large quantities .
Now , people buy these products in large commercial chains and then wonder where all these diseases , cancers and tumours come from .
It is , of course , obvious that they are caused by food colourings and artificial additives .
I must add that instead of supporting multinational corporations , we must support smallholders so that they can be Europe 's lifesavers in a developing food crisis .
( PT ) Mr President , the recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security that this report speaks of is inseparable from the recognition and promotion of the concept of food sovereignty .
The greater the food dependency and food insecurity of a country , the more difficult it is to guarantee a sufficient supply of food to its population , in terms of both quantity and quality .
Food sovereignty is the best insurance against food product price volatility , an issue that has dramatically re-emerged on the order of business .
This volatility has its origins fundamentally in the financial speculation carried out on food products , an area on which the speculators , investment funds , hedge funds , pension funds and large banking institutions have focused so much of their attention that the other speculative bubbles have either dried up or burst .
The only way to stop this speculation is to do away with the instruments that make it viable , namely , certain financial products such as over-the-counter derivatives .
Sadly , the measures that the European Union has adopted in this area are far from being capable of putting the brakes on this sinister wave of speculation and its inhumane consequences - as is acknowledged in a recent United Nations report authored by the Special Rapporteur on the right to food .
Mr President , we are discussing the poorest of the poor - the European Roma - and , together with the new Hungarian Presidency , we are all addressing the European Roma strategy .
Among inter-sectoral issues that concern the poorest of the poor , agriculture is very rarely addressed , notably because no land is owned by the poorest of the poor in Europe .
So we are talking not just about food security but about having food on the table .
As one of my colleagues has already said , this is an essential question for the EU today .
I believe that the agricultural sector - and the Commission 's work on these documents - has to be in line with all the EU micro-regional development projects which are concerned with fighting poverty and securing food on the table for future generations .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission very much welcomes this timely report , as food prices are rising sharply , mainly due to erratic weather conditions and natural disasters , but also to increases in energy prices that impact on the cost of food .
Therefore , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Sârbu , and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their efforts .
Food security is fundamental for the almost one billion people around the world that still suffer from hunger , but it is also important for vulnerable populations across Europe .
For them , the common agricultural policy makes a real difference .
The - sometimes criticised - CAP has managed to provide EU citizens with food at affordable prices and has ensured food security in Europe .
This must continue .
Food security is identified as a central issue in the communication on the common agricultural policy towards 2020 that was adopted on 18 November by the Commission .
The report that Mrs Sârbu has put in front of us underlines the issue of excessive price volatility , which is closely linked to food security because of the impact it has both on farmers and on consumers .
The Commission fully agrees that there is a need to tackle excessive price volatility .
We must collectively look for better regulation , supervision and transparency to address market issues , and this requires not only better financial regulations but also substantially improved transparency on the market .
The report recommends the creation of a global food system .
Not an easy subject .
We have had experiences in the past of commodity boards .
They have proved not to be successful and therefore , this topic undoubtedly requires more detailed debate .
It also requires analysis of the experience we have gained , for example , from the EUR 1 billion Food Facility adopted by the Commission in 2008 , and also from the work that the Commission undertakes closely with the FAO and the World Food Programme to ensure that bumper stocks are pre-positioned in order to soften the blow of rising food prices .
All these efforts can be developed when the G20 looks closely into the food stocks issue , and you can be assured that the European Commission will be an active participant in the related deliberations in the coming weeks .
The report has made a call , echoed by many of you here this evening , for a strong agricultural and rural development policy in Europe , capable of ensuring food security for all , with the support of research and innovation to face the challenges of producing more with the fewer resources we have and will have .
The Commission fully agrees with this .
There is no more relevant instrument to fulfil these objectives than a strong common agricultural policy able to guarantee the economic and environmental competitiveness of agriculture and - as some of you said - able to bring young people into the agricultural sector of Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 18 January 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Food security is a political priority at both European and world level .
The globalisation of the food chain means that new challenges - and sometimes risks to health and consumer interests - are constantly emerging .
One of the main challenges that the European Union will have to face up to is developing agricultural and food reforms in order to satisfy the needs of the global population .
According to recent figures , the world 's population is steadily increasing , and it is thought that it will increase by around 40 % by 2050 , creating an increase in demand for food which is expected to double current requirements .
To tackle the rising growth in world demand for agricultural products and foodstuffs , the Member States and the Union will need to ensure the security of food supply .
To attain this objective , the EU will have to guarantee the security of food products bearing in mind their specific characteristics and , at the same time , ensuring the proper functioning of the internal market .
Lastly , I should like to ask the Commission to look at all possible measures to improve training for young people at work and to create job opportunities for graduates in the field of food security , with the principal objective of contributing to employment in the agriculture sector .
It is quite right to emphasise the importance of food security for the inhabitants of the EU , as it is their basic human right .
The EU must therefore strive to ensure that healthy and nutritious foods are financially and physically accessible to all EU citizens , enabling them to lead an active and healthy life .
We must strictly monitor compliance with the highest standards for food and agricultural production , for the safety and quality of foods , and also for their environmental sustainability .
Nevertheless , in these circumstances , it is also necessary to point out the strict need for similar quality and safety standards in relation to foods imported from third countries , in order to protect the competitiveness of European farmers .
I would also like to support the measures , which will motivate farmers to improve energy efficiency , as energy costs are a key factor in the profitability of farming activities .
In my opinion , the most important aspect of the whole report is the emphatic appeal to the Commission to secure , in the public interest and in cooperation with Member States , public access to information on the results of food security monitoring , particularly through the rapid communication of this information between Member States .
We simply cannot allow another failure like the selling of meat containing traces of dioxin , as is now happening in Germany , when other Member States were given insufficient and late information as to the situation that arose .
in writing . - As we begin to consider what the final make-up will be of the CAP post-2013 , the themes of food security , food shortages and sustainability are coming ever more to the fore .
This is something that almost everyone in this House , and everyone who will be involved in drawing up the bill , will recognise .
The biofuel boom several years ago , coupled with the global food crisis in 2009 , has shown us how scarce a resource food is beginning to become .
As such , our vision must be narrowed : the sustainability of food and the needs of those who do not have automatic access to food must be put first ; farming practices and innovations should be geared towards more food , and the correct crops ; and , as we draft the new CAP bill , we should finally ensure that the new CAP will work towards a carbon-free Europe , and one which does not exacerbate the current carbon problem .
We consider security of food supply to be one of the basic human rights .
In today 's world , there are 900 million people suffering from constant hunger due to poverty .
The world 's population is set to exceed 9 billion by 2050 , and global food production will have to increase by up to 70 % .
Agriculture must , on the one hand , boost output , and , on the other , cope with high energy costs , an ever diminishing area of non-polluted land and the consequences of climate change .
We must address the instability and fluctuating prices caused by speculation on the commodity markets and declining food stocks .
The future security of supply of basic foods requires a strong common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
The CAP must improve food security by boosting productivity and supporting both environmentally sustainable food production and traditional agriculture , small farmers , organic farms , and the local and regional distribution of foods .
These agricultural models contribute to food security , as they employ methods and procedures proven for generations in individual regions of the EU .
Agriculture is the most strategic EU policy , the success of which will help to ensure the survival of Europe 's population in a time of food crisis .
In order for the CAP to be capable of combating the effects of climate change , maintaining food prices at an acceptable level and increasing the supply of healthy foods , it is essential for its budget to be preserved at least at the existing level .
in writing . - ( LV ) European agriculture is one of the Union 's strategically most important sectors , as it provides more than 500 million people with their food supply .
So that European agricultural policy may carry out its most important task , namely , to provide Europe 's population with healthy and good quality food at reasonable prices , while ensuring an adequate income for farmers , it must be competitive in the global market and there must be a guarantee of fair competition in Europe 's internal market .
Hence , what we must achieve with CAP reform is a level playing field for all Europe 's farmers .
EU Member States have not encountered food security problems .
Nevertheless , such risks will exist in the future , and we have to react accordingly , before that occurs .
We must take into account that farmers are already having to work for minimal incomes or even at a loss , and this has an adverse effect on their ability to maintain production .
It is also a fact that natural disasters affect food prices in the shops and hence , how available food is to people .
We must acknowledge the strategic importance of agriculture in the European Union and do all we can to ensure that in the future , the people of Europe will not have to experience food shortages as a result of the failure of EU politicians and governments to have spotted the risks in time and to avert them .
The recognition of agriculture as a strategically important sector for food security is an important step towards avoiding food security issues in the future .
The own-initiative report recognises the fact that agriculture is of strategic importance in the context of global food security .
A glance into the future shows how urgent the need for action is .
By 2050 , experts estimate that global demand for food will double .
Agriculture must be in a position to be able to meet the enormous needs of the growing population for safe and adequate food .
At the same time , the obstacles resulting from the limitation of natural resources , high energy prices and climate change need to be dealt with .
I supported the report , which clearly demonstrates that food security is a central concern in the European Union , too , and requires coordination of the individual policy areas .
Only if the areas of agricultural policy , development policy , trade policy , financial policy and energy policy , as well as research , work together can improvements be achieved .
Securing the incomes of farmers and an adequate supply of good quality food must therefore be key goals of the common agricultural policy .
The greatly fluctuating market prices in the agricultural sector are the result of crop failures , speculation and a concentration in trade , and these are significant uncertainty factors .
Interventions and stockpiling are the crisis mechanisms that will put a stop to market abuse and speculative transactions .
It is important that these market intervention mechanisms play a central role in the future common agricultural policy .
Another important point is the recommendation for the development of a global system of food stocks and emergency reserves .
Europe needs a common agricultural policy which will guarantee the development , and not the stagnation , of European agriculture .
Agricultural policy must respond to European and global challenges , particularly when we take into account the fact that , according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation , food production has to increase by at least 70 % to meet the needs of a world population which , by 2050 , is set to exceed 9 billion .
It can be seen , then , that the common agricultural policy needs to increase food security by increasing efficiency , while at the same time promoting an environmentally sustainable food policy .
I would like to point out that regulations in this area should be transparent .
I appreciate initiatives which recommend the promotion of agricultural diversity and the use of traditional and ecological agriculture .
In addition , it is important to ensure that young farmers have access to land and loans in order to achieve the objectives of the CAP , such as innovation , modernisation , improving competitiveness and , above all , modern agriculture .
The link between the European common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and global food security is an important theme that must be taken into account during the process of drafting the CAP post-2013 .
Indeed , the priorities of the CAP must be viewed against the backdrop not only of the aspirations of our modern-day society , but also of the constraints that will be imposed on us throughout the world in the future .
According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation , food production must increase by at least 70 % if it is to meet the growing needs of the world 's population .
Europe must take account of world food security and must increase its production with a view to limiting imports .
In addition , I support the proposal to review our financial legislation in order to combat price volatility , which is caused mainly by speculation .
To be effective , however , this review must be carried out simultaneously at international level .
I am delighted that one of the priorities of the French Presidency of the G20 in this area is to combat food and commodity price volatility .
The increase in global demand for food , resulting from the planet 's growing population , obviously has an impact on natural food resources and entails new food security regulations and precautions .
The EU 's priority task is to guarantee Member States the right to food security and to support developing countries in achieving a sufficient food security level .
I think that it is important to promote the production and sale of local traditional foods .
Numerous benefits can be derived from regional food products : lower transport costs and a lower risk of food perishing .
There are many regions with significant agricultural potential which has remained untapped due to social or economic imbalances , against the background of an increasingly ageing rural population or of industrialisation .
Indeed , large areas of farmland are not used efficiently .
Regional authorities can play a key role in food security by supporting the agricultural capacity of the regions which have this potential .
The EU is one of the global leaders in the field of research and innovation , including in the agricultural sector .
A steady rise in the urban population 's majority poses a new challenge : how much of a priority is the development of urban agriculture with a view to guaranteeing food security , using various models such as vertical urban agriculture ?
I support the approach suggested by the resolution adopted today in this Chamber : food safety is a basic human right and it is achieved when all people , at all times , have physical and economic access to suitable , safe and nutritious food .
In the European Union , around 80 million people still live below the poverty line today , and many of them are helped through food aid programmes .
A proper diet is necessarily a key factor in our health , and there are still too many doubts being raised about genetically modified organisms by part of the scientific community .
For this reason , I am against the text 's openness to GMOs , particularly the part that provides for extending the approval process for importing genetically modified foods from third countries into the European Union .
For the sake of consistency , I do not believe that we can forbid our farmers from using a technique that we then tolerate in the production of imports .
However , I do support the measures to encourage young farmers , who currently represent just 7 % of the total , with installation premiums , subsidised interest rates on loans and other incentives which have been implemented by Member States through their rural development budgets , safe in the knowledge that European agricultural production can maintain its current high levels of quality and safety .
I welcome the report on recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security .
However , I also wish to express my dismay that Parliament decided to allocate so little time to debating it .
This topic is particularly current at the present moment when we have realised how the food crisis can affect states ' stability .
One of the causes of the uprising in Tunisia has been the increase in food prices .
Algeria , India and Bangladesh are also states where rising food prices have caused serious tensions .
The increasing cultivation of biofuel crops , financial speculation , producers switching very rapidly to more profitable crops and , last but not least , the change in the eating habits of citizens in many states , are also new topics closely related to the subject of today 's report .
I wish to make one final comment .
In an index produced by a Japanese bank indicating vulnerability to food price rises , four of the forty most vulnerable countries are Member States of the European Union , with another state soon to become an EU member , and three states are the EU 's immediate neighbours .
This is an interesting index which must give us food for thought .
If we regard agriculture as a strategic area , then an essential precondition for ensuring the security of food supplies is for the European Union to be self-sufficient , at least in the production of basic foods and animal fodders .
EU dependence on imports of agricultural products causes food price rises , and undermines the EU 's direct producers in the marketing chain .
According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) , demand for food and animal fodder could rise by 70 % by 2050 .
It will therefore be necessary to use all available forms of agriculture , and to provide significant support for financial investment into scientific research in this area .
The efficient use of traditional agricultural varieties that are characteristic to certain regions also requires greater support and public interest .
For example , assessment of the environmental impact of food production and transport distances is easily understood by the consumer .
Current wastage levels of up to 50 % in the overall production chain , and the disproportionate growth in freight transport , are not factors compatible with ensuring the security of food supply .
We cannot pretend to ensure food security and protect the environment while at the same time tolerating a dependence on products grown on another continent and imported over thousands of kilometres .
Such practices create an enormous environmental footprint and , at the same time , oblige developing countries to import almost all necessary foods , making them dependent , ruining their economies , impoverishing their inhabitants and destroying their environment .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
EC-Serbia Stabilisation and Association Agreement - Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EC and Serbia ( debate )
The first item on the agenda is the joint debate on the EC-Serbia Agreement
EC-Serbia Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
Recommendation by Jelko Kacin , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Recommendation on the draft Council and Commission decision on the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Serbia , of the other part [ 15619 / 1 / 2007 - C7-0341 / 2010 - 2007 / 0255 ( NLE ) ]
Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EC and Serbia .
Council and Commission statements
Madam President , the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and Serbia was signed in April 2008 , and the transitional , interim trade agreement with Serbia has been successfully implemented since February 2010 .
The ratification process began in September 2008 when the Serbian Parliament first ratified this agreement .
The agreement provides a political , legal and economic framework for cooperation between the European Union and Serbia , and Serbia was unable to continue along the path of European integration without the ratification process getting under way .
In 2009 , there were no reports of Serbia on the European Parliament 's agenda because the ratification process in the Member States stalled following Serbia 's failure to cooperate fully with the Hague-based International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) .
To date , eleven Member States have ratified this agreement , which is why , today , I call on the remaining Member States to do the same as soon as possible .
If , today , we ratify the agreement in this higher assembly , we will be sending a strong and visible message of support for Serbia 's European efforts .
That alone , however , will not ensure a successful completion of the ratification process .
The resolution on Serbia , on which we will be voting tomorrow , carries precisely this message of support .
We need to support Serbia along its long and difficult path to membership of the European Union .
As a country which has long been isolated and which has remained outside the modern tide of European politics and economy , Serbia is facing many challenges .
In the past two years , we have witnessed the political scene in Serbia becoming more pro-European .
Serbian leaders will provide us with the best evidence of their sincere commitment to European values and way of life if they successfully resolve problems and implement all the reforms that are necessary .
We have already seen some positive developments .
We have sincerely welcomed Serbia 's willingness to compromise and the adoption by the UN General Assembly of a joint resolution on Kosovo in September 2010 .
On 1 January 2011 , Serbia abolished compulsory military service , and generations of young Serbian citizens have been given an additional opportunity to learn , study and develop .
Civilian supervision of the armed forces has also been strengthened .
On the other hand , Serbia 's advancement towards the EU has very much been hampered by the fact that two individuals indicted for war crimes by the ICTY remain at large .
Ratko Mladić has been on the run for more than 15 years since the genocide in Srebrenica , that greatest of crimes perpetrated on European soil since World War II .
We welcome the statement of the Serbian Government that they consider the finalisation of their cooperation with the Hague Tribunal to be a priority .
However , we call on the Serbian authorities , as the main ICTY prosecutor has said , to reduce convincingly the gap between the political will they have shown and concrete results .
The time has come for Serbia to close this painful chapter and to make a new step towards reconciliation in the region .
Serbia will not be able to secure candidate status until it demonstrates that it is fully cooperating with the Hague Tribunal , as stated in the Council conclusions of 25 October 2010 .
The most compelling evidence of this would be the arrests and extradition of those who have been indicted .
Serbia 's efforts to date to bring this about have not produced results and they remain inadequate .
Significant shifts in regional relations in the Western Balkans , evidenced most of all by the relationship between Serbia and Croatia , have been achieved .
We welcome the stance of the Serbian President , whose new approach has given a powerful impetus to a lasting reconciliation in the region .
Despite that , there are still further challenges .
Belgrade must demonstrate a constructive relationship in the upcoming dialogue with Priština and , regardless of the issue of Kosovo 's status , the relationship between Belgrade and Priština must become a partnership , so that the whole region is more easily able to progress towards Europe .
This also holds true for Serbia 's relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Belgrade needs to support the reforms that will enable Bosnia and Herzegovina , as a country with its own institutions , to negotiate on its membership of the European Union .
At the moment , that is still not the case .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , it is a great privilege and honour for me to return to the European Parliament in my new capacity as the representative of the Hungarian rotating Presidency of the Council of the European Union .
I hope , honourable Members , that you will consider me a former Member of this House , and as a guarantee that the Hungarian Presidency will be a Parliament-friendly Presidency .
I look forward to working with you all during the forthcoming five-and-a-half months of this Presidency , with great expectations . I shall now use my mother tongue .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure and honour for me to take part in this debate after which Parliament will vote on the approval of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement signed with the Republic of Serbia .
I should also like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the rapporteur of the European Parliament , Mr Jelko Kacin , who drafted an excellent report on the subject , and to warmly welcome the resolution on Serbia 's European integration process .
Similarly to other countries in the region , the prospect of European membership has benefited Serbia as well , and the country has made considerable progress in this direction over recent years .
In this context , the Stabilisation and Association Agreement is an important step forward for Serbia on the road to the European Union .
The agreement strengthens the already close ties between the European Union and Serbia , and creates a contractual relationship between the two parties .
The agreement establishes a new framework for political dialogue .
It creates a free trade area and strengthens bilateral economic relations , through which it is intended to bring major economic benefits to Serbia .
The agreement encourages the reform processes which will contribute to the growth of the Serbian economy and help Serbia develop a fully functioning market economy .
Furthermore , the agreement lays the foundations for increased cooperation in numerous areas to evolve between the European Union and Serbia in the future , last but not least , in the fight against organised crime and illegal cross-border trade , as well as with regard to improving current environmental protection regulations .
The Council started the ratification process for the agreement on 14 June 2010 .
To date , eleven Member States , including , of course , Hungary , have endorsed the agreement through their parliaments .
We are very confident that all the Member States will ratify it within a short period of time .
The Council would welcome the Stabilisation and Association Agreement coming into force by the end of 2011 , but by early 2012 at the latest .
This would mean that Serbia would enter into an ambitious contractual relationship with the European Union at precisely the time when it starts making more intensive preparations for accession .
Your votes will do even more to give prominence to and further this process , due to the unanimous support that was expressed by all political forces at the meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on 1 December .
Serbia expressed its commitment to the European Union by its request for accession submitted in December 2009 .
In October last year , the Council asked the Commission to submit its opinion . This can be expected in the second half of 2011 .
We are all aware that the European integration process has numerous advantages for Serbia .
At the same time , Serbia still needs to make major reforms . These include further endeavours in the fields of public administration and the rule of law , justice reform , the fight against corruption and organised crime , and cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
As the report submitted by Mr Kacin also states , the integration process advances on the basis of the progress made in this area .
I welcome the fact that many results have already been achieved .
At the same time , I should like to take this opportunity to point out that last year , Serbia took historic steps towards peace with its neighbours in the region .
I also welcome Serbia 's close cooperation with the European Union in the summer of 2010 and the resultant UN resolution that opened the way to dialogue between Belgrade and Priština .
The Council fully supports High Representative Ashton in the work she has done in this area .
This is a major challenge , but the possibility of creating a dialogue offers both Kosovo and Serbia the chance of coming closer to the European Union .
Lastly , allow me to share a concluding thought with you .
I am convinced that the European Union must maintain the credibility of the enlargement process .
The means of doing this are in our hands .
I believe that if the accession negotiations with Croatia can be concluded successfully during the Hungarian Presidency , this will give a very positive sign to Serbia as well that the process is alive , and that the Balkan countries have a place in the family of the nations of the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , 2011 will be an important year for Serbia , which will bring both challenges and opportunities .
I welcome the opportunity which this new agreement gives Serbia so that we may build together a joint future in a peaceful Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is a great pleasure and honour for me to address the European Parliament today for the vote of consent to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Republic of Serbia .
I would also like to express my warm gratitude to the rapporteur for Serbia , Jelko Kacin , for his report on the European integration process of Serbia .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement is a major step forward for Serbia on its path towards the European Union .
The fundamental objective of this agreement is to pave the way for further European integration and reforms and to prepare Serbia for European Union membership .
This important milestone will serve as an encouragement for Serbia , as it has renewed its efforts to promote reconciliation in the region .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement sets up a comprehensive institutional framework through the SAA Council and SAA Committee , a renewed framework for political dialogue , and a network of subcommittees extensively covering most European Union policy areas .
Naturally , it also establishes a specific body between this House and the Serbian Parliament , the Joint Parliamentary Committee .
From an economic standpoint , the SAA foresees the gradual establishment of a free trade zone and the gradual integration of Serbia into the European Union 's internal market , thus bringing economic benefits for both the European Union and Serbia .
As was the case in central Europe in the 1990s , the agreement will boost investment , in particular , for indirect investments .
It will make a key contribution to the growth of the Serbian economy and help Serbia move towards a functioning market economy .
The benefits of this agreement for the European Union are equally significant .
Serbia 's market has now been opened up to European Union exporters .
Previously relatively high tariffs will be totally dismantled within a couple of years , with the exception of a few very sensitive agricultural products .
Furthermore , by gradually integrating Serbia into the internal market , conditions for investors will become more stable and predictable .
Rules on competition and State aid are aligned to those of the European Union .
Protection of intellectual property rights is also gradually being brought up to European Union standards .
The sizeable Serbian public procurement market is also being progressively opened up to European bidders .
Forging closer ties with Serbia entails a number of other advantages for the European Union in particular , as it will facilitate cooperation in the areas of justice , freedom and security , the environment , transport and customs , to mention just a few . It therefore helps make the European Union 's policy in south-east Europe more credible and effective .
Finally , it is particularly noteworthy that Serbia brought forward the implementation of the interim agreement .
It officially entered into force in February 2010 , but Serbia decided to apply it shortly after it was signed in April 2008 .
Serbia has thereby demonstrated a commitment to its economic integration with the European Union and has so far established a positive track record .
Since 14 June 2010 , when the Council decided to launch the ratification process for the agreement , nine Member States have notified ratification and two more have secured the approval of their parliaments .
Today 's vote by the European Parliament should therefore provide additional impetus for this process thanks to the unanimous support from across the political groups .
I hope that ratification by the other Member States will follow soon .
Let me conclude by focusing on the motion for a resolution on the European integration process of Serbia as a well-prepared contribution to today 's political debate .
I am therefore grateful to the rapporteur , Jelko Kacin .
The resolution sends Serbia both a message of support for enhancing EU-Serbia relations , and a message of expectation in relation to the key challenges on Serbia 's path to European Union membership .
This is particularly timely in the context of the preparations of the opinion on Serbia 's membership application .
I was in Belgrade last November to hand over a detailed questionnaire to the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister for European integration .
The Serbian authorities are currently working hard on their replies , which we expect by the end of the month .
I am encouraged by the Serbian Government 's adoption on 30 December of an action plan as a follow-up to the Commission 's progress report .
The Commission will thoroughly analyse the replies to the questionnaires and the steps taken by the Serbian authorities in the coming months to complete its assessment with a view to issuing the opinion in the second half of 2011 .
As my Hungarian colleague said , 2011 is an important year for Serbia : a year of demanding challenges as well as a year of opportunities .
The path has been set and the objectives are well known , yet it is up to Serbia to walk down that path , fulfil the required criteria , and , once ready , engage in the negotiation process with the European Union .
I am convinced that , with our joint support , Serbia will continue to make the right European choices and move ahead in its integration efforts .
This will deliver a positive message for the whole region at a time when we need to reaffirm its European perspective in order to consolidate peace and foster economic prosperity in the Western Balkans .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , in my view , the report on Serbia is excellent . I congratulate the rapporteur , Jelko Kacin .
It seems to me that Serbia has finally made up its mind that it genuinely wants a European future for itself .
The majority of the political elite believes that this is the most favourable option .
This determination has to be seen in the light of the turbulence of the last two decades .
Serbia experienced the end of communism , the collapse of Yugoslavia , the wars that ensued , the rule of Slobodan Milošević , the bombing of 1999 , burgeoning mafias and criminality , violence , refugees - a depressing and traumatic history .
The decision to opt for Europe , therefore , is a considerable achievement and signals that Serbia has become a factor of stability in the region .
Two major political problems remain : the arrest and transfer of Ratko Mladić to The Hague , and coming to terms with the independence of Kosovo .
Both these point towards psychological barriers .
Mladić has his protectors , and the loss of Kosovo is painful for a sizeable section of Serbian society ; any loss of territory is painful .
To these may be added several other areas that need attention , notably , the upgrading of public administration and of the administration of justice , the establishment of market conditions and full openness towards Serbia 's past , including opening up the archives .
The auguries for Serbia 's road towards Europe are reasonably good .
There is a clear commitment in this direction .
The tasks faced by the elite and by society are recognised and the technical preparations are going ahead .
If all goes well , Serbia should receive the opinion this autumn and candidate status after that .
The road to Europe will not be easy , but Europe as a whole benefits from a stable , democratic Serbia .
Welcome
Before we move on down the list of speakers , I would just like to take the opportunity to bid welcome to a guest who is following our debate today , namely , Serbia 's Deputy Prime Minister , Mr Božidar Đelić .
A very warm welcome to you , Mr Đelić .
It is nice to have you with us .
EC-Serbia Stabilisation and Association Agreement - Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EC and Serbia ( continuation of debate )
The next item on the agenda is the continuation of the joint debate on the EC-Serbia Agreement .

Madam President , I , too , should like to congratulate Mr Kacin on the balanced and detailed text which he has presented .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament wholeheartedly supports the accession prospects of Serbia , a country which has made tremendous progress over recent years and which forms the cornerstone for consolidating peace and stability in the Western Balkans .
Parliament 's approval today of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement is therefore an historic moment and we welcome it .
In the resolution by the European Parliament , we also welcome the accession request filed by this country , but emphasise that other steps still need to be taken .
It must be clear that the development of regional cooperation is still the Union 's top priority in the Western Balkans .
This being so , cooperation between Serbia and the International Criminal Court is an absolute international obligation and must proceed apace , not because Europe wants it , but because the dispensation of justice requires reconciliation with the past and allows relations to be improved between all the peoples of the former Yugoslavia .
However , we must not forget that the Serbian people were victims of this war .
Serbia is now the country with the highest number of refugees and internally displaced persons in Europe ; people who need care and housing and to be integrated into the labour market .
The Union must provide practical support for all efforts in this direction , especially in light of the credit crisis .
We therefore welcome the recent commitment by the Presidents of Serbia and Croatia to find joint solutions to the refugee problem .
The decision to enter into dialogue with the authorities in Kosovo is especially important to stability in the area .
We support the dialogue , which needs to start as soon as possible , for the benefit of everyone living in Kosovo , and we hope that it will contribute towards the common European future of the peoples in the region .
To close , I should like to congratulate the Vice-President of the Serbian Government , Mr Đelić , on his statement yesterday , to the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , that Serbia is seeking an historic compromise on Kosovo .
This compromise really is necessary and we must all help to achieve it .
Madam President , as a liberal , I must stress that the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is a group which has always supported the enlargement process because we believe in a Europe comprising all its members , namely , a powerful , united Europe .
As a Romanian , I cannot but welcome this European path being pursued by Serbia , while also emphasising that Serbia is a European country and its journey towards Europe will not be completed without difficulties arising from a troubled past .
However , Serbia must look forward and try to forget the past , because reconciliation with the past must not stand in the way of a future destiny in Europe .
I wish to stress that it is vital for the Copenhagen criteria to be implemented properly , robustly and scrupulously for the whole region , which means Serbia as well , because they alone guarantee respect for European values , the rule of law and viable democracies .
I believe that these last two years since the historic decision was made to embark on the European path prove that both the government in Belgrade and the Serbian people are motivated and determined .
They wholeheartedly believe in this European project because what else can be more important than European decisions adopted by a government which has not been forced to make these decisions by legal requirements or requirements stipulated by the rules of this political game .
It is also crucial that Serbia stabilises its economy .
Indeed , the signs we are seeing at the moment in the Serbian economy are excellent .
It is paramount that it stabilises its democracy .
However , a great deal of attention must be focused on multiculturalism in the Balkans , which has been a sensitive issue .
The problem of minorities in this region must not be one which will create conflict .
I believe that a model promoting assistance and support for minorities and cultural reconciliation is an absolute must .
Madam President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is a staunch supporter of Serbia ' s accession to the EU .
We are , therefore , pleased with the current government 's unequivocally pro-European course .
However , in my opinion , neither side is exactly going to win any awards for the way in which it has been dealing with the accession process .
The EU is simply letting itself be trifled with .
In order to support Serbia ' s pro-European policy , it was granted a visa waiver before it had fully complied with the criteria .
Serbia received the Avis in October , in exchange for taking a moderate position on Kosovo .
The EU is sending out a message that it is political games , not adherence to the criteria , which will determine the accession process .
We should not have to reward Serbia for behaving like a mature European democracy .
In fact , we should be able to expect Serbia to take on a responsible role as a regional leader with regard to Kosovo and Bosnia as a matter of course , without having to reward it in the same way that one gives a small child a sweet for being good .
One thing which we should at least do is stop caving in every time that it comes to the hunt for Mladić and Hadžić .
We are talking here about the perpetrators of horrific war crimes and genocide .
They should not be allowed to get away with murder .
Serbia can , and must , do a lot more to arrest them .
We cannot allow full cooperation with the ICTY to become a trifle which may be overlooked in the interests of diplomacy .
The verdict on this must rest with those who are in a position to judge whether Serbia is cooperating fully , and that is prosecutor Brammertz .
For that reason , I ask you to vote in favour of our amendment .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , Serbia 's progress towards EU membership is gathering pace , and rightly so , as evidenced by the excellent Kacin report .
When I was in Serbia last October , I was impressed with the commitment and effort of Serbia 's dynamic , western-orientated democratic government .
Serbia certainly has much work still to be done , relating to judicial reform and the fight against organised crime .
We in the ECR also hope that Ratko Mladić will be caught and sent to The Hague , though it is by no means certain that he is on Serbian territory .
However , it is vital that Serbia 's progress is reciprocated and rewarded by the EU and its Member States , for example , now by ratifying the SSA , not least because some of Serbia 's neighbours , such as Croatia , are far more advanced on the road to EU accession .
Serbia 's relationship with Kosovo is problematic but not insoluble .
I personally believe that an equitable full and final settlement based on partition and the ' land for peace ' principles we see in the Middle East would be the best way forward .
In my view , the EU should properly evaluate this option during the forthcoming dialogue brokered by the High Representative .
To dismiss it out of hand would be dangerously short-sighted , and would only perpetuate Kosovo 's state of limbo in terms of international recognition at EU , NATO and UN level .
Madam President , the greatest figure in Serbian history , Saint Sava , said that the Serbs are a people both of the East and of the West .
From this arises the problem that they do not trust the people of the West , because they regard themselves as people of the East , and they do not trust the people of the East , because they regard themselves as people of the West .
In fact , Serbia is a bridge between the east and west of Europe , a key country for European unity , and , ultimately , even the novel by the great Serbian writer , Dobrica Ćosić , ' A Time of Death ' , shows that Serbia is of key importance where the unity or break-up of Europe are at stake .
I believe it is time for us to realise the fundamental importance of Serbia for European unity .
It is the key Balkan economy , and there will be no European unity without the Balkans .
I would like to emphasise that we have common tasks that can be addressed relatively quickly , such as the problems of refugees in Serbia ( Serbia has some 750 000 refugees on its territory ) , environmental problems ( some of which go back to the 1990s ) and the operation of shipping lanes on the Danube ( we have a working inter-group in the European Parliament dedicated to the Danube ) , and we should also aim to assist Serbia in a bold reform of the judiciary and in the fight against organised crime .
Madam President , I believe that Mr Kacin 's report strikes a perfect balance , for which I congratulate him .
Serbia 's progress in terms of the reforms needed is reflected in this report in a realistic manner .
Just yesterday , the Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia gave a satisfactory presentation of developments to the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Nonetheless , one important outstanding issue is cooperation with the International Criminal Court , including handing over the final fugitives to The Hague , this being a fundamental prerequisite to Serbia 's progress towards accession .
Freedom of the press is one of the most important problems that the Serbian Government needs to resolve ; there should be no political pressure or other influences that obstruct the independence of Serbian journalists .
Another problem besetting Serbia is the large number of refugees and internally displaced persons facing housing problems and poverty , while unemployment is close to 19 % .
I think that we should help Serbia and we must not forget that this country recently came out of a war .
( NL ) Madam President , we should not focus just on arresting and trying the war criminal Mladić .
Serbia has enormous problems with organised crime .
A number of speakers have already mentioned this and we must not underestimate those problems .
Certainly , progress has been made , but not enough to achieve an acceptable standard , not by a long shot .
Another thing , of course , is that Serbia is a poor country , like all those candidate countries .
These are poor countries and their accession will be very costly for European citizens .
Serbia is even more corrupt than Romania and Bulgaria .
Romania and Bulgaria should never have been allowed to join the Union .
This will lead to a great many problems in terms of corruption and Serbia is even more corrupt .
I view that as a particularly persistent problem and one that cannot be resolved just like that .
I therefore call on you not to underestimate it .
Moreover , Serbia 's potential accession , just like the visa waiver , will lead to even more emigration into Western Europe , emigration that will be of no benefit to us .
Madam President , the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and the European integration of Serbia are important for both Serbia and the European Union .
I should like to make two remarks .
In order to negotiate the agreement properly and to properly manage the integration process , the European Union should start by identifying and recognising its own interests .
Europe has an unsolved Albanian problem , a lack of geopolitical coherence on its southern flank , and a black hole of organised crime and corruption in its Balkan area .
This means that at the centre of the Union , there is a need for an enlarged functional and cohesive market and for better transportation corridors in that area .
None of these problems can be solved without the contribution of Serbia .
Secondly , we have to avoid treating Serbia as a second-class European country and lecturing it on every occasion .
Serbia has indeed committed many sins , but the Euro-Atlantic contribution to the sins committed was also significant .
2011 is indeed a year of challenging opportunities for both Serbia and the European Union .
We will not be able to rise to those opportunities unless we leave aside all narcissism and treat Serbia as a peer .
Only a dignified Serbia can be a reliable partner for a historic reconciliation in the Balkans and a historic reunification within the European Union .
Mr Kacin 's report makes a remarkable contribution in that direction .
Madam President , I join those who have praised and welcomed the report by my colleague , Jelko Kacin , and I thoroughly agree with his remarks that Serbia 's future lies in the European Union and that Serbia will become an important player in guaranteeing security and stability in the Western Balkans region .
I have supported the aim of EU membership for the Western Balkan countries for the last decade , including when I was the Vice-Chair of the Balkans Delegation .
I worked closely with our rapporteur in championing visa-free travel and I was delighted when that was secured for Serbia , among others , a year ago .
I think this is a really vital contribution to person-to-person contacts and to raising horizons and , ultimately , to guaranteeing security in its wider sense .
Some of the challenges that are faced by Serbia have already been mentioned .
I would like to add something on the challenge of judicial reform .
The Commission 's progress report last autumn sounded a note of concern about reappointment procedures being carried out in a non-transparent way , jeopardising the principle of independence of the judiciary and creating a high risk of political influence .
That is clearly a key issue in terms of the Rule of Law .
In relation to cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , in The Hague , Mr Kacin told the Foreign Affairs Committee last night that Serbia is doing absolutely everything in its power to locate and apprehend the remaining two indicted individuals and transfer them to The Hague , but Serge Brammertz , the Chief Prosecutor , in his speech to the UN Security Council in September , said that Serbia needed to bridge the gap between its stated commitment to the arrests and the effectiveness of its operations on the ground .
We are not seeing results .
Serbia needs to adopt a more proactive approach to arresting the fugitives , so I am afraid that there is a gap between rhetoric and reality , and that gap absolutely must be bridged .
( DE ) Madam President , we , too , advocate the accession of the Western Balkans to the European Union and , of course , also that of Serbia .
Each country is discrete , of course , but the region is interconnected and the action of each country in the region has a crucial impact on the success of the process itself .
In this context , I would like to point out , once again , that , for us , Serbia 's accession process cannot progress any further without a definite all clear from the International Criminal Court and , as my fellow Member just said , more proactive and , above all , more effective cooperation with the Court on the ground .
There have also been positive developments . One such development was the adoption of the Gender Equality Act , which we were very pleased about .
What we want to see now is for its implementation to take place really quickly and we are calling on the Commission to make money available to support this process .
If this region wants to grow together , we also need more public transport options in and through the region again .
In this regard too , I call on the Commission to provide more support and funding in this area through the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( IPA ) , as we are convinced that what is needed is contact between people and not just between leaders .
This is very much fostered if it becomes easier for the people of the region to be mobile .
Mobility is also a question that I would like to just mention quickly before I finish , specifically with regard to the vehicle licence plates that Belgrade continues to issue for seven regions in the north of Kosovo .
We call on Belgrade to finally desist from issuing these licence plates for Kosovo .
( PL ) Madam President , Serbia is a European country .
Serbia is part of European history .
Serbia is a part of European culture .
Serbia is not just a part of Europe 's geography .
Serbia , therefore , must be part of the political map of Europe , so let us not search for pretexts to prolong Serbia 's path to the European Union .
I have the impression that the EU has sometimes brushed that country off and there has been an inequality between the treatment of certain countries in the Balkans and Serbia .
We must end this inequality once and for all .
Let us not look for pretexts - and I stress this once again - to prolong Serbia 's path to the European Union .
The Serbian nation has done enough to be given a place among the nations of Europe as soon as possible .
( NL ) Madam President , at the moment , the economic crisis in Serbia and in the Western Balkans is coming to a head .
This precarious situation carries with it the danger of a renewed upsurge in populist and nationalist sentiments .
Commissioner Füle , is it not time that we established a development fund for the Western Balkans along the lines of the post-war Marshall Plan ?
Commissioner , I have a second question for you .
I was yesterday informed by an insider of a potential new hotbed in Serbia .
This concerns the activities of radical Islamic forces in Sandžak .
One name that has been circulating in this respect is that of the regional mufti , Mr Zukorlić .
What specific information does the European Commission have about this matter and what countermeasures is the Commission considering ?
( BG ) Madam President , tens of thousands of Bulgarians live in the east of Serbia , in the areas around Bosilegrad and Caribrod .
They are an ethnic minority which remained in Serbia after the end of the First World War .
It would not be too far from the truth to say that they are among the poorest people in Europe .
Not only has the Serbian Government failed to do anything about this - such as investments , to get the economy of the region going a little , but in November last year , with no explanation and in violation of its international undertakings , it stopped a group of Bulgarian citizens bringing aid to the children of the region who were coming to learn in Bulgaria .
I would remind the representatives of the Serbian Government that free movement of people and open borders are a fundamental value of the European Union .
And until you learn about it and apply it , there is no place for you here .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Kacin for what he has put forward .
His report makes a clear case for a ' yes ' vote .
I think that , for all the issues where we continue to criticise Serbia , for all the imperatives for internal reform processes , all the necessity of cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , for the issues relating to the fight against corruption , which is particularly far-reaching in Serbia in particular , with mafia mob activities taking place and influencing economic life , the struggle in respect of all of this needs to be fought over the years and this is a condition for Serbia to continue on a positive pro-European course towards membership of the European Union , as they were firmly promised at Thessaloniki , and we need to be true to that promise .
I would also like to say , however , that it is necessary to cooperate with Serbia .
You only have to look into the history of the region to know that there can only be lasting peaceful development if Serbia is on board and that we therefore must see Serbia not only as an applicant for future membership of the European Union but also as an essential strategic partner in the sensible development of the entire region and that , for this reason , we should be a source of encouragement and that we should not treat Serbia less well than states that are Member States of the European Union or that are a long way down the road to accession , for whatever historical reasons , be they short or long-term .
Given the courage with which President Tadić has fought for a European course and how embattled he is in Serbia , it is imperative that we support these political forces and encourage them so that they are able to show their population that the path to Europe , rather than a nationalistic path , is the right path for the people , too .
For this reason , I would like to invite everyone , and the Member States , in particular , to move forward quickly with the ratification process and , in this way , send a signal that the steps that Serbia is taking towards Europe must be supported so that we can achieve security in the region in the long run .

( DE ) Madam President , I was in Croatia a few days ago and never has so much been spoken about Serbia there as in recent days , and specifically in a very positive sense because of exactly what Mr Brok said - the brave moves that Mr Tadić has made together with President Josipović - and I am also aware that Deputy Prime Minister Đelić is heavily involved in this regard - are significant steps towards Europe .
These are elements of a regional collaboration , but a regional collaboration with a great political as well as humanitarian significance .
It is therefore very important - and in this regard I fully back what Mr Brok and other Members have said - that we encourage Serbia to continue to take such steps .
Clearly , this also applies to relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina .
We all know how important it is that Serbia positively engages - and the same applies to Croatia - in order for that country to hold together and also to carry out the appropriate reforms .
In this regard , Serbia really is very courageous here and it is absolutely crucial to regional collaboration .
One critical element that I nevertheless wish to raise is collaboration with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) .
I had , of course , invited Mr Brammertz to attend the working group of the Committee on Foreign Affairs that I chair .
We are not completely satisfied in this area - more can be done .
Our promptings in this regard have not really been satisfied .
I would therefore ask everyone to put pressure on for this to happen .
As Mrs Koppa has already said , this is not just a question for Europe .
Serbia must also work on these issues for Serbia itself .
Just as there has been this apology in Vukovar , which will undoubtedly go down in the history of the country , the fight against those who have committed major crimes must also continue .
( SV ) Madam President , we cannot fail to notice that Serbia has made a huge amount of progress recently .
Let me give you a few examples : the successful conclusion of the visa liberalisation process , the regional cooperation in the areas of both traffic and energy , a political will to contribute to the reconciliation process in the region and a new political leadership , which was most apparent in President Tadić 's visit to Srebrenica and Vukovar .
All of these things demonstrate not only the good leadership of particular individuals and Serbia 's huge desire to move closer to EU Membership , but also the decision on the part of the Serbs to choose precisely this sort of leadership .
We are therefore pleased that the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Serbia is now in place and that we are sending clear signals to Serbia to show that we can see the results of their efforts and that Serbia has a place in the EU family .
There are clearly many challenges remaining : the fight against organised crime , continued legal reforms and finding a solution to the minorities issues .
Most of these problems are not unique to Serbia , however , but are also shared by the other Balkan countries .
However , one issue that is rather unique and that needs to be mentioned in this context is the cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague .
The political will exists in the Serbian Government .
There is also an awareness of the fact that it is necessary to cooperate with the Tribunal .
Let us now hope that Ratko Mladić will soon be back in The Hague .
( ES ) Madam President , I have one minute to stress how important it is that we complete the makeup of the European Union with Serbia 's membership , which I hope can be confirmed this year on the basis of the significant progress the country has made .
That progress has been acknowledged by the Council in its decision to move forward with the accession process and by Parliament in the report by Mr Kacin , whom I congratulate .
In this one minute , I also have to point out that the different positions on Kosovo within the European Union have encouraged Serbia to make a clear commitment to Europe , which is essential for consolidating peace and democracy in the Balkans and for achieving a constructive approach to regional integration , as demonstrated by the High-Level Meeting in Sarajevo , held on 2 June under the Spanish Presidency .
I hope that Serbia has the EU 's full support in undertaking the reforms that it needs in terms of justice , combating corruption and intra-regional dialogue .
Madam President , I am glad to see that Serbia has shown strong determination and made substantial progress in the integration process .
Concluding the Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( SAA ) and implementing it are the next important steps on this road .
The Serbian Government should be commended for the actions which have been taken to get to this stage .
I am sure that the SAA will bring concrete economic and trade benefits for the country in areas such as environment , energy , transport and many others .
Thirteen countries have so far ratified this agreement .
I hope that its ratification by the European Parliament will encourage the rest to conclude the process soon .
However , there are still challenges ahead for both Serbia and the EU .
Serbia needs to commit to full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in bringing the remaining war criminals to justice .
There is also an urgent need for progress in the fight against corruption and organised crime , and for further reforms in the sectors of justice and public administration .
Equally , the Serbian Parliament needs to abandon the practices of blank mandates and the arbitrary allocation of parliamentary seats .
Finally , the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo will , I hope , be put on the right track and will guarantee ordinary people better prospects for the future .
The European Parliament has always been a strong supporter of the integration of the Western Balkans .
Serbia is a crucial part of that with this commitment ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Madam President , this is an important moment for stability in the Balkans .
Serbia has clearly demonstrated that it has made a choice to work towards a European future , but it will have to work hard to achieve that .
There are a number of stumbling blocks on the road to possible EU membership .
On top of that , the last two ICTY suspects , Goran Hadžić and Ratko Mladić , have still not been arrested .
Unfortunately , as is apparent in the Chief Prosecutor Brammertz 's report , Serbia has failed to convince the international community that it is putting every effort into searching for these criminals .
In Brammertz 's opinion , rather than doing its utmost to arrest the suspects , the Serbian Government has , in fact , done no more than the bare minimum that is required of it .
What we need is a clear and united message from the Serbian Government .
Similarly , it is important that the European Commission be prepared to exert much more pressure .
It is also important that the rights of women and homosexuals remain high on Serbia 's agenda .
I expect Serbia to pull out all the stops to allow an open process .
( HU ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , first , congratulations are due to both the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur for reaching suitable compromises in this text and for producing a good report .
Last year , Serbia took major steps towards integration in many respects , which the report takes account of as well , and thus I would like to mention only a few points .
One of these is the question of visa-free travel , which the Serb authorities ought to take very seriously and , in the future , they ought to do their utmost to advise citizens not to abuse this opportunity , as otherwise , the access to European prospects on the part of young people in the future would be impaired , because this visa-free travel - which we have always supported - is precisely about the young generations joining and closing the gap with Europe , and this must not be gambled with .
At the same time , Serbia must make immediate progress in cooperating with the international tribunal and must produce results in negotiations with Kosovo .
However , what I should like to emphasise is the issue of minority rights listed in the Copenhagen criteria .
I am pleased that the report has devoted attention to these matters in good time because Serbia must continue its activity in this area : the laws on the status of Vojvodina and on national councils must be put into practice in a manner that enables them to exert their effect in reality .
The European Union , however , must learn from the accessions of 2004 and 2007 that these ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Madam President , the decision made by the Council to initiate the procedure for ratifying the Stabilisation and Association Agreement will encourage Serbia to continue its reforms in order to comply with the Copenhagen criteria .
The entry into force of this agreement will open up trade between the EU and Serbia and will offer real prospects for accession .
Significant progress has been made so far , especially in cooperation with EULEX , in the areas of reforming the judicial system and fighting corruption .
At the same time , I believe that the refusal to recognise Kosovo 's independence must not stand in the way of Serbia 's Euroatlantic aspirations .
Above all , the Serbian Government has shown its readiness to engage in fresh dialogue with Kosovo under the aegis of the EU .
I would also like to mention the key role played by Serbia in safeguarding peace in the Balkans .
In this respect , I think that it is of paramount importance to continue the open-door policy towards all the countries in the Western Balkans .
Romania has supported unreservedly the expansion of this region towards the EU and NATO , with a particular mention for Serbia .
I will end by stressing that this country 's efforts and aspirations must be recognised by European states and encouraged at the same time .
It is our duty to support our partners in the Balkans in continuing along the Euroatlantic path which they have already chosen .
( BG ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Kacin , on the fine work he has done on this report .
The future of Serbia and the Western Balkans is in the European Union .
I am convinced that the historical errors and injustices that befell the Balkans in the last century can only be overcome through European integration .
Our common aim is to change the present borders from lines of separation to lines of unification .
It should not matter on which side of a border citizens live , regardless of their ethnicity : whether they are in Niš or in Kalotina , in Caribrod or in Sofia , in Priština or in Leskovac , European integration is the only way to stability , security and prosperity , for Serbian citizens as well as their neighbours .
Dr Kacin 's report includes aspects of what has been achieved in Serbia , and what remains to be done .
Serbia has our support on its road to integration , and will continue to have it .
However , those of us from Eastern Europe can give our Serbian friends some useful advice to prevent them from repeating our mistakes .
One such piece of advice would be to open the files of the repressive communist system in Yugoslavia .
In Bulgaria , we have bitter experience of what delays in opening the files entails .
The former secret services are closely linked to corruption and organised crime in the region .
I congratulate Serbia in its attempts to limit the influence of communist structures in its government .
A democratic country 's future should not be controlled by its totalitarian past .
We in Eastern Europe are clearly aware of manipulation by the former communists , who do everything they can to present their activities as being in defence of the national interest .
Do not be fooled .
The only thing they are interested in are their own interests .
Whoever controls the past also controls the future .
Opening the files of the communist secret services will be a clear sign to Europe that Serbia wants to break with a regime that cut it off from Europe for decades .
The citizens of the former Yugoslavia have the right to know their most recent history .
I wish Serbia success on its way to European integration , in which it has our support .
We look forward to seeing it in the European democratic family .
( EL ) Madam President , I wish to start by thanking the rapporteur for his excellent work and for the text which he presented on Serbia .
The signature of the EU-Serbia Stabilisation and Association Agreement is a crucially important development for both Serbia and the European Union .
Now , the next stage , the next important step , is to acquire the status of candidate country .
I believe that we should decide on this next December .
Let us not forget that 2011 is a pre-election year for Serbia , with parliamentary and local elections due to take place in March 2012 .
Those of us who had an opportunity to listen to Deputy Prime Minister Đelić in the Committee on Foreign Affairs yesterday witnessed Serbia 's dedication and determination to make every effort to satisfy European criteria and preconditions .
We also witnessed the positive and constructive position of Serbia and the Serbian Government on fundamental dialogue with Priština .
We must encourage Serbia .
( LT ) Madam President , given the Council 's conclusions on the progress made by Serbia in the area of reforms , we should congratulate this country , but unfortunately , some matters give us concern .
As Serbia takes steps towards the European Union , a huge effort must be made in certain areas , in particular , the improvement of the business environment in Serbia .
The experience of Lithuanian investors raises reasonable questions over the business environment and the protection of investments in Serbia .
The Serbian Government accused Lithuanian companies , which had invested EUR 34 million , of default and , in violation of the agreement between Serbia and Lithuania providing for investment promotion and mutual protection , terminated the privatisation contract .
Serbia must find means of ensuring transparency and a predictable environment for business , and deal with bureaucratic restrictions , legal uncertainty and similar issues .
It goes without saying that we support Serbia 's goals of integration into the European Union and hope that Serbia will deal with problem issues .
( HU ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner Füle , we are not just ending a process , but I hope that we will also be able to start accession negotiations this year given that Serbia has achieved a great deal in recent times .
I would like to mention the fact that Chief Prosecutor Brammertz himself regards cooperation with the international tribunal in the Hague as irreproachable .
For a long time , this was a sensitive issue .
The same applies to NATO partnership and what I consider to be particularly important in the case of the Western Balkans is that Serbia has a commendable minorities policy which could be exemplary for many EU Member States , as the wide-ranging cultural autonomy that is manifest in the genuine operation of the councils of various national minorities guarantees the continued existence of the minorities .
Furthermore , progress on the issue of Kosovo , which is an emotionally highly complicated and complex question , is extremely important , but Serbia is taking a very good path ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( SL ) Madam President , the report of my colleague , Mr Kacin , is realistic and encouraging in equal measure .
Serbia 's full integration into the European Union is in the interest of European stability and security .
Its integration will also mean eliminating , or making an important step towards eliminating , the grey zone in South-Eastern Europe .
I support Serbia and its strategic objectives , of which Vice President Đelić has informed us .
The keys are in Serbia 's hands and Serbia must meet the conditions .
This might also be an opportunity to get the message across to the Serbian public that General Mladić should be a source of shame , not pride , for the Serbian nation .
I would like to emphasise that I welcome all the steps taken by the Serbian Government and the Serbian public towards building a good neighbourhood .
At the same time , I need to point out that the border is one of the key issues when it comes to neighbourly relations .
( DE ) Madam President , I , too , would like to voice my backing to the accession of Serbia to the European Union and to the idea that the Serbian people have a future in a common Europe , just as the Western Balkans as a whole has .
Personally , I will also give the green light to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , although I feel I must point out , at the same time , that Serbia 's cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) is still not what it should be .
I , too , hope that there will be a majority in this plenary for our amendment and that Mr Brammertz 's words will continue to apply in the future .
I would like to thank Mr Kacin for his report and for his , in places , very positive reporting on the progress that there has been in Serbia and , at the same time , on those elements where problems still persist .
I will turn now to relations with the Republic of Kosovo .
As rapporteur for this Parliament for Kosovo , I am making an appeal to the Serbian administration .
I followed very closely what Deputy Prime Minister Đelić had to say yesterday , when he stated that the willingness to enter into this historic agreement is there but that it must also be clearly stated that the dialogue between the Republic of Serbia and the Republic of Kosovo ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to begin by expressing my support for the conclusion of an association agreement with Serbia .
Serbia was , and continues to be , an influential Balkan country .
The citizens of this country , however , have , for many long years , been paying for the mistakes of their political leaders , who got the country into a difficult political situation through their risky decisions .
If we want to stabilise the political situation in the Balkans on a long-term basis , however , we must have open and correct relations with all countries in the region .
Serbia must therefore be an equally serious partner for us as the other stable countries of the region , in order for us , in open dialogue and through good cooperation , to help the inhabitants of the country integrate as soon as possible and as well as possible into the community of free , democratic European countries .

( HU ) Madam President , as a Hungarian , the Hungarian Presidency is a great pleasure for me and I wish the Council every success , yet this speech about Serbia 's EU accession gave me a slight feeling of sadness and a sense that something is lacking .
This was due to the absence of any mention of the extraordinarily crude violation of human rights committed against our fellow Hungarians in Vojvodina , and I would like to ask whether the Hungarian Presidency or the Commission is aware of the reports of human rights organisations and the reports of observers , firstly in the case of the young men of Temerin .
The case of the young men of Temerin shows a flagrant violation of human rights perpetrated by imposing an excessively severe sentence of a total of 61 years in prison on five young men for a pub fight , which they must serve in third world conditions , tortured and subject to inhumane , cruel treatment .
This is compounded by the fact that at the same time , the most brutal crimes committed against Hungarians are not investigated .
Do you know ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , contrary to the view of those advocates of the EU who wear rose-tinted glasses , accession to the Union alone is not enough to resolve all conflicts just like that .
Especially when it comes to the applicant state of Turkey , it can be seen that the EU operates a double standard .
Serbia , after all , is ready to engage in talks with Kosovo even though the EU 's attitude is manifestly inconsistent : in Bosnia , multiple ethnic groups are to be forced into a multicultural State while in Kosovo , it is deemed legitimate for a single ethnic group to hive itself off from a State .
Not only has Serbia expressed its willingness to talk to Kosovo , but it has also apologised for the genocide at Srebrenica .
Yet , despite this , Belgrade continues to be accused of failing to adequately cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague .
The violations of human rights in Turkey , however , where simply discussing the Armenian genocide is enough to merit punishment , are apparently something that can be overlooked .
The accusation against Kosovar Prime Minister Thaçi of trading in human organs also demonstrates that war crimes cannot be viewed in a one-sided way .
These accusations must be fully resolved .
For accession to the EU , it is very important that Serbia and Kosovo first resolve their disputes .
Madam President , the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia represents another important step in the process of integration towards the EU undertaken by Serbia .
We are talking about a country whose progress in recent years has already been impressive , and I think that further political and economic integration on the basis of the SAA will give the final boost that Serbia needs on its path towards the EU .
In view of the important role that Serbia plays in the Western Balkans , the SAA will have a positive influence not only on the EU and on Serbia , but also on the region as a whole by enhancing its security , stability and development , as well as setting solid foundations for the enlargement process in the Western Balkans .
I hope that , after it has received the green light from the European Parliament , the SAA process can be concluded as soon as possible .
I would therefore ask the Member States to ensure that the ratification process takes place as smoothly and rapidly as possible .
( PL ) Madam President , cooperation with our European neighbours is an essential element of EU policy .
Serbia , in a similar way to all countries on the Balkan Peninsula , is a very specific case .
Due to the break up of Yugoslavia in the 1990s and the wars that were waged there , these countries are wrestling with economic and political problems to this day .
The European Union 's role is to support these countries and help them .
History has taught us that the political situation in the region affects the whole continent and that we all feel its consequences for a long time .
To a certain degree , Europe bears partial responsibility for the events that have taken place .
For this reason , we have an increased moral obligation towards those countries , and the agreements we are talking about today - cooperation in all areas and measures to make things easier for the citizens of those countries - are essential , not least to ensure that this history is not repeated .
( SL ) Madam President , today has again proved that a democratic and European Serbia has many allies in the European Union .
It is a fact that only a democratic and pro-European Serbia has the chance to make up for a 20-year delay in the development of democracy , economy and the quality of life of its citizens .
Serbia 's democratic government and President Tadić deserve our support .
Serbia is key to stability in the Balkans .
A modern , European Serbia has a major responsibility here .
It has the responsibility , first of all , to ensure a stable , European , peaceful and better future for its neighbour , Bosnia and Herzegovina , and secondly , to strike an historic compromise with the neighbouring Albanian nation .
Both of these objectives are the aims of the current Serbian Government , so let us work together with it and support its objectives .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner Füle said that everything was in Serbia 's hands as to whether they make the right choices .
This is undoubtedly the case , but at the same time , we have to be aware , and we know this as new Member States , that this process should be strengthened .
Serbia made the right choice by signing the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
It committed itself to undertaking a range of undoubtedly difficult reforms .
As the European Parliament , we must strengthen these reforms , because it is not only the government but , above all else , society that must make this proper European choice .
When I was observing the constitutional referendum , I said to the Serbs , I said to my European colleagues , ' look at Belgrade and these people , the Serbs - they are Europeans , and we should help them on the road to reform ' .
I believe that everything that is happening in the process to ratify the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , as well as the European Parliament 's resolution , can help Serbia to a great extent on that road .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for this rich debate , which has shown the House 's constructive support of the process of the European Union integration of Serbia .
The support provided by Parliament to the ratification process of the SAA is an important signal for Serbia , and will contribute to intensifying its efforts on the path towards the European Union .
Let me address briefly some questions which were raised during the debate .
To Mr Belder firstly , on the Sandžak , I would rather talk about a politicisation of the issue of Muslim representation than a surge of radical Islamism .
In that context , we look forward to the next elections to the Bosniak National Council in April this year , which should be peaceful and inclusive and will help foster dialogue and avoid radicalisation .
On the question of the Development Fund , we are in close dialogue with Serbia and other countries in the Western Balkan region concerning how to make the best use of the IPA and how to make it even more effective .
Reflection is ongoing regarding the support for technological development .
Concerning the question by Mrs Morvai , let me say that we pay particular attention to human rights and also to the protection of minority rights .
I will write to her addressing one concrete case she referred to in her intervention .
I am personally very encouraged by Serbia 's serious and constructive approach to the current stage of the enlargement process .
Where we talked yesterday about concerns , we are talking today about Serbia being on the right track in addressing , for example , the important issue of judicial reform .
This is a good basis for Serbia to fully use the integration potential that the year 2011 offers .
Madam President , Mr Đelić , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for this excellent debate .
Excellent observations have been made on an excellent report , and the fact that the majority of the issues raised here have been included in the report demonstrated the excellence of the report to me , so I believe this was an excellent basis for discussion .
You have all confirmed that this is not about a completed process but rather about a beginning .
After this beginning , I believe that all the issues which you , too , have raised in the debate will be discussed .
Substantial progress has been made , and this is why we have reached the point we are at in the process , and there is still much to do .
You yourselves have raised a great many issues , such as deepening democracy , refugees , developing a business environment , problems related to visa-free travel or the situation of minorities .
We have heard that there has been a major step forward in minorities policy in Serbia , as Mr Tabajdi also pointed out , yet , at the same time , the Copenhagen criteria are in force , and the Commission has drawn attention to this .
This is an important pointer for us , and we will watch this closely in every movement and every assessment we make .
It has also been said that the situation is fragile .
I fully agree with this , and this is the reason why it is particularly important that we encourage Serbia to carry on along this path .
Mr Brok and Mr Swoboda pointed this out as well .
I believe that the most essential thing , as Mrs Nicolai also mentioned , is that this is a decision made by Serbia of its own will ; that Serbia is committed to the European Union and EU membership , and we will help this process by all possible means .
I regard the fact that they have chosen this path of their own volition as a guarantee that Serbia will take all the necessary measures .
I am very confident , Madam President , that after this well-rounded debate , Parliament will assent to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
Madam President , today 's rich debate is the best illustration of the lively interest in , and support for , Serbia here in the European Parliament and in other European institutions .
Amongst all the challenges it inherited from the wars of the 1990s , Serbia is now , primarily , in the process of laying down the foundations for the rule of law .
Judicial reform , which began in 2009 , remains in many ways incomplete , but that requires systematic rectification .
The rule of law is the key Copenhagen criterion .
Serbia needs to ensure the independence , competence and efficiency of its judicial authorities in order to ensure legal certainty and economic development .
We welcome Belgrade 's recent efforts to understanding these challenges .
Restitution , that is , the return of confiscated property and the protection of private property , is one element of this .
I look forward to the arrival of the speaker of Serbia 's National Assembly , who will visit the European Parliament as early as this month .
We need to strengthen the role and responsibility of the Serbian Parliament and all its members .
We also need to be better at attracting the Serbian opposition , which must assume more responsibility for the success of Serbia 's integration process .
The submission of the Serbian Government 's replies to the European Commission 's questionnaire , which Prime Minister Cvetković will hand over to Commissioner Füle this month , will be an historic step for the Serbian state and for all its citizens .
I believe that this step will be highly significant and successful , which is why I also wish the Hungarian Presidency every success in promoting pro-European forces in Serbia .
I know that the Serbian Government 's European Integration Office , headed by Milica Delević , is doing an excellent job and , therefore , cooperation will not be difficult .
In addition , the presence here today of Mr Božo Đelić , the Serbian Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Science , is proof of the lively interest on the part of the Serbian Government in our work and in Serbia 's future in the European Union .
To conclude , I would like to leave you with one thought .
Less than three years ago , Serbia was on the verge of self-imposed isolation .
Today , that danger has passed and Serbia is firmly on the road towards the European Union .
At what pace it will progress depends solely on Serbia itself .
With this resolution , we are encouraging Serbia along its historic path , and we are sending out a clear message to Serbia that we appreciate its successes and recognise all the challenges it is facing .
The joint debate is closed .
A motion for a resolution to close this debate has been tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The vote to that effect will take place tomorrow at 12 : 30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome and support all steps leading towards the rapid integration of Serbia into the EU , since a majority of Serbs want this integration .
At the same time , however , I would like to say that most of the shortcomings for which the Serbs are censured in the draft resolution of the European Parliament can be seen to stem from the former years of destructive engagement by some EU Member States in the Balkans , and the direct aggression of NATO against Serbia .
We should facilitate Serbia 's entry into the EU , as membership is not a reward for this country , but a chance for the EU to contribute towards solving many of the problems it actually caused , directly or indirectly .
I would like to draw urgent attention to the need for a very prudent and balanced approach regarding ethnic minorities in Serbia .
The European Parliament draft resolution acknowledges the ' further aspirations of the Albanian minority ' in Serbia , and speaks of respecting its ' right to provincial autonomy ' .
If the problems of minorities are to be ' solved ' through the creation of collective legislation providing them with special rights , it will be a ' solution ' with disastrous consequences for the state involved , and that applies not only to Serbia .
The only way to secure minority rights is to consistently promote and defend individual human rights .
Hungary ratified the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Serbia on 16 November 2010 .
Hungary , at the time preparing for its term of office in the EU Presidency , did not learn from its historic mistake , when it could have made Romania 's accession conditional upon regional autonomy for the indigenous Hungarian minorities of Transylvania .
The consequences of this missed opportunity are still being felt to this day : Hungarian cemeteries are being desecrated ; a silent genocide of Hungarians is taking place in Transylvania .
Through the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Serbia , the European Union and the Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs must enforce the protection of minorities .
There is great pressure on the European Union to show candidate countries , by concluding and accelerating association agreements , that EU accession is an attainable goal .
While Jobbik supports , for example , the accession of Croatia as a country satisfying the criteria , it firmly opposes further , hasty steps made towards Serbia .
A far greater degree of autonomy for the indigenous Hungarian minority living in Serbia , including full regional and cultural autonomy , must be laid down as a condition for the continuation of the accession process .
We must also not dismiss the idea of allowing the people of Vojvodina to express their will with regard to their regional status through a referendum , thereby alleviating to some extent the indelible injuries inflicted on Hungarians at Trianon .
( The sitting was suspended at 10 : 25 and resumed at 10 : 30 )

Review of the Belgian Presidency of the Council ( debate )
Colleagues , allow me to welcome Prime Minister Yves Leterme .
Half a year ago , we had the presentation of the Belgian Presidency .
Now we have the presentation of the achievements of the Belgian Presidency : legislation , the European External Action Service , financial supervision , the Citizens ' Initiative , the budget - we will discuss all these points .
Welcome , too , to President Barroso , who is present with us , and to all of you .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements : Review of the Belgian Presidency of the Council .
Mr President , Mr Barroso , Excellencies , ladies and gentlemen , though this may appear somewhat incongruous here , in the plenary hall of the European Parliament , I would nonetheless like to start my speech with a quote from a great North American thinker , Ralph Waldo Emerson , who said , and I quote :
' Do not go where the path may lead .
Go instead where there is no path and leave a trail ' .
( FR ) In other words : ' Do not go where the path may lead .
Go instead where there is no path and leave a trail ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is exactly what we have done , with you all , these last six months .
Belgium , my country , was called upon to assume the rotating Presidency of the European Union after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is true that we were not venturing into totally unknown territory but , even so , it was necessary to establish the criteria for the new functioning of the European Union under the new Treaty , with the new institutions with which the European Union has equipped itself .
Therefore , true to the Belgian tradition , the tradition of my country , we did our utmost to enable the institutions to function optimally to create the right precedents .
Ladies and gentlemen , I feel able to say to you that the European Union , as it was structured under the Treaty of Lisbon , functions today and functions well .
The Union has equipped itself with a new instrument for the supervision of the financial sector , which should hopefully prevent the re-emergence of crises like the one we are still struggling to extricate ourselves from .
Economic governance has advanced .
Agreement has been reached on the 2011 budget and , most importantly , in total , in those six months , almost forty agreements of a legislative nature were concluded between Parliament and the Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , our determination to respect both the letter and the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon was a choice for the future of the Union , an investment in ever closer European cooperation .
To achieve this , during this Presidency , we followed two major guidelines .
First , we did not want to push ourselves forward .
Instead , we incorporated our programme , the Belgian programme with its five priorities , into the European agenda , into the programme of the Commission , into the momentum generated by the Heads of State or Government at the level of the European Council , into the programme of the troika with our Spanish and Hungarian colleagues .
( NL ) Secondly , ladies and gentlemen , as well as not wanting to impose a Belgian agenda , we opted for what I would call an inclusive Presidency .
We effectively tried to cooperate as closely as possible with all the European institutions , respecting the letter and spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon and playing a role that was actually no more than that of facilitator .
We cooperated with all parties , obviously with Parliament and the Commission , but also with the new permanent President of the Council , the High Representative and , of course , with Member States , but I believe I can say that , throughout all of our tenure , we paid particular attention to working constructively , and with an open mind , with Parliament , whose powers have been significantly strengthened under the new rules .
Some modesty would be fitting today , of course , but I have to say that , together with you , we ensured that this method was successful .
Moreover , ladies and gentlemen , today , more than ever , the Union represents an interplay between institutions and Member States .
I think that this method has worked and that it can continue to work , because it was and is focused on results and not on image building .
This applies to our Presidency , but it also , in fact , applies to the European Parliament , although you must be the judge of that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here , I would nevertheless like to express my appreciation and gratitude for your cooperation , on behalf of the Belgian Government and on behalf of my colleagues who have held the rotating Presidency .
I believe I can say that most of the agreements we reached were ultimately adopted with a very broad majority .
This is a testament to the quality of your debates and - and this should reassure European citizens - the priority you have placed on what is good for Europe , placing it far above national interests .
However , ladies and gentlemen , those six months are over .
Of course , we cannot dwell on the past .
Over the coming months and years , we will actually have more to do than ever , because our Union , our society , is facing exceptionally great challenges .
I would now like to mention them in brief .
The first challenge , obviously , lies in the continuity of what we have started over the past six months , namely , economic governance .
Since those six months began , we have worked together to take the measures necessary to avert a crisis in the euro area .
However , countering the symptoms that have been in evidence so far is not enough .
The threats which a number of the countries in the euro area have been facing have shown that a monetary union cannot , in fact , work on its own without an economic union , without greater economic convergence .
We must therefore press on with determination along the road of greater economic cohesion , more cohesion in the fiscal , economic and social policies of Member States .
Economic governance also requires rigorous monitoring of the budgetary and structural policies of the Union 's Member States .
We need to make full use of the European Semester which was established with that purpose in mind .
A return to budgetary discipline should not just be a non-binding target ; it must be verifiable and , if necessary , enforceable at a European level .
This is obviously not about discipline for its own sake ; sound public finances are an absolute necessity if we are to establish sustainable growth again , a credible growth that creates jobs for our citizens .
Those jobs are , of course , essential for the maintenance of our very specifically European social model , which goes hand in hand with political and economic freedom , social solidarity and ecological responsibility .
( DE ) The Union must use the new instruments that it is introducing in order to monitor the financial markets efficiently .
These instruments are supposed to be ready for use by the end of this year .
That is an absolute must in order to prevent any new derailments of the markets .
Economic convergence , monitoring of the national budgetary and structural policy options , new instruments for financial market monitoring - all of this may give the impression that the apparatus of the Union is on the way to becoming pretty heavy-going and complicated .
Of course , it is also to be expected that closer monitoring of the national political decisions of the Member States will not proceed without discussions and sources of friction .
Yet that should not put us off , as it forms part of the essence of European integration .
The second field in which we must do this - in which we must keep up the momentum - is that of the Union 's role in the world .
We have made progress in that field .
Thanks to our concerted preparation and unified representation , we have indeed increased our weight in the G20 .
In the last months , the Union has started to build its own diplomatic representation all over the world .
These moves are good but they have to be consolidated .
The European Union , it is true , speaks with one voice on most problems in the world , but words are not enough .
The Union must indeed develop more clout , it must be able to act in a decisive manner and to become a real pole of influence and power in this multipolar world .
Thirdly , we have to address the financial perspective of the Union .
It is true that this is not a time when governments can contemplate hefty increases in their contributions to the Union budget , but neither can we avoid a debate on the long-term financial perspective .
Promises have been made to this Parliament that there will be consultation on the philosophy of the Union 's future financing and on ways and means .
The Union cannot live hand-to-mouth : it has to have this long-term perspective .
Last but not least , I want to say that we will be able to deliver on these challenges only if , more than ever , we believe in ourselves .
I would like to quote the French thinker and writer , André Frossard , on this challenge for the coming years .
I will first quote in French , and then translate :
( FR ) ' Europe quite rightly wants to equip herself with a common policy and currency but , most of all , she needs a soul ' .
Europe quite rightly wants to equip herself with a common policy and currency but , most of all , she needs a soul ' .
We do indeed need a soul , colleagues .
We need to have faith in ourselves and in what we have accomplished , and not to excuse ourselves for who and what we are .
We need to remember that , before being a market , before being a currency , before being a set of institutions , the Union - our Union - was a vision , a belief , a dream .
It was a dream of peace on this continent , which has been torn by so many wars .
I have heard that it has become a little bit passé to speak of peace to generations in Europe who have never known war .
I can only say : ' Look around you ' .
Watch all the refugees , for instance , who come to us fleeing war , fleeing armed conflicts , fleeing tyranny .
Those refugees certainly do not look down on the achievement that it is to have spread peace and security across almost the entire continent .
And those refugees - those people - aspire , like so many people elsewhere in the world , to the rights and freedoms which too many of our citizens take so easily for granted .
As much as the Union is about peace , it is also about liberty , about democracy , about fundamental civil rights and about the rule of law , for our citizens as well as for our immigrants .
We believe in the right of each person to human dignity , which means people 's right to live on their feet and not on their knees , and the right to think and speak and worship freely .
In a much quoted statement , Jean Monnet said that nothing gets done without people , but that nothing lasts without institutions .
This is just as true today as when he said it but , on the other hand , it is also true that institutions will wither if they are not carried by people with strong convictions .
We must remember that we will carry our citizens with us only if we give them a vision : if we give them a dream .
To conclude , I wish Hungary all possible success now that it has taken over the baton of the Presidency .
I am sure it will hold high the torch of the European dream of peace , the European dream of freedom , and the aim of an ever stronger Union .
( Applause )

Mr President , Mr Leterme , ladies and gentlemen , with efficiency and focus , with pragmatism and Community spirit , the Union made important advances during the Belgian Presidency , which deserve our admiration and our recognition .
On behalf of the European Commission , I would like to offer my heartfelt congratulations to the Prime Minister , Mr Leterme , his entire government team , the administration , and all the Belgians who gave their very best to ensure the success of this Presidency .
It was a fine and great Presidency at a delicate and challenging time for the future of the European Union .
Rarely had the challenges been so important and the difficulties so crucial to overcome .
Throughout those long months of sound and fury - if you will forgive the expression - the Belgian Presidency held firm to the course of European politics .
Its action was always embedded in the fundamental sense of the existence of the European Union , the solidarity of everyone in the general European interest .
Its action also enabled us to chart the best way forward to achieve our primary objectives : stability and the relaunch of job-creating growth .
They were months during which Europe was still living to the frenetic rhythm of developments in the financial crisis and in sovereign debt .
All eyes were on the future of the euro area and on our determination to defend it .
When we say that we will do everything possible to defend the stability of the euro area as a whole , these must not be empty words .
It is nothing more and nothing less than the expression of our firm political will to defend our common destiny .
The future of the euro area and the future of the European Union are two sides of the same coin .
We want this future to be stable and prosperous for ourselves and for future generations .
That has always been , and remains , the meaning of European integration and of the Community spirit .
The fundamental reforms to which we have committed ourselves show that we are fully aware of the challenge facing the European Union .
We must adapt to the new political , economic and strategic realities of a rapidly changing globalised world .
We must achieve this adaptation while reaffirming our values , defending our interests and enhancing our credibility and influence on the international scene .
The basic decisions we have taken on strengthening European economic governance and tackling our macro-economic imbalances are at the heart of this progress .
They are not an option but an imperative .
I hope that , during this six-month period , the European Parliament and the Council will adopt the proposals on economic governance .
Fundamentally , the question is not who among the different political stakeholders in Europe emerges a winner or a loser , but whether each of us is prepared to cooperate in full respect of our mutual prerogatives .
In essence , the question is whether the European Union as a whole emerges a winner or a loser .
The answer is clear : if we do not strengthen our economic governance , we will all be losers , both in the euro area and throughout the European Union .
If we do not strengthen our economic governance , we will lose the battle for stability , growth and employment in Europe .
If we do not strengthen our economic governance , the strong links of today may become the weak links of tomorrow .
And if we do not strengthen our economic governance , we will lose our credibility on the international scene .
While issues of governance and macro-economic imbalance are also global issues and are discussed , notably at the G20 , how could we remain credible and influential with our international partners if we were not even capable of resolving them at EU level ?
I say this weighing all my words carefully : essentially , it is an existential question for the European Union .
We act and we assert ourselves as a Union , or we fail to act and allow ourselves to be marginalised .
What is really at issue is our collective destiny .
We are , fortunately , moving towards self-assertion .
I would therefore like to congratulate the Belgian Presidency most sincerely .
The agreement obtained at the ECOFIN Council on 17 September resulted in the establishment of new cycles of economic governance , known as the European Semester .
The first step was taken last week with the presentation of the annual growth review prepared by the European Commission , in which we make very clear that the three priorities we need to focus our efforts on are reinforcing macro-economic stability - in particular , through rigorous fiscal consolidation - structural reform and job-creating growth .
We also achieved notable successes in financial supervision , in particular , by adopting a new European architecture of financial supervision , which came into existence on 1 January 2011 with the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board and of three new financial supervisory authorities covering the markets , the banks and insurance , respectively .
In those six months , we were also able to obtain agreements on the management of speculative funds and other alternative investment funds as well as on the rating agencies .
For our citizens , austerity measures are not a vague concept but the harsh reality of their daily lives .
There are , across Europe , many worries and concerns , but there are also , across Europe , high expectations that the reforms , postponed for far too long , will finally be completed , that the European dimension will be an integral part of the solution , and that Europe will defend its projects , its values and its interests in the world .
It is therefore important to spread the word as widely as possible about what the Union is doing to restore growth that is sustainable and able to create jobs and to build a European society that is fairer and more environmentally friendly .
I would also like to point to some other achievements , in particular , with regard to foreign policy and external relations .
One such achievement is the free trade agreement signed with South Korea on 6 October , which is , quite simply , the most ambitious commercial agreement ever concluded by the European Union , and which must remain a benchmark for our future bilateral commercial agreements .
Contrary to the expectations of some pessimists , Cancún also managed to show some progress towards multilateralism in the fight against climate change .
Cancún also demonstrated the importance of cooperation between the Presidency and the Commission to enable Europe to speak with a coherent and audible voice on the international scene .
As regards practical results , I should also like to commend the agreement finally reached during the Belgian Presidency in the field of transport on the Eurovignette dossier .
This is very important for our citizens .
I would also like to pay tribute to the Belgian Presidency for the exemplary way in which it enabled the major innovations of the Treaty of Lisbon to be respected and implemented .
It used all its negotiating skills to brilliant effect during a difficult discussion on the 2011 budget of the European Union under the new budgetary rules of the Treaty .
It was an illustration of the European spirit and of its culture of compromise at its finest .
The Commission is proud of the contribution it made to this outcome .
Tomorrow , in fulfilment of my commitments to Parliament , I will have an initial meeting with the President of the European Parliament , Mr Buzek , and Prime Minister Orbán , who holds the rotating Presidency of the Council , to discuss the next steps to be taken in budgetary matters .
2010 was an often difficult and , at times , extremely demanding year .
Ultimately , however , it was very productive .
It was under the Presidency of two countries , Belgium , but also Spain , that European integration was able to move decisively forward .
I see in it the strength of our Union and the proper functioning of our institutions .
It is now up to the third country in the troika , Hungary , to maintain this momentum .
The important decisions that we have taken over the past year are proof that all of us , Parliament , Council , Commission , Member States , know what we have to do to ensure a stable and prosperous future for Europe .
If we know what we have to do , we have to do it now .
We have said that we have the will to do it ; we must now show that we are indeed capable of honouring our political commitments without diluting them , without weakening and without allowing ourselves to be fooled by tentative signs of recovery .
We need to consolidate our actions , to show that they are not a reaction to the pressure of the crisis in the markets , but rather the strong reaffirmation of our will to live together in this Union for peace , solidarity and freedom .
Mr President , the Belgian Presidency has rightly received praise from all quarters .
You and your colleagues , Mr Prime Minister , can lay claim to a remarkable series of achievements .
Rather than commenting on the specific achievements , I would particularly emphasise the gold standard that you have set for the Presidency .
After all , the Belgian Presidency of the Council was the first to have held office entirely within the new institutional framework of the Treaty of Lisbon .
That in itself was a challenge .
The Treaty has radically changed the institutional framework , as I have already stated in my report on the previous term .
Thus , the European Council and the Council have now clearly become two separate institutions , each with its own Presidency .
One other thing which is new is that the Treaty uses exactly the same wording to describe the mandate of the Council as it does to describe that of Parliament .
One cannot shake off the impression that some members of the Council have had some difficulty in adapting to the new relationship between Parliament and the Council .
That was obvious during the budget debate .
However , this cannot be said of the Belgian Presidency .
In consultation with the Commission and Parliament , it has mainly invested its efforts in the realisation of the European Legislative Agenda .
European priorities were always paramount in this .
That also partly explains the success of the Belgian Presidency .
In the past , presidencies have too often tried to assert their national priorities over European agencies .
This is not the case here and , therefore , Europe has made real progress during this Presidency .
The difficult budget debate during the Belgian Presidency also set the course for one of the most difficult challenges facing the Union in years to come , namely , the establishment of the new financial framework .
Belgium received a pledge from the previous presidencies that Parliament would be involved in the debate on this multiannual financial framework .
For its part , the Commission undertook to formulate , in the framework of its proposal for the multiannual plan , proposals for the Union 's own resources , and it is essential that that is done .
Parliament will therefore ensure that both the Commission and any forthcoming Presidencies adhere to these commitments .
Mr President , Prime Minister Leterme , members of the Presidency-in-Office , Mr Barroso , this week , we have the opportunity to compare two Presidencies : the one just completed and the one just begun .
When it comes to the Belgian Presidency , I have to say that it delivered excellent work - many thanks for that , therefore .
It did this despite difficult conditions - the political situation at home is not exactly easy , of course , the Treaty of Lisbon is new and even the relationship with the European Council is not all that easy .
The Belgian Presidency had a clear focus on Europe , however .
It wanted to take Europe forwards .
With the Hungarian Presidency , in contrast - up to now , at any rate - we have seen a Presidency that pays more attention to its domestic affairs , in other words , to holding on to power at home , specifically in connection with a very controversial media law that we will also be discussing at a later date .
I hope that Mr Orbán will take a very close look at how the Belgian Presidency went , and perhaps follows its lead somewhat .
Mr Leterme , you spoke of economic governance .
In this regard , I can but fully endorse what Mr Barroso had to say .
All there is is an either / or situation .
Either there is another crisis-provoking development in Europe - and not only in the euro area - or there is an attempt to create efficient economic governance based on cooperation between all the Member States , but also based on strong action taken by the Commission .
You know , Mr Barroso , that you have our full backing in this regard .
You achieved much in this area , Mr Leterme , but we need to go further now , and we need to take the next steps .
You said that this is primarily about tax , fiscal and social cooperation .
That takes me to the second item where this Belgian Presidency very much excelled , namely , the social dimension .
I think we all have an interest - though perhaps with differing emphases - in this social dimension being developed accordingly .
Social Europe does not mean that every last thing is done in Europe 's socio-political sphere ; rather , it means , for example , the things that you talked about and achieved in relation to fighting poverty .
It is scandalous to see that poverty is actually rising in Europe to some degree .
The same applies to what you said about the increasingly disparate distribution of incomes .
In your Presidency , you made clear that this is not only a social issue ; it is also an economic one .
More poverty and more social inequality also translate to a loss of competitiveness .
That has been proven economically , financially and empirically .
The things that you said are very important .
Also important are the things that you said about the Europe of the citizens .
You delivered a tangible contribution , along with Mr Šefčovič and Members of this House , in bringing about the European citizens ' initiative .
This will be a major step forwards if it is also used appropriately by pro-European forces to bring Europe closer to the citizens .
Naturally , we wish Belgium all the best for the future , too .
It is not without importance how the actors on the political stage behave .
I hope that all the political forces in Belgium attempt to find a real consensus .
It is difficult to tell people in a crisis-hit region that they should just reach a consensus , that they should just work together on important issues , when this is not possible in Belgium - one of the heartlands of the European Union .
In this connection , I wish you all the best .
In many ways , you represented an exemplary Presidency .
I hope that other , subsequent Presidencies follow your example .
( Applause )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Swoboda how he dares to criticise the Hungarian Presidency when it is just starting .
He does not even know anything about it .
Why does he not instead criticise his comrades in the Socialist Group who were shooting at their own people on the 50th anniversary of the 1956 revolution and who arbitrarily imprisoned hundreds of people ?
He should ask them and criticise them .
Mr President , I am familiar with this kind of argument , which states that if you criticise a government , you criticise its people .
It was like this in former times in my own country too .
Let us be clear .
We did not start the debate .
It was the Hungarian Government with this - as I said here - contested law .
It is a law greatly disputed by many Hungarian citizens who suffered under Communism and during the Nazi regime .
They are afraid that their liberty of expression is in danger .
That is the thing that should be addressed .
Mr President , I propose that we debate the Hungarian Presidency tomorrow .
We should keep matters separate , or else Prime Minister Leterme will have to comment on the new media law in Hungary , and I do not believe that that is his responsibility .
The role of Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , is to pass and monitor legislation , which therefore means being critical when things go wrong , when things are in a bad state , but also giving praise when things actually turn out well .
We could say that the Belgian Presidency has been good , very good , and that it has been a success thanks to the efforts of many people : the Belgian Government , but also many diplomats , the Permanent Representative , the Deputy Permanent Representative and all those who have worked every day to make it a success .
It was a success which no one foresaw , because , Mr Prime Minister , all of us were constantly confronted with the following question from our constituents : how can a caretaker government make for a successful Presidency ?
In my view , it was the first time that we had ever had a real European government , because it was a government which concerned itself only with European affairs and European issues , and which was not distracted by the affairs of its members ' own nations .
This is almost an invitation to other governments to be caretaker governments when they take over the Presidency of the European Union , so that they can concentrate on Europe for six months instead of occasionally squeezing it in between other issues .
I think that the Belgian Presidency was successful mainly for one reason ( look at the financial supervision , the hedge funds , the rating agencies ) : because this Presidency understood that , under the new Treaty , we need to be working towards ' more Europe ' and because it pushed for ' more Europe ' in the Council .
That cannot be said of all presidencies .
Jean-Luc Dehaene is right when he says that there are , indeed , a number of Member States that still do not understand that the ground rules have changed .
The ground rules have changed and the Belgian Presidency is the first to have grasped that that is the case .
If we have ended up with an arrangement for European supervision whereby the objectives of the European Parliament have finally been attained , then that is because the Belgian Presidency told our colleagues in the Council : ' That will not work , it has to be a European solution ' , unlike the solution developed by the finance ministers in December 2009 .
I would say the same about the European patent .
Now , that was a major breakthrough , Mr President .
I would call on you and all other members to give the green light for that patent to the European Parliament very soon , so that , after more than 20 years , the European patent can finally become a reality .
Mr President , as others have said before me , it is obviously true that , to date , Belgian political engineers have been better outside their borders than at home .
In any case , I welcome this and I congratulate you .
The Belgian team did a good job and this is a very good thing .
Moreover , I am of the opinion that the opposition you encountered in the different Councils in fact resembles the opposition we encounter in the Belgian debate : solidarity , transfers , all these issues relating to withdrawal or contribution are things that we are very familiar with in Belgium and that you encountered in the Council .
Furthermore , Mr Barroso , since you expressed your admiration and your acknowledgement , perhaps , at some time in the future , the European Union could give Belgium a nudge in the right direction or a bit of a helping hand .
Since Belgium helped the European Union , perhaps the European Union could help Belgium to unblock its federal stalemate .
As for the rest , to come back to a few specific issues , Prime Minister , notably the issue of the budget , one has greater responsibility on leaving the Presidency than on entering it .
Therefore , as regards the budget , my opinion is that we doubtless lacked boldness by not embracing the proposal for a convention we could have made on the financial resources , but the issue of own resources will be a central issue in the months ahead and I am very much counting on Belgium - which will recover , if you like , its freedom of speech , since it no longer represents all the Member States but speaks for itself - to take this matter forward .
The second important issue is the European constituency .
It is something that will come before the Council at some time in the future .
I know that , in Belgium , there are some who do not want a federal constituency , but I think that it is necessary , and perhaps it is precisely because they do not want it in Belgium that Belgium wants it at European level .
A European constituency would be extremely useful in guaranteeing what you call the ' soul ' of the European Union , i.e. the fact that , there , European citizens can , quite simply , consider themselves citizens who can vote for more than national representatives .
I think it is a very important issue .
And the third issue , which has already been mentioned , is the Citizens ' Initiative .
Here too , I am very much counting on Belgium to speed up the implementation process .
It is an important instrument alongside all the economic governance reforms and I hope that Belgium may also contribute to moving the process forward more quickly and more strongly .
Mr President , over the past six months , Belgium has proved itself to be a worthy holder of the Presidency .
You would not think that the incumbent Belgian Government was resigning .
When I look at the dossiers that I am qualified to assess , the balance is positive .
An agreement on the regulation of risk capital , a regulation on the supervision of financial markets and a budget for 2011 .
I am very familiar with both Belgium and Europe .
European politics is , as it were , an extension of Belgian politics , with a greater purpose .
It involves the search for compromises through conversations and long lunches and , if necessary , a bit of gentle cajoling in the interests of achieving a result .
There are some who therefore say that Belgium is Europe in miniature .
That is exactly where the danger for Europe now lies , because the Belgian system is itself no longer able to keep functioning on compromises .
There is not even a successor to Mr Leterme in the pipeline .
If Belgium is the future of Europe , then we must ask ourselves : why is the Belgian system coming to an end ? Why is it in a state of dissolution ?
The explanation for this , in my view , is that Belgium has created a transfer economy which is no longer affordable .
In the name of solidarity , we created a cash flow from Flanders to Wallonia and Brussels , but , Mr Barroso , if solidarity is all one way , then people become alienated from one another and that is what we are now witnessing in Belgium .
At the moment , we in Europe are busy planting a transfer economy .
You have been doing this and , as a result , the euro has already been misused .
Now we are faced with a call for eurobonds .
Mr Verhofstadt calls for that on a daily basis .
Look also at the Euro Emergency Fund , which is beginning to resemble a Ponzi scheme .
First , it was temporary , then it was permanent , and now we have to keep pumping more and more money into it .
One of the casualties of this will be competitiveness , as foreign investments in Europe will decline .
Those who want to see the Europe of tomorrow should look at the Belgium of today !
Then we might imagine Germany in the role of Flanders , saying : ' We no longer want to keep paying for everybody else ' .
Some of you will laugh at this , but that danger is closer than you think .
Let this be a wake-up call for all of us .
Mr Leterme , I have always had a great deal of respect for you .
I wish you every success in whatever it is that you go on to do , but I fear that Belgium will retain you in your current post for a while yet .

Mr President , Mr Leterme , while I fully acknowledge that you assumed the Presidency of the European Union in the very difficult context of the crisis , you nonetheless intimated that you would make social issues one of your priorities and announced a statute to protect public services .
You did nothing about this .
Not only was there no initiative to protect services of general interest , but today , under the strengthened Stability Pact , we are entering a worrying spiral where , in order to reduce the debt of Member States , the vultures of the financial markets and of their rating agencies are driving Member States to sell off their public goods , which are , however , an asset for justice and equality .
As for social issues , all the vigilance of Parliament was required to ward off the increase in working time for lorry drivers or the so-called ' single permit ' project , expanded version , of the Bolkestein Directive .
We were in the European Year for Combating Poverty .
There is not one single poor person fewer in the European Union ; there are more and more !
And it has to be recognised that the anti-crisis measures are ineffective because they dissipate social rights .
The strategy adopted continuously entails reassuring the creditors of Member States that are heavily indebted because of a reduction in taxation on capital and a decline in growth due to a fall in purchasing power and austerity - a word that I heard mentioned for the first time by Mr Barroso .
And , to that end , you now want to check the budgets of the Member States a priori in the place of national parliaments .
You surreptitiously initiated a review of the European treaties , which you told us yesterday were inviolable .
Yet you continuously refused to initiate a debate on the setting up of a social and environmental development fund financed by a tax on capital movements and the upward harmonisation of taxation on capital , on the creation of money by the European Central Bank for the repurchase of the debt of Member States , and on the development of public services that are crucial for justice and social progress .
At the start of your Presidency , you said , Prime Minister , that you wanted a sober Presidency , and this was very much to your credit .
However , during your Presidency , it has to be recognised that the financial markets and the large shareholders have been satisfied .
The people themselves are increasingly living in poverty .
Mr President , I should like to start by wishing everyone , especially the Commission , the Bureau and all the members , a Happy New Year , in a year that looks set to be a very difficult year .
I should like , in passing , to comment in response to the gauntlet thrown down by the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , who said that we shall need , through global economic governance , to help him prove what Europe is .
It is a single economic , cultural and perhaps also political force .
That is why we must all support the Commission , so that Europe continues to be a major force .
As far as the Belgian Presidency is concerned , it is generally admitted that it was a very successful Presidency .
I should like to add two points to what has already been said , which were not mentioned here and which underline the success of the Belgian Presidency .
First of all , Belgium functioned in a completely European way ; in other words , it followed the Commission 's and the European Parliament 's agenda .
The presidencies usually add national issues .
Belgium set a good example , demonstrating that we are Europe and we follow the agenda set by the Commission .
It had no ambition to add its own agenda .
The second commendable point of the Belgian Presidency was the model it applied ; the model of trialogue and tripartite cooperation between the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission .
My congratulations to my fellow Members .

( NL ) Mr President , Mr Leterme , you have received a considerable number of compliments on how the Belgian Presidency has conducted itself , and that is understandable .
The European Commission and Parliament are relieved that the Belgian Presidency is over and that no major accidents have happened .
Indeed , an artificial country with no government , a country which is not even capable of governing itself , is hardly the obvious candidate for taking over the Presidency of the EU .
One could , of course , say that you and the ministers have had plenty of time to deal with the Presidency , given that you were only running a caretaker government .
One could say that you have benefited from diplomats who have done their job well and that the importance of the rotating Presidency has decreased since the Treaty of Lisbon .
All that might be true , but I think that your best decision was to heed the advice of Vlaams Belang and , in particular , to adopt a low profile .
You could have made the same mistakes as the previous Belgian Presidency in 2001 .
Just consider the failed ' praline summit ' in Brussels , the build-up of diplomatic blunders and what has become known as the Laeken Declaration which ultimately led to the debacle of the European Constitution .

Of course , it is not the case that the Belgian Presidency has achieved a clear round : first , there was the incident where the socialist Minister for Pensions , Daerden , chaired the Council of Ministers in a state of inebriation - Commissioner Andor 's face speaks volumes ; the Flemish taxpayer and net payers are no longer able to laugh at this , in the knowledge that this character is now responsible for their pensions .
Furthermore , there were the desperate attempts by the Foreign Minister , Mr Vanackere , to open a new chapter in Turkey 's accession negotiations , at any cost and against the will of the people , when Turkey should not even be being considered for negotiation .
( ES ) Mr President , I am not going to emphasise what has already been said .
The Belgian Presidency has been excellent .
I would like to mention two highlights : financial supervision and the European Semester .
Regarding these highlights , I would like to say what has been done and , most importantly , what needs to be done .
In terms of financial supervision , in the space of 48 hours , the Minister , Mr Reynders , managed to get a dossier that was in deadlock moving , and we were able to give the Council and the Commission what the Commission had asked of us : European authorities that could begin operating on 1 January 2011 : strong , authentically European authorities with clout .
What happened next is not very reassuring .
We still do not have presidents for the authorities ; we have an extraordinarily small budget and I am told that the rewards for those who are going to hold positions in these authorities are not brilliant .
They are , of course , much less brilliant than the bonuses received by bankers in London .
There are two matters that still need to be dealt with : the regulation of the systemic bodies , and contributions and taxes on banking .
In the regulation of systemic bodies , we want the European authority to be responsible for supervision , through the national authorities , which , in this case , would act as agents and would be subject to the instructions of the European authority .
The alternative would not make sense .
In terms of taxation , the most recent offering from Commissioner Šemeta sets out all the possible taxes for banks .
Parliament has already adopted two contributions : the contribution to the coordinated guarantee funds and the contribution to the banking stability funds .
This is a fact , and next we will be able to discuss the tax on banking or taxes on banking transactions , because , I stress , the rest is a fact .
In terms of the European Semester , the only thing that we want is to coordinate with everything : with Eurobonds , with project bonds , with the mechanism , etc . ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Mr President , I risk repetition .
To be honest with you , this has been a somewhat uneventful debate , but also one that we can take pride in , and so I happily join my fellow Members ' chorus of praise for the Belgian Presidency .
Yves , your team , your ministers , and also your political and diplomatic corps have done a fantastic job .
I was able to experience this first-hand .
I have had the joy and pleasure of participating in two trialogues on the environment and - no , you must not let this go to your head , though this time you will receive a little praise - here I wish to compliment you on the intelligent way in which you have discharged the Presidency .
However , I have a major and a minor ' but ' to add to those words of praise .
My first ' but ' has to do with social policy ; in my opinion , we have made progress on a number of social dossiers .
Nevertheless , we have to be honest and say - and I am not laying this at the Belgian Presidency 's door , but at that of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion - that European interest in these issues is not great .
We have not made any real progress in legislative matters , when it comes to the European minimum income , for instance , and thus there is still a lot of work to be done .
My second ' but ' has to do with the role which the Belgian Presidency has played in the post-Lisbon period .
I have received congratulations from Messrs Verhofstadt and Dehaene , two former prime ministers who are exceptionally knowledgeable about institutional matters .
There is , however , a downside to that role , especially the Belgian Presidency 's lack of political leadership on some really critical dossiers .
There was some sitting back and doing nothing and Mr Van Rompuy ought to have taken the lead on this matter .
I am referring to the debate on economic governance and to the debate on the debt crisis in the European Union .
Other Heads of Government - not to mention Prime Minister Merkel and President Sarkozy - did take on these issues .
This , in my view , led to limited results at the last Council , because of the debt crisis , amongst other reasons .
In the past , the Belgian Presidency did assume political leadership and I would hope that the next government will indeed assume that leadership of the European Union .
Mr President , we make laws together but , too often , we do not know how those laws get applied by Member States .
You have taken the lead in making clear that this Parliament supports the Commission in wanting to see correlation tables included in all future legislation .
The Belgian Presidency has been very helpful in tabling a paper to the Council , in which it promotes the use of correlation tables , emphasising that they help clarity and transparency and will make the application of EU law quicker and more effective .
I think that a period of reflection on the matter has been initiated .
Prime Minister , I wonder if , in your concluding remarks , you could tell us what sort of response you have had to that paper and whether the Belgian Government , in its role as part of the troika and within the Council , will continue to press for the inclusion of correlation tables .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have one minute to applaud the Belgian Presidency .
The balance may generally be positive , but I suppose I would pat everybody equally on the back .
In my view , thankfully , Commissioners Potočnik and Hedegaard had a strong presence , in terms of content , at the major biodiversity conference in Nagoya on biodiversity and the climate change conference in Cancún .
It has been said - and it has sometimes been intended as a joke - that the Belgian Presidency did well because they had heaps of time and were able to focus all their energy on the Presidency .
For example , Mr Verhofstadt said that it was the first time that Europe had had a full-time government .
I would agree with that .
However , we cannot ignore the fact that there were a lot of people standing behind those teams , that they had a diplomatic service behind them which was well-prepared , well-informed and who used their incredible talent for negotiation to ensure that this was a successful Presidency .
Mr Leterme , tomorrow , the Golden Shoe prize will be awarded in Belgium .
If I were to present the Golden Shoe to the Belgian Presidency , to the best actor in the Belgian Presidency , then it would , without any doubt , go to the Belgian diplomatic staff , to the people who are seated behind you and who have ensured that you , your team and the regional government have indeed done a cracking job .
( PL ) Mr President , it goes without saying that I would like to add to the words of congratulation and the compliments regarding what happened during the Belgian Presidency .
However , as I listen to this debate , two rather important questions arise .
Is it really the case that during the Belgian Presidency , everyone in Europe forgot about national interests and focused only on those interests determined by institutions in Brussels and supported by the Belgian Government ?
This certainly was not the case .
We have been watching events in Europe over the last six months and it can be seen clearly that just because a Presidency does not make reference to national interests , it does not mean they do not exist .
And a second thing , which is , perhaps , the most fundamental and the greatest doubt in this whole debate : it would not be a good thing if we contrasted what we are calling here European objectives with what we are calling national ones .
After all , the national goals that we are talking about are ideas that come from specific countries .
This is a specific contribution without which Europe would be far worse off .
We cannot impose a standard in which these goals , which are formulated in specific Member States but for Europe , are not treated as an asset but as a problem .
Mr President , may I ask the Prime Minister for his attention , please .
I am here , on your left , Mr Prime Minister .
I need to have a frank conversation with you .
I have a text in Portuguese but I am going to improvise in English because that was the language you used in what , for me , was the most important part of your speech , when you said : ' look at refugees .
Look at the refugees if you think that war and peace is not important for Europe ' .
You were addressing the new generations .
I have to admit that my heart jumped when you said that , because I am the European Parliament rapporteur for refugees .
During your Presidency , you could have done more than look at refugees .
You could have done something to help ; it was not difficult .
The Council could have finished the codecision procedure which Parliament started on resettlement of refugees .
In our part of the codecision , we increased the money that we give to Member States to resettle refugees ; we established categories of priorities for people who have been raped , who have been tortured and who have diseases , and who are waiting in camps to be resettled .
The Council has not completed the codecision .
It seems that it was because of Article 290 and delegated acts - something which is in the Treaty of Lisbon .
You say : ' look at refugees ' .
But I challenge you to do what we did , go to the al-Hol camp in Syria .
Then tell refugees to look at Article 290 , look at delegated acts .
They will say : ' what are you talking about ?
My kids are not going to school ; I do not have a passport ; we are stuck in a refugee camp ; why are you talking about a minor institutional problem when you could have done something to help our problem ? '
This will tarnish the Belgian Presidency .
I am sorry to say this ; I say it in sadness .
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to join in the tributes which my fellow Members have been paying here to the Belgian Presidency and to you , Mr Prime Minister , because , at a time when the way in which your country 's cabinet was formed was causing deep consternation for many businesses , you truly managed to draw on the European spirit to make this Presidency fully functional .
In my view , you are selling yourself short by calling yourself a ' facilitator ' , for you have been the driving force and have managed to overcome differences , including those which you have had with this Parliament , in a creative and committed fashion .
Thanks to you , we now have robust European supervision , a directive regulating alternative investment funds and also the Eurovignette , another difficult bargaining chip which has ended with a clear Council conclusion .
However , from the European spirit which infused your speech here in Parliament , I can see that you are also looking ahead .
I would like to emphasise one point in your speech , in particular .
You rightly say that economic governance should not result in a situation where we are merely treating the symptoms without doing anything about the risk which is still out there because , while a robust Stability and Growth Pact might well become a reality , it is only one mainstay of that economic governance .
What we want for our citizens is for us to be able to come out the other end of this economic crisis altogether and again be in a position to create jobs for our citizens and young people and , in order to do that , we need robust European macro-economic supervision and a very strong European 2020 strategy .
Will the European Semester really make that happen ?
Will Member States commit themselves to fleshing out economic governance in this area as well ?
As Parliament , we should take full advantage of our colegislative role in the governance package , the legislative package , in order to make that a reality .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Leterme , when you presented the programme of the Belgian Presidency last July , I said to you , in welcoming you and in jest , that you would perhaps still be there in January to present the outcome to us .
I have to say that I had hoped I would be wrong and , without wishing to offend you , Prime Minster , like all Belgians , I would have liked to have before me today the Head of Government duly elected at the ballot box on 13 June .
However , you were the one who had to take on this Presidency , and I congratulate you and all the ministers of the present government .
Now , let us leave aside the internal political situation to focus on the outcome of the Belgian Presidency .
I , too , would like to quote a famous American , who was not a philosopher but a tennis player . Arthur Ashe said , ' One important key to success is self-confidence .
An important key to self-confidence is preparation ' .
And it has to be recognised , without doubt , that the Belgian Presidency drew inspiration from this .
In respect of the issues I am dealing with here alone , I have seen a great deal of progress : closer cooperation in divorce matters ; the European protection order for the victims of violence ; future enhanced cooperation for patents , and the agreement on the Late Payment Directive and on the labelling of foodstuffs are all successes that the Belgian Presidency can take pride in .
The same is true of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) after 2013 .
Though there is as yet no agreement , the principle of a strong CAP with two pillars and the principle of simplification have already been accepted .
What agriculture is most in need of in the future , however , is regulation that manages to contain the volatility of the markets within certain limits .
Yet there is still no agreement on this and I have grave concerns in respect of future presidencies , notably Hungary and Poland , since regulation does not seem to be one of their priorities .
Apart from good preparation , the full involvement of ministers , the effectiveness of diplomats and of Belgian officers , the secret of the Presidency , which you have emphasised , was not to impose its own agenda but to commit itself to current priority issues , at European level , and to make every effort to move them forward , thanks to the pragmatism and the culture of compromise that characterise us .
I hope that future presidencies will learn from this example .
( DA ) Mr President , I would also like to thank the Belgian Presidency for its contribution , particularly in the two areas that I am most familiar with : the budget and transport .
The fact that the budget negotiations broke down in the first round was not down to the Presidency and , of course , we did find a solution in respect of the 2011 budget .
Let us hope , therefore , that the question of flexibility and the financing of the ITER fusion energy project will also fall into place soon .
In the area of transport , the Belgian Presidency found a solution to the difficult issue of the Eurovignette .
I would particularly like to thank the Belgian Presidency for supporting something that I have been working on for many years , namely , the creation of a network of safe rest areas in Europe so that lorry drivers , who literally hold Europe together and create the internal market , have good and safe conditions in which to work .
I would like the governments of all the other countries to be inspired by the Belgian Government 's positive view of this matter so that we can at last get something to happen in practice .
( PL ) Mr President , Belgium , which is one of the six founding states of the European Union , has recently ended its six-month Presidency .
Despite domestic political difficulties connected with not being able to form a government , the Belgians are officially being praised for their effectiveness and success in achieving almost all the priorities they had earlier set themselves .
For this reason , I would like to join in congratulating them because , in such a short period of time and as part of the priorities set out , they faced up to the economic crisis in Europe , protected Europe 's environment , built an open and secure European Union , built a coherent social model in the European Union and provided the foundations for a common EU foreign policy .
It is rare in history that such a small country , in such a short time , has done so much for the benefit of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister Leterme , when , six months ago , the Members of this House had so many questions about the Belgian Presidency and when we had read the programme , many Members were still full of doubt .
Today , as we offer our thanks to you , but also to the permanent representation , for your outstanding work and preparation , our pleasure is therefore that much greater .
Obviously , your success was not an easy one .
The domestic political problems in Belgium have already been mentioned , and Mr Verhofstadt also had to observe that there is not necessarily efficiency at the national level in Belgium or at the European level .
Perhaps that is the key to success tomorrow , too - in other words , that the politicians who are competent here need to achieve the necessary recognition in Belgium , too .
Your success was not easy , as the external conditions , too , were not the best .
This was not least because - and I can say this , speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) in relation to transport - you also did not choose the easiest subjects to deal with .
It has been mentioned , and for us it was more than satisfying , that the issue of the Eurovignette , amongst other subjects , was resolved .
This issue is not just about a principle .
In my view , it is about new funding sources and safe , clean but also efficient mobility at the European level .
This is about seeing whether we will be able , tomorrow , to more vigorously readjust this area - mobility - at European level .
As someone who lives in a border area , clearly I am also pleased about the implementation of the road safety provisions .
For us , and in every border region , it is unacceptable that it is the licence plate that determines whether or not a serious offence is punished .
You have grabbed this awkward subject by the horns and taken a first step .
The passenger rights for bus transport represent an important step with the effect that Europe has now given its citizens passenger rights across all the various forms of transport .
During the volcano crisis , we observed how important it is for businesses , but also for passengers , that a European framework of this kind should be in place .
I hope that we can continue in this way .
Finally , I wish just one thing for you and for Belgium , and that is that we finally get to see the proficiency at Federal level in Belgium that you have shown at European level following the sound thinking that whoever has to make demands - as you did - must also demonstrate solutions .

( ES ) Mr President , Mr Leterme , on behalf of those in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament responsible for employment and social affairs , I would like to join my fellow Members in congratulating the Belgian Presidency on the last six months .
How is it possible that I can join in those congratulations , despite the fact that you scarcely mentioned the social dimension and that there is not a great deal of social stocktaking in the Belgian Presidency ?
Quite simply , Mr Leterme , because I have had the privilege of working with your ministers , Mrs Onkelinx and Mrs Milquet , and I am aware of the efforts made by them and their teams to make progress with a social agenda in such difficult circumstances and in a Council that is so insensitive to the social Europe as the one that we unfortunately currently have .
Despite this , they have worked valiantly , responsibly and with a highly pro-European spirit to ensure that Parliament is heard and that Europeans are heard at this very serious time when Europe 's future is at stake .
I therefore also join in congratulating you , Mr Leterme , and I hope that in future , when the challenges come , what you have said will be true : that Europe will find its soul .
That soul needs to be a political and social soul , not just an economic one .
I would like to mention a few matters that have not been resolved during your Presidency , on which I hope that you will pass on your pro-European , humanist spirit to the Hungarian Presidency , because a lot is at stake for the future of Europe .
I am referring to the matters relating to Europe 's immigration policy , the single permit , the two directives on temporary workers and transfers within a company .
President-in-Office of the Council , please tell your colleagues to take a long-term view .
There cannot be unequal treatment of workers who come to Europe .
There needs to be equal treatment , otherwise we will open up a gap that will have incalculable consequences for the future of the Union .
It cannot be that these workers arrive in Europe under unequal conditions with regard to working here , because we will be destroying Europe .
I hope that in the next six months , the Hungarian Presidency will listen to you and you will be able to regain freedom of speech in the Council , and that the Council will focus on Europe 's soul , which can only be a humanist soul and a soul of progress .

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Leterme , ladies and gentlemen , I must say that I am pleased to have had a Presidency that has proved able to manage the European agenda in a pragmatic and effective way , albeit at a difficult time .
From the adoption at first reading of the recast of the directive on combating late payment in public administration , which is fundamental to the future of the system of undertakings , to the adoption of the financial supervision package , the Belgian Presidency has proved to be both practical and dynamic .
I could cite other examples , but I prefer to draw conclusions about what can be learnt from a Presidency that has concluded its term of office in a positive way .
Firstly , one has to have a realistic work programme ; secondly , one has to be able to negotiate dynamically and reach compromises ; and , lastly , one has to fully involve the European institutions , starting with Parliament , and take an approach to outstanding issues that is free from constraints and national interests .
I hope that this Presidency will serve as an example to the others that follow it .
For now though , I offer it my most sincere congratulations .
( FR ) Mr President , Prime Minister , we worked very well with your ministers , Joëlle Milquet and Laurette Onkelinx , so that the voice of the European Parliament could be heard when the employment guidelines were adopted by the Council , where our positions were taken into account , but also on the issue of public services , with the role that these services play at the heart of the European social model being reaffirmed during your Presidency .
I hope that the impetus given to the interinstitutional dialogue can continue both in the work of the Commission and in the work of the new Presidency .
There is also another aspect that we worked on extensively together , which is how to ensure that the economic governance to which you referred can stand on its own two feet , because , if it treats the issue of employment as a balance , it is leading us into disaster .
And it worries me to see the way in which the Commission , in the European Semester package , deals with this matter by proposing to Member States that they reduce salaries willy-nilly or increase , virtually blindly , the retirement age and lower the level of pensions .
This is not the spirit in which economic governance can ensure the success of the European question , which is what our employees and our citizens are expecting .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to say that the Belgian Presidency has been a wonderful and unrivalled example of how the EU works .
Despite the fact that the country has not had a government , the Presidency is nevertheless receiving praise from all sides of this Chamber .
It is perhaps a depiction of how the EU actually works best - without elected representatives and , in fact , without any people at all .
In any case , it was during the Belgian Presidency that the greatest deception so far , the greatest betrayal of European citizens since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , became a reality , namely , the introduction of the now permanent crisis mechanism .
When we had to convince the European people to put the Treaty of Lisbon in place , which entailed the transfer of an unprecedented amount of power to foreigners in Brussels , we were promised that one thing at least could not happen : we would never be responsible for each other 's debts .
It was during the Belgian Presidency that this one promise was broken .
Now we have , with effect from 2013 , an established act to the effect that we are to be responsible for one another 's debts for ever more .
That is the legacy of the Belgian Presidency , and it is regrettable .

( NL ) Mr President , Mr Leterme , Mrs Győri , both you and your diplomatic service have proved that we can be successful , even in very difficult economic conditions , and that we can tackle those conditions in a way that makes Europe stronger .
That is very important .
Obviously , this kind of thing requires that we make compromises , difficult compromises .
That will always leave us subject to criticism but I think that , in this situation , the golden rule that ' the perfect is the enemy of the good ' , applies more than ever .
This kind of compromise is always justifiable if it enables you to make progress and if it benefits the prosperity and wellbeing of our citizens .
Mr Leterme , as I only have one minute , I will comment only briefly on the next Belgian Presidency , which will possibly hold office in 2025 or thereabouts .
You will probably be 65 then and I will be a year older than that .
I assume that Europe will still be a strong player on the world stage at that point but , for that to happen , we really have to keep up the momentum of the past six months .
In any case , I wish you every success , both here and in Brussels .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Belgian colleagues , congratulations !
I doff my cap to you !
As a Hungarian , I will be very happy if the Hungarian Presidency is as successful .
( HU ) Now I should like to continue in Hungarian .
During the Belgian Presidency , the deepening of the crisis of the euro area was successfully prevented .
The Irish rescue package was put together at record speed .
A system of new economic policy coordination was prepared , and the adoption of six pieces of legislation of economic governance now awaits the Hungarian Presidency .
Financial supervision was set up , and the European External Action Service was started as well as the Citizens ' Initiative .
I can only express my fullest admiration with regard to the progress of the practical transposition of the Treaty of Lisbon , although there are countless open issues still ahead of us .
( FR ) Once again , congratulations to my Belgian colleagues .
I hope we will have just as much success during the Hungarian Presidency .
( RO ) Mr President , while there were fears that developments in Belgian domestic politics might affect the performance of the rotating Presidency , I am pleased that Belgium proved the predictions wrong by handling the European dossiers in a pragmatic and efficient manner .
Indeed , the flagship dossiers of the Belgian Presidency provided a series of European issues par excellence : the launch of the European External Action Service , economic growth and fiscal consolidation , the adoption of the regulation on the European Citizens ' Initiative and the launch of the Europe 2020 strategy 's implementation .
As far as Romania 's interests are concerned , the Belgian Presidency adopted a fair and balanced approach .
In two sensitive dossiers for Romania , the Belgian Presidency chose the options which best reflected the position argued by Romania : the discussion of the Roma issue from the social inclusion aspect and the management of the procedure for referring to the European Parliament the draft decision on the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to begin by emphasising that Belgium assumed the rotating Presidency in a situation that was difficult not only on the internal political scene , but also , of course , on a global scale .
I cannot therefore ascribe all of the failures of the Union to Belgium .
On the contrary , I would like to say that Belgium made an excellent job of handling the trialogue between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
With Belgium at the helm , progress was made in the important area of banking sector supervision and regulation - at least in part .
In October , negotiations were completed on the regulation of hedge funds , share firms and rating agencies .
I could imagine some even more ambitious measures in this area , but I think that Belgium succeeded in coordinating at least the things that were possible , and to achieve at least some progress .
The area of international relations was also exceptionally important .
The Union formulated its diplomatic service , and here , too , Belgium showed herself to be a skilful mediator .
I would like to end by congratulating Belgium and expressing my thanks for her Presidency , and also expressing the certain hope that Hungary will follow the example of your Presidency .
Mr President , could I raise a wider issue here ?
At Christmas , John Bruton , a former leader of Ireland and one-time President of the Council , said that the part-time nature of the European Council is really not fit for purpose , given the extent of the crisis that Europe faces .
He suggested that the time given to these big issues is little more than the times when leaders are on a flight to Brussels .
He says that we are facing a financial crisis - a crisis of the welfare state in an ageing society , a crisis of globalisation of nation states and , potentially , even a crisis of the efficacy of European democracy .
He says that leaders need to sit together until they have reached a full mutual understanding of all that needs to be done : the whole job and not just bits of it .
Only something on that scale will give markets durable confidence .
I would ask people to discuss this , because perhaps he is right .


( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , your speech , Mr Leterme , contained some important quotations ; it is a shame that , in reality , you will be remembered mainly as the Prime Minister of a country that , 219 days after holding elections , was unable to form a government .
You see , I had a bad opinion of you - although it has undoubtedly changed over time - because , on the day of your inauguration , I asked you , in your specific role as President-in-Office , what action would be taken in response to the acts committed against the Catholic Church in your country , in response to the searches that were declared null and void , which I considered to be very serious and which were subsequently condemned by the judiciary itself .
You did not answer me .
I did not like that , because I believe that a President should represent everyone .
If asked a question , a President should try to answer it somehow and should make a brave decision : to say ' I am in favour ' or ' I am against ' , and to explain why .
You did not do that .
Today , I can say that you and your Presidency have done a good job .
Perhaps if you had been slightly more on our ' level ' from the start , we might have had a better relationship .
( DE ) Mr President , Belgium definitely took over the Presidency of the Council in a very difficult transitional phase , as , for one thing , the economic crisis had not yet been overcome , whilst , at the same time , the Treaty of Lisbon , of course , had not yet been completely implemented , while its limited fitness for purpose also became apparent .
In the whole debate about the euro rescue package , however , there is a significant aspect that must not be forgotten , namely , that both the rescue package for the euro area countries and the loans for Greece violate the Treaty of Lisbon .
Both measures thus lack the necessary legal basis .
That means that this is a clear case of the EU exceeding its competence , which ultimately makes a proper amendment procedure for the Treaty indispensable .
After further rescue package candidates - like Ireland and Portugal - Spain , too , is a problem child for the euro area .
On the other side of the coin , net contributors such as Germany and Austria are , by and by , becoming the cash cows of the European Union .
Obviously , things cannot continue in this way .
Belgium was not really able to master either of these two - admittedly difficult - challenges , namely , overcoming the economic crisis and implementing the Treaty of Lisbon .
( PL ) Mr President , many good opinions have been expressed about the Belgian Presidency , in particular , about its effectiveness in negotiations and its calm in a difficult period of crisis , the G20 summit , the Cancún conference and the budget debate .
The financial markets ' return to stability and also economic stability were dominant issues , but it should be said that national egoism went wild , in particular , as regards the budget .
The Belgians ' effectiveness in negotiations should be congratulated , but this was , after all , Belgium 's twelfth Presidency .
Prime Minister Leterme said that the Presidency 's programme was the Council 's and the Commission 's programme , without the ambition to give it any kind of national priority .
We do , however , have to allow future presidencies to decide their own priorities .
It seems to me that this is the essence and spirit of integration , about which Prime Minister Leterme was speaking .
What worries me is the crisis in adopting the 2011 budget and , in particular , the background to this and the forecast that in the future , the new financial perspective will not be negotiated easily .
( ES ) Mr President , there is at least one area that is important for Europe and for the region to which I belong - Euskadi , the Basque Country - in which you have done absolutely nothing .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives Parliament powers relating to fisheries .
The Council blocked several plans for anchovy fisheries .
At the beginning of your Presidency , I personally expressed the view that I was prepared to continue with the negotiations in order to get important plans moving again , and you have made no effort to do this .
I cannot , therefore , congratulate you , because basically , the Council does not recognise the powers that the Treaty of Lisbon gives this House .
I believe you have wasted an opportunity to solve a problem that has been dragging on since the Spanish Presidency .
You have not made a single move ; I hope , therefore , that the next Presidency will be capable of doing so .
I would also have thanked you for paying a little attention to my speech .
( PT ) Mr President , I , too , should like to congratulate the Belgian Government on the success of its Presidency , despite the difficult conditions under which it took place , which have also been mentioned here .
Furthermore , in the area that I followed most closely , I should like to congratulate Mrs Milquet , and to thank her for her commitment and determination in preparing the report on the Maternity Leave Directive , despite the Council 's lack of agreement with her .
We hope that the Hungarian Presidency will attach the proper importance to this matter .
Mr Leterme reminded us of the dream that guided the founders of the European project in addition to the single market , and Mr Barroso highlighted the importance of European spirit .
I think that these are good points in the current context , in which we need greater unity and solidarity in order to face the challenges before us .
( PL ) Mr President , the Belgian Presidency , the last two presidencies to be precise , came at the time when the Treaty of Lisbon was being implemented and a new order was being shaped in the EU .
Both these presidencies limited their national approach in order to deepen cooperation and coordination in the EU .
This good path serves to strengthen a community rather than a government approach .
On the other hand , we should be careful in limiting the role of national presidencies in creating their priorities .
A specific balance has to function here .
An undoubted achievement of the Belgian Presidency is the strengthening of economic governance .
Agencies which supervise financial institutions have begun their work .
Much has been done towards budget discipline being more rigorously observed .
Activities aimed at structural reform have been made the main instrument of development .
Furthermore , the impasse over approval of the 2011 EU budget has finally been overcome .
We would simply like to say thank you .
Mr President , I must say that it is very encouraging to hear so many Members from all sides of the House praising the Belgian Presidency , and rightly so .
I feared the opposite .
I think one of the reasons the Belgian Presidency is a success is because they took the realities of the Lisbon Treaty into account .
Nowadays , there must be a seamless transfer from one Presidency to another .
It is like a relay race : the more effective the transfer is - and the more low-profile it is - the better , probably .
The Belgians did that exceptionally well and have given an example to other countries of how to do so in future .
I would particularly like to thank them for their work in relation to the budget and the banking authorities and other authorities established .
If they are as successful as we hope they will be , then the Belgian Presidency will actually grow in stature in the years ahead as we look back on these very important decisions .
( FR ) Mr President , I concur with the practically unanimous messages expressed this morning .
Prime Minister , the Belgian Presidency was a good Presidency , because it moved the European project on in a difficult national context , which , nevertheless , did not prevent it from addressing the challenges facing Europe .
I have in mind the adoption of the 2011 budget , certain aspects of which leave a bitter taste in our mouths .
However , you avoided a detrimental institutional confrontation .
As regards the social dimension , from the very outset , the Belgian Presidency was confronted with the over cautiousness of some in the Council .
I am thinking in particular of the idea of a framework directive on minimum income .
Despite this context , Belgium can be credited with some real progress thanks to the fighting spirit of your ministers and of our ministers : the report of the EPSCO Council before each European Council to act as a necessary counterweight to the ECOFIN Council ; the conclusions on social services of general interest ; pensions , notably the conference on pensions in Liège , which highlighted the necessary joint consideration of the adequacy and sustainability of pensions , which I feel bound to stress , and the EPSCO declaration on the Year for Combating Poverty .
Congratulations once again .
Hopefully , this progress will continue with the new presidencies .
Mr President , on a point of order , I would ask you to carry out a survey of who is being allowed in on Catch-the-Eye and who is not .
It seems to me that there is not a fair distribution from one part-session to another .
I would ask you to do this because some of us , who have other duties , cannot sit in the House day in and day out , whereas other people have the opportunity to do so .
I think there has to be a fair opportunity for Members to intervene in debate .
I do apologise for delaying the House , but I would ask that you carry out that survey .
Mr Mitchell , I do not want to say any more other than that I have a list and you can check the list .
Almost 20 people on the list have the possibility to speak .
If you wish , you can come to my office , I can show you the list and we can explain it .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , a great deal of positive evaluation and praise has been expressed in the House this morning .
On behalf of the Commission , I would like to say that it is very well deserved .
With its European spirit , the Belgian Presidency clearly demonstrated impressive efficiency and a very cooperative approach .
When the Belgian Presidency took up an issue , we all knew that it would pursue the European goal - and only the European goal - and that it would do so in a spirit of loyal cooperation among the institutions .
The Belgian Presidency 's very good cooperation with the European Parliament and very close contacts with the Commission resulted in what is clearly a very impressive list of achievements .
Today , we can say that the Lisbon Treaty is now fully operational .
We have managed to give our citizens a new voice through the European Citizens ' Initiative , and we managed to reach an agreement on more transparent and effective rules for comitology .
I worked on both of those issues with the Secretary of State , Olivier Chastel , and I must say that I was always impressed by his cooperative spirit and high level of professionalism .
A calm and constructive approach was needed for the conclusion of the debate on the 2011 Budget , and for the beginning of the new economic governance in Europe .
Even in complex , protracted discussions on issues such as divorce , financial supervision and even patents , the Belgian Presidency managed to achieve clear progress .
It is very clear now that we need to carry forward the positive spirit and efficiency of the Belgian Presidency .
Clearly , the economy , recovering from the crisis and fiscal consolidation remain top priorities for us all .
We received good news last week with the successful sale of Portuguese , Spanish and Italian bonds , and we saw reductions in the spreads for Belgium and other countries .
But it is also very clear that we need to press ahead with structural reforms and that we have to work even harder .
If we do not want to have a jobless recovery , we need to look at how we can reform our labour market rules and how we can remove the obstacles to higher employment in Europe .
At the same time , we need to protect the vulnerable in our society and reduce poverty .
This is the only way we can develop our social market economy in Europe .
A lot will depend on how we start the European Semester and to what extent we will collectively be able to be ambitious in our national reform programmes , in our consolidation efforts , and in implementing the EU 2020 strategy .
The Belgian Presidency made a major contribution to the launch of this new process of economic governance and we now have to continue the excellent work it started .
Prime Minister , Secretary of State , I should like to thank you very much for your excellent work .
I would also like to thank all your diplomats very much for creating a positive atmosphere in which the next Presidency can continue the work you started so successfully six months ago .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these are my last words on behalf of the Belgian Presidency , so I will be brief .
I am delighted to see so many people here , but I know that has to do with other items on your agenda .
( NL ) Ladies and gentlemen , I , of course , wish to thank all those of you who provided very constructive feedback , which will prove invaluable in your and our work in the future .
Let me , first and foremost , say , with regard to the European Parliament 's very positive evaluation of our Presidency , that I try to stick to the principle of being serene in the face of negative feedback and of being very modest in the face of positive feedback , even if it proves to be exaggerated .
By way of conclusion , I would like to highlight three elements .
First of all - and this obviously goes beyond the remit of our Belgian Presidency - I think it is really important that we institute best practice as regards the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Every nation state which takes on the six-month rotating Presidency of the European Union should keep Europe particularly high on its agenda .
Secondly , the purpose of managing the rotating Presidency is , perhaps not just acting as facilitator , but also as a driving force , as one of you said , so that our institutions can do their work .
We all fought hard for the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It would be absurd , of course , if we managed the rotating Presidency in such a way that it failed to do justice to the letter and spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Moreover , I think that that is the only way in which the rotating Presidency will make sense in the future and any future Treaty amendments or new agreements will survive .
Thirdly : not everything is perfect and several members have rightly pointed to some gaps .
I would like to reiterate , in particular , that Europe ought to be more ambitious when it comes to social policy .
( FR ) What has been said is indeed correct .
At the level of social policy , the Union must be more ambitious in the future , but I nonetheless believe that Belgium played its part .
The Belgian Presidency strengthened the role of employment policies in the Europe 2020 strategy , it ensured that these policies would have a place in the new economic governance of Europe , and I believe that it also created the foundations for the social dimension of the Europe 2020 strategy , not only the fight against poverty , but also social cohesion .
In response to some of the speeches , it seems to me that we have nevertheless put the issue of services of general interest on the European agenda .
However , it is true that we need to do more and to move forward , especially at legislative level .
As I said earlier , our Presidency is not perfect and I think that , as Mr Tavares rightly pointed out , we can do more than we are doing today at the level of refugee policy .
( NL ) By way of conclusion , I will make two final remarks , as there are other items remaining on the agenda .
I would emphatically like to address the Belgian members of the European Parliament in general , but several of them in particular , especially two of my predecessors .
On behalf of the Belgian Government , I would like to say that we consider the efforts we put in during the Belgian Presidency as a kind of salute to your work here .
We have done all that we could , ladies and gentlemen , to apply the Treaty of Lisbon correctly , which is also a kind of salute to the initiatives developed since the eleventh Presidency , which oversaw the emergence of the Treaty of Laeken , and later , under important rapporteurships , with a view to implementing the spirit of Laeken in the Treaty of Lisbon .
It has rightly been pointed out that a rotating Presidency primarily relies on the commitment and achievement of a great many people around the politicians who have to take responsibility and stand in the firing line .
I am talking about the advisers , the diplomats , about a great many people who are ultimately the ones doing the most important work .

I would like to let Mr Staes know that , while the Golden Shoe Prize , which will be awarded in Belgium tomorrow , has always gone to people like Lukaku and Boussoufa , if it was the Belgian Presidency which was being honoured , the Golden Shoe would easily go to its diplomatic service , some of whose staff are seated here behind me .
Finally , let me address a few words to Mr Tabajdi , and I will try to use my best Hungarian :
Prime Minister , thanks to you , over the last half year , we have developed new ways of cooperating at different levels between the two chambers of legislation of the European Union : between Council and the European Parliament .
Your Presidency was a great success .
All the best to your country and all the best to you personally .
( Applause )
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
31 December 2010 saw the end of a rather dull Presidency , which some people have described as lacklustre and weak .
That was all we could have expected from a Belgian Government that has not actually existed for eight months .
Belgian politics has not managed to set out a political plan for its own country , which is the victim of an unprecedented institutional crisis .
I do not see how it could possibly have led such a complex entity as the European Union - itself very fragile and rickety today - with foresight and vision for the future .
The Belgian Presidency was supposed to put Europe on the road to recovery from the economic and financial crisis .
Yet , once again , we find ourselves tackling the speculation that threatens the very existence of the single currency , even today .
It was the Belgian Presidency that was behind the major acceleration in the further enlargement of the EU 's borders .
As we have seen in recent years , the accession of economically weak countries has complicated the work of the European institutions and weakened the whole of Europe , which is now less capable than it was previously of shouldering the domestic problems of any new Member States .
Belgium occupied the Presidency of the European Union for the last six months and hardly anyone there seems to have noticed .
The country was mainly preoccupied - and what is more , unsuccessfully so - with forming a new government , while the quarrelling between the Flemings and the Walloons has rendered the country unable to make political decisions .
It was therefore little wonder that the EU political establishment had an easy ride in its desire to push forward centralisation within the European Union .
The euro crisis was used as a pretext to forge plans for European economic governance .
Meanwhile , the so-called ' permanent rescue package ' for the euro is nothing other than an assault on the net contributors , who will have to dig even deeper into their pockets in future .
Belgium should actually be regarded as a cautionary example of what can happen if peoples with differing economic performances are corseted up together .
Belgium , where the differences between the Flemings and the Walloons are evidently irreconcilable , and where the Federal apparatus represents a redistribution mechanism from the Flemings to the Walloons , shows what may befall the European Union and the euro area if they continue to follow the existing misguided path .
In summing up the Belgian Presidency , we should , first of all , appreciate its highly active role in designing the European financial stability system .
All of those who observed that process know that it is a difficult operation and was carried out under time pressure .
For this reason , I would like to offer my sincere congratulations to all of those who contributed to bringing the project to fruition .
In this regard , the Belgian Presidency has left behind for the Hungarian Presidency a job well done .
It should also be stressed that the Belgians have marked out the path for future presidencies in the context of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to express the hope that future presidencies , including the Polish one , will try to set their own , clear priorities to a greater extent , while still placing them , however , within our common , European objectives .
This method of working allows the policies of European institutions to be planned and carried out to a greater extent .
I would like to start by congratulating the Belgian Presidency , which demonstrated outstanding abilities while leading the European Council for the last six months .
The Belgian team can be considered all the more successful in view of the circumstances in which the country took over the Presidency .
Firstly , this was the first Presidency which had operated on the basis of the rules introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , and secondly , the EU and its individual Member States were in an extremely difficult financial position .
In addition , Belgium had to deal with domestic problems during its Presidency .
In spite of it being such a difficult and demanding time , the Presidency showed how effective it could be , displaying true European style in the implementation of all measures .
It left its domestic problems and issues to one side and concentrated on following a course of action that corresponded to the proposals of the European Parliament , the European Commission and the European Council , and on supporting these institutions .
The Presidency took on the role of a mediator .
With regard to the priorities achieved by the Presidency , measures focused on combating the economic crisis deserve recognition ; I am thinking here , above all , of work on the next multiannual financial framework .
The Eurovignette is a further significant achievement of the Belgian Presidency .
Finally , I would like to say that the Belgian Presidency can serve as a good lesson for the next countries taking over the Presidency of the European Council .
I would like to wish both the Hungarian Presidency and the Polish Presidency , which will begin in the second half of 2011 , the same success .
I would like to express my thanks to the Belgian Presidency .
Its work , which has just come to an end , can serve as a model for the countries which will lead the work of the European Council in future .
This is a subject particularly close to my heart in view of Poland 's upcoming Presidency , which I hope will follow all the trails blazed so successfully under the Belgian Presidency .
It is not often the case that the country holding the Presidency puts Community measures before domestic interests .
In my opinion , the key success of the Presidency we are discussing was its consistent implementation of the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , in particular , at the level of the European Council , which became a full institution with a permanent President , and at the level of the Foreign Affairs Council , which is currently headed by the High Representative .
Combating the economic crisis also proved to be a matter of no little significance , and the systematic monitoring and moderation of the financial sector will make it possible , over time , to restore its tarnished reputation .
This is particularly important at a time when there is so much pressure to extend the euro area .
To sum up , I sincerely hope that the path mapped out during the Belgian Presidency will serve as a quality standard for the countries taking over future presidencies .
May the good of the Community always be our priority . Thank you .
1 .
Mergers of public limited liability companies ( codified version ) (
2 .
Protocol to the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement between the EC and Jordan , to take account of the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the EU (
3 .
EC-West African Economic and Monetary Union air services agreement (
Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by adopting my report , we will be voting for an agreement which will manage to bring about the approximation of the laws under 47 existing bilateral air services agreements concluded between the individual Member States of the EU and the individual countries of the West African Economic and Monetary Union .
In so doing , we are ensuring the application of applicable EU law , preventing discrimination and barriers to market access and cutting red tape .
Please vote ' yes ' !
4 .
Harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products (
5 .
European Consensus on humanitarian aid (
6 .
Agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
We will now proceed to the explanations of vote .
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , the building industry constitutes a very important branch of the economy of every country .
Such an essential part of the market cannot be overlooked when striving for economic growth and an improvement in living standards .
Everyone is aware of the importance of a correctly built or modernised structure for security and comfort .
At the same time , we are all striving to reduce the costs of building homes , industrial and public buildings .
The report aims to remove market barriers , enable the effective sale of building materials and ensure competitive prices in the sector .
The benefits of this initiative will be felt throughout Europe .
I lend my full support , too , to the author 's proposals regarding increasing employee safety in the industry .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the Stihler report , it is clear what an important role the construction sector plays in Europe .
We simply had to tackle the problems faced by 12 million citizens directly employed in this sector .
The Stihler report is a valuable tool for bringing down the national administrative and technical barriers that prevent the marketing of construction products within the European Union and for continuing to build a single market in this sector .
I support the recognition given to small and medium-sized enterprises in the construction sector , just as I support the particular attention paid to the need to recycle construction products , which is an issue of the utmost importance in the fight against climate change .
However , I would like to take this opportunity to draw attention to the issue of the health and safety of workers employed in the construction sector .
The guidelines that the rapporteur has included on this matter are useful , but they need to be expanded upon .
It is our duty to discuss and develop these proposals further in the immediate future , thereby ensuring that workers employed in the construction sector receive a high level of protection .
The tragedy of work-related deaths is an issue that concerns the whole of Europe .
I hope that , through our work , we will be able to put a stop to them .
( FI ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank Mrs Stihler for this excellent report .
It is very important to focus attention on the harmonisation of the marketing of construction products , because in the future , we will need better and higher quality construction .
We need to remember that , although this is a highly competitive industry , what is most important is not the competition in itself , but the end result .
It is important that the buildings which are constructed in Europe are safe for their users and that they are also safe for the builders and other employees during the construction process .
It is very important that we also have harmonisation in the area of the marketing of construction products , and , as a result , are able to exchange best practices .
It is true that in many countries in Europe at present , they still use materials which are not healthy for residents .
For example , we have a huge problem with mildew in many Member States of the European Union , and that is why it is important to use best practices and innovations to try to make the marketing of construction products one that relates to products that are healthy and satisfactory as far as their users are concerned .
I therefore want to thank Mrs Stihler for this excellent report .
Europe needs good construction products and a system of marketing that takes account of the safety regulations specifically .
Mr President , last week , the French Prime Minister came to London and said that we needed to join in the project of assisting the euro .
Let us leave aside for a moment the question of whether we should again be dragged into somebody else 's problem ; let us focus instead on the main logical flaw here .
He says ' European integration is not working , so let us have more European integration ! '
I am sure that you can spot the problem in his reasoning here .
' My dinghy keeps capsizing , so I would like to be put in charge of an ocean liner ' .
' My go-kart has crashed , so please put me at the wheel of an articulated lorry ' .
It seems that whatever the problem is , the answer is always closer European integration .
The EU is a solution in search of a problem , but surely the day is coming when we can no longer impose ourselves both on the markets and on public opinion .
The spell is breaking and the shamanistic incantations are losing their force .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid , when you consider that its contribution represents more than 40 % of all international humanitarian assistance .
The Union 's humanitarian policy is the practical expression of its commitment to supporting people in third countries in need of assistance when they are at their most vulnerable .
The European Consensus on humanitarian aid , signed on 18 December by the Presidents of the Council of the European Union , the European Parliament and the Commission , represents a significant step forward .
I must point out here that the commitments derived from the Consensus apply both to the Member States and to the European Commission .
In recent years , we have seen non-humanitarian bodies increasingly involved in the response to humanitarian crises .
It is essential that political bodies and military or humanitarian organisations active in the same working environment should learn more about one another and engage in dialogue , while having regard to - and not compromising - their respective roles and remits .
Obviously , when civil protection resources are used , it must be in accordance with the international guidelines as set out in the European Consensus .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the report adopted today - for which I thank and congratulate the rapporteur Mrs Striffler - is a text that will make for more effective and consistent humanitarian aid .
The European Parliament is today inviting the Union to cooperate more closely in order to reach a consensus aimed at strengthening our collective response to humanitarian crises and , in particular , at strongly upholding full compliance with international humanitarian law .
We must ensure , therefore , that humanitarian aid and humanitarian aid workers have better access to populations in need , and as there are more of these populations these days , we must succeed in doing even more than we have done so far , through the Commission or through bilateral programmes .
While the needs are huge , the distribution of aid is becoming increasingly difficult and also risky and dangerous due to the increasingly complex international framework .
In view of these requirements , therefore , this agreement promotes a European consensus in which it is affirmed that EU aid is based unequivocally on the humanitarian principles of neutrality , independence and impartiality and must be provided quickly and effectively to crisis victims on the basis of identified need .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the dramatic increase in the number and severity of natural disasters , together with the rising incidence of complex crises , mean that we are faced with worsening violations of international humanitarian law and a shrinking ' humanitarian space ' .
The recent tragedies in Haiti and Pakistan demonstrate once again that the tools available to the EU for responding to natural disasters need to be improved .
I agree with the general approach of the report and , in particular , with the statement that the European Union must promote humanitarian principles unstintingly .
The external action of the European Union is provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon ; it should reflect the Union 's political weight and influence as the main international donor .
I voted in favour of Mrs Striffler 's report because I agree that it is essential for us to work on strengthening implementation of the European Consensus and the associated action plan , as well as worldwide coordination and burden sharing , taking into account the regional responsibilities of the countries who have the capacity to be major contributors of humanitarian aid .
Mr President , I had great pleasure in voting for this particular report , because the report confirms that food security is a basic human right .
The agricultural sector must meet a growing population 's need for safe and sufficient food despite the obstacles of limited natural resources , high energy prices and climate change .
According to the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation , food production must increase by at least 70 % to meet the growing demands of a world population which is expected to exceed 9 billion by the year 2050 .
Furthermore , around 900 million people worldwide are chronically hungry due to extreme poverty , while up to 2 billion people lack genuine long-term food security due to varying degrees of poverty .
In Europe , 16 % of citizens still live below the poverty line .
Basically , what I am saying is this : we need to tackle this issue head-on .
It is essential that the financing of the new common agricultural policy after 2013 recognises this , and the very least we need is that the budget should be maintained at least at its current level .
( DA ) Mr President , Parliament has today chosen to formally recognise agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security .
This is something that we in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have recognised for many years .
Likewise , we also recognise the fact that agriculture is a strategic sector when it comes to food quality , public health and sustainable , economic growth .
However , this does not justify school fruit and milk programmes .
Nor does it justify more market-supported milk subsidy programmes .
We would like to point out that we voted against these proposals and we regret the fact that they were voted through .
However , this must not destroy the overall picture , which is the fact that we must provide good conditions for agriculture .
Butter mountains , wine lakes and school programmes are not the way forward , however .
Farmers ' income will not be secured by intervention and distortion of the market .
Instead , we must invest in research and give farmers the opportunity to use new technologies for alternative forms of income .
Overall , we consider the report to be good , and therefore we voted in favour of it as a whole .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , food security is a basic human right , and it is achieved only when all people , at all times , have physical , social and economic access to sufficient food .
The new EU common agricultural policy must reflect these new requirements : it therefore needs to respond clearly and unequivocally to food security and other challenges , most notably climate change , the economic crisis and keeping territorial balance within the EU .
We need to promote not only the competitiveness of our products , but also traditional agriculture , small-scale farming , organic farming and local distribution .
These models of agriculture have always made , and continue to make , a valid contribution to food security because they often represent the most effective way of utilising land in diverse geographical regions of the EU through the use of methods which have been specifically developed in distinct regions over long periods of time .
( PL ) Mr President , our role as Members of the European Parliament is to act to improve the lives of EU citizens .
Ensuring them access to safe food of the highest quality should be a top priority .
Food shortages and high prices are usually accompanied by social unrest and we cannot allow this situation to occur on our continent .
Taking into account growing population numbers , climate change and natural disasters , global food security is under threat .
Many people are already starving , and in order to find a remedy , a sensible and just common agricultural policy is required as well as financial support for the sector .
Agriculture should be given a special status which will allow special action to be taken and appropriate instruments to be applied in the event that food crises occur .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , food security and a guaranteed supply of food for populations continue to be the main challenges for agriculture , not only in Europe but also worldwide .
I am very satisfied with the contents of this report , in particular , because food security is recognised as a fundamental human right .
Food security as an objective will be achieved only if two important issues - market and price volatility and dwindling food stocks - are given serious consideration .
Europe has to be able to intervene with common and effective measures to guarantee food supply and prevent the serious asymmetries that still exist in relation to safety standards between EU and non-EU products .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to say that I was very pleased by the report on recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security as this puts the significance of the rural economy back at the centre of things .
The first conclusion , for me , is that we also continue to need a strong European common agricultural policy .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur .
There was one point where I did not vote with the report , however , and this concerned the creation of a European food aid programme within the European Union .
I believe that providing aid on the ground , in other words , aid to ensure that no one in the European Union should suffer from hunger , must remain the responsibility of the Member States , quite simply because such problems should be solved where they occur , namely , in the Member States .
Mr President , this report highlights the need for food security for the citizens whom we represent .
It also emphasises the important public goods which farmers produce , often with little or no recognition .
However , I feel that there is going to be a problem .
I have recently heard major speeches which indicate that the common agricultural policy should actually shift to being an environmental policy .
This I think will ultimately lead us to mistakenly believe that we can do without European farmers , and maybe just import food from outside of the EU .
This should not be the case .
Our farmers should be supported to produce food in a way which is not harmful to the environment , and as for importing food , world markets are simply too volatile - both in terms of price and in terms of consistency of supply .
There are a number of things that we must do .
We must have a strong budget for the common agricultural policy .
We must encourage young farmers into the industry to secure a future for it .
We must have more research and innovation to make production methods more efficient , and we must have less red tape - and certainly no green tape to tie up our farmers .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in recent weeks , the various parliamentary committees that are dealing with the issue of the common agricultural policy have been looking into the matter of the post-2013 reform .
Clearly , food security is one of the fundamental elements of agriculture .
This consideration must therefore be viewed in the light of the report being put to the vote today , in which food security is defined as a fundamental right that must accordingly be safeguarded in every possible way .
Such attention is required , Mr President , whenever there is an emergency , such as that linked to the dioxin scandal that we are witnessing at the moment , with the discovery that dioxin is being used in animal feed , but also , and above all , to ensure that we have a common production process that respects the production sector as a whole , that respects the quality of farmers ' work , the environment and marketing , and hence , that respects consumers .
This report forms part of a set of measures that this House has developed to promote agriculture , and I can therefore say that I am satisfied .
( HU ) Mr President , nowadays , the world 's food production is facing different challenges to an increasing extent .
One such challenge is climate change , which unfortunately may cause unpredictable food shortages , and thus endanger the satisfaction of the growing demand of the world 's population , estimated to reach more than 9 billion by 2050 .
The common agricultural policy must react unequivocally to challenges posed by food safety , climate change and economic crisis .
Not only competitiveness , but also traditional agriculture , small-scale and organic farming , and local values must be encouraged .
As a result of climate changes , there are more and more natural disasters , which will have the effect of reducing the possibility of using large areas of agricultural land , thus jeopardising food safety .
To achieve the above objectives , and in the interest of rational food prices and a fair income for agricultural producers , the CAP budget must be maintained at least at its current level .
For this reason , it is important to handle agriculture as a strategic sector from the point of view of food safety .
This is why I , too , supported this report .
( FI ) Mr President , first , I want to say that it is excellent that the European Parliament recognises agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security .
It is very important for us to ensure that the food that we produce in the European Union is , above all , safe and free from impurities .
I am rather worried that we tend to pay more attention to quantity than quality .
The insistence on efficiency has somehow overlooked these health requirements .
When we talk about food security , it is very important to ensure that the food which is made available to European consumers is safe , good quality and nutritious .
It is also crucially important to ensure that the various Member States of the European Union preserve their own agricultural practices .
When we face natural disasters , it is important that we have a farming economy that is selfsufficient .
In this way , we can use the principle of the sourcing of local food to respond to the issues that may arise when disaster strikes .
I wish to stress , above all , the importance of these principles , which derive from considerations of health and are important .
I hope that we will see more of this trend in local food .
It is important all over Europe to ensure that agriculture is absolutely viable and that every Member State of the European Union is able to practise farming .
It is vital and a strong basis for the future , which we need specifically in the food sector .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having voted firmly in favour of this important report , I would like to emphasise , in particular , paragraph 35 of the well-structured opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety which , in considering that the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) has a major role to play in the assessment of all risks associated with the food chain as part of a set of measures designed to protect the health and wellbeing of the public , hopes that all Member States will set up corresponding national bodies to collaborate with the EFSA .
As the recent serious events in Germany demonstrate , national food safety bodies need to be set up today by all the Member States .
It is surprising that the Italian Government , after establishing the Agency , has changed its mind for budgetary reasons .
In my view , food safety should not fall by the wayside because of budgetary constraints .
Written explanations of vote
Since , according to the Consultative Working Party of Parliament 's legal services , the Council and the Commission , the proposal in question contains a codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance , I agree with their adoption at first reading .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this report and the European Commission 's proposal , because I believe that it is very important to simplify and clarify Community law so as to make it clearer and more accessible to all citizens .
This aim cannot be achieved so long as numerous provisions that have been amended several times , often quite substantially , remain scattered , and considerable research work , comparing many different instruments , is thus needed to identify the current rules .
The codification of legislation is particularly important in the field of business , which , in order to ensure the smooth and continuous free movement of people , goods and services , is regulated by a significant amount of Community legislation .
The consolidation of legislation regulating mergers of public limited liability companies is a welcome step towards improving Community legislation .
There are very many companies in Europe ; they come in very many different forms and are subject to very many rules .
However , since 1978 , European legislation has been in place to regulate mergers of public limited liability companies from the same Member State .
It is important to regulate these mergers because they may significantly affect the interests of the employees , shareholders and creditors of those companies . They may be adversely affected , for example , if the merger is subsequently cancelled .
On this European matter as on others , we need clarity and legal certainty .
This is what we are trying to achieve with the codification of this directive .
I voted for this resolution because I believe that confidence is an incredible driving force for growth .
I voted for this report as , in the proposal for codifying the Third Council Directive 78 / 855 / EEC of 9 October 1978 concerning mergers of public limited liability companies , the Commission has taken into consideration the editorial or formal amendments proposed by the Consultative Working Party of the legal services , which have proved to be justified .
For example , the Consultative Working Party suggests that it is particularly important that shareholders in the merging companies are informed in an appropriate manner and as impartially as possible , and that their rights are adequately protected .
However , there is no need for an analysis of the draft terms of merger to be carried out by an independent expert .
Furthermore , the administrative or management bodies of each of the companies involved inform the general meeting of their respective companies and the administrative or management bodies of the other companies involved of any material change which has occurred between the date of preparation of the draft terms of merger and the date of the general meetings which are to decide on the draft terms of merger .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Maštálka because the proposal in question has been carefully weighed up by the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , which jointly deemed it to be a codification , which is to say , it is merely a streamlined version of the existing text .
Just yesterday , a study was presented in Italy which showed that , at the moment , the businesses that have best withstood the crisis have been those that have managed to bolster their assets .
In particular , the study , carried out by a respected Italian university on behalf of the country 's most active business association , claims that mergers were the main means of consolidation .
It is not by chance that major financial operations , including mergers , go hand in hand with restructuring and the search for efficiencies in all economic sectors .
Within the single market , it is therefore incumbent upon the European institutions to lay down rules that can provide guarantees for all those involved and enable more virtuous businesses to compete better , free from legal uncertainties , red tape and obligations caused by simple misunderstandings .
A modern , liberal and efficient economy - as I believe ours must be - needs a specific law on mergers but only if , like the directive proposed today , it is streamlined and non-interfering , and protects the freedoms and rights of the people who could be hurt by these operations .
In this sitting , following an amended proposal by Parliament and the Council , Parliament has analysed a draft legislative resolution on mergers of public limited liability companies ( codified version ) , having adopted the proposal tabled by the Commission .
Given that the proposal is simply aimed at the ' straightforward codification ' of the legislative texts without any change in their substance , along with the improvement of working methods , and bearing in mind that it incorporates the forms suggested and substantiated by the Consultative Working Party of the legal services , I am voting in favour of this proposal as I recognise that it will translate into a significant improvement in the functioning of public limited liability companies , particularly by modernising and streamlining them .
I voted in favour of this report because , according to the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , the proposal in question contains a straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance and therefore , in the interests of clarity and rationality , the existing texts should be codified .
in writing . - I voted for this report because , according to the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , the proposal in question contains a straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
Carrying out codification in order to maintain clarity after a certain number of amendments certainly makes things easier .
In general , however , we need to consider whether such a multitude of rules and regulations is necessary at all .
In some areas , it is excessive and consumers are scarcely credited with common sense any more , while in other areas , the prescriptions include the likes of name changes for foodstuffs .
In order to protect the interests of shareholders and third parties , coordinating the laws of the Member States covering mergers of public limited liability companies is a suitable way to ensure the observance of information rights .
I find myself unable to vote in favour of some of the amendments and I therefore voted against the report as a whole .
I voted in favour of this report , given that it is confined exclusively to codifying existing texts on mergers of public limited liability companies .
On 21 September 2010 , the Consultative Working Party , made up of the respective legal services of Parliament , the Council and the Commission , having examined the proposal for codifying the Third Council Directive 78 / 855 / EEC of 9 October 1978 based on Article 54 ( 3 ) ( g ) of the Treaty concerning mergers of public limited liability companies , concluded without dissent that the proposal is effectively a straightforward codification of existing texts , without any change in their substance .
During my assessment of the draft legislative resolution on mergers of public limited liability companies , I considered the following legislative acts : the Commission proposal to the European Parliament and the Council ; the common position established at first reading on 17 June 2008 ; Articles 294 and 50 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , pursuant to which the Commission submitted the proposal to Parliament ; the interinstitutional agreement of 20 December 1994 on an accelerated working method for official codification of legislative texts ; Rules 86 and 55 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure ; and lastly , the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Based on this , I decided to follow Parliament 's position at first reading , as it is in line with the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , above all , in view of the fact that it is merely a codification of the existing texts , without any substantive amendments .
According to the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , the amended proposal on the directive concerning mergers of public limited liability companies is restricted to a codification of existing texts without entailing any change in their substance .
I therefore voted for this report .
in writing . - Having sought legal advice , the services stated that , having regard to the interinstitutional agreement of 20 December 1994 on an accelerated working method for official codification of legislative texts and , in particular , to point 4 thereof , the Consultative Working Party consisting of the respective legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission met on 21 September 2010 for the purpose of examining , among others , the proposal submitted by the Commission .
At that meeting , an examination of the amended proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council codifying the Third Council Directive 78 / 855 / EEC of 9 October 1978 based on Article 54 ( 3 ) ( g ) of the Treaty concerning mergers of public limited liability companies resulted in the Consultative Working Party 's concluding , without dissent , that the proposal is a straightforward codification of existing texts , without any change in their substance .
With this in mind , we decided to support the proposal .
I agree with the signing of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , to take account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the European Union on 1 January 2007 .
I voted for the report like my fellow Members did .
Apart from the formal aspect , it is important from the perspective of united Europe 's global role in different regions , not only its economic , but also its political role .
They have ensured that the Mediterranean region has been and still is a region of strategic interest .
I welcome the adoption of this resolution .
I support the conclusion of a protocol to the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , to take account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the European Union .
The text of the legislative resolution on which we have voted underwent the simplified procedure provided for under Rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure .
I believe that this is justified given the non-contradictory nature of its subject matter .
The Euro-Mediterranean Agreement between the European Communities and Jordan must include Bulgaria and Romania , so the proposed protocol has reason to be valid and to merit the unanimous support of the European Parliament .
The Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishes an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , and the protocol is to update the agreement , taking account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the European Union , which has been provisionally applied since 1 January 2007 .
In this legislative resolution , the Council is submitting to Parliament a request for consent to the protocol .
Since I do not have any objections to such approval , I voted in favour .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which is a simple piece of housekeeping updating the existing agreement to take into account the accession of Bulgaria and Romania .
The proposal has no impact on the EU budget and is uncontroversial .
This protocol merely brings the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the EU and Jordan into line with what has , in reality , been applied since 1 January 2007 .
It is sheer deception .
The hurry to implement the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area by 2015 justifies all the failures to comply with democratic principles .
These blind methods have just demonstrated their limitations in Tunisia .
I will be voting against this text .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the draft Council decision on conclusion of a protocol to the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , to take account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the European Union since all the prerequisites had been met and since what was at hand was primarily a formal act .
This recommendation on the draft Council decision concerning the conclusion of a protocol to the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , to take account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the European Union , deserves my vote .
Indeed , it is vital to strive for a robust , consistent and effective Neighbourhood Policy .
Since the Council , in accordance with the terms legally stipulated in the treaties , has submitted a request for consent to this protocol to Parliament , there is nothing standing in the way of its adoption .
Euro-Mediterranean agreements are gaining ever increasing significance in Europe 's association activities .
In this case , therefore , I intend to give my backing to the draft European Parliament legislative resolution on conclusion of a protocol to the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , to take account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the European Union , which Parliament has already approved so that the protocol could be concluded .
My backing is also supported by a series of acts , namely , the draft Council decision , the draft protocol to the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , to take account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the European Union , the request for consent submitted by the Council in accordance with Article 217 and Article 218 ( 6 ) , second subparagraph , point ( a ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , Rules 81 , 90 ( 8 ) and 46 ( 1 ) of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , and the recommendation of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .


In the light of all this , I support the cooperative approach being taken by the EU .
I voted in favour of the conclusion of this protocol , which is fully justified in view of the need to include the Republic of Bulgaria and Romania as contracting parties in the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , which was concluded in Brussels on 24 November 1997 and entered into force on 1 May 2002 .
in writing . - Having regard to the draft Council decision ( 06903 / 2010 ) , having regard to the draft protocol to the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , of the other part , to take account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania to the European Union ( 09373 / 2008 ) , having regard to the request for consent submitted by the Council in accordance with Article 217 and Article 218 ( 6 ) , second subparagraph , point ( a ) , of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( C7-0384 / 2010 ) , having regard to Rules 81 , 90 ( 8 ) and 46 ( 1 ) of its Rules of Procedure , having regard to the recommendation of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the Verts / ALE Group agreed that Parliament should give its consent to the conclusion of the protocol .


This is a recommendation on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the West African Economic and Monetary Union on certain aspects of air services .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the West African Economic and Monetary Union on certain aspects of air services .
At present , the Community has exclusive competence with respect to various aspects of external aviation .
Consequently , the Council has authorised the Commission to open negotiations with third countries in order to replace certain provisions in existing bilateral agreements with Community agreements .
The Commission has negotiated an Agreement with the West African Economic and Monetary Union that avoids discrimination between EU air carriers , allows the taxation of aircraft fuel for operations within the territory of the European Union , and brings into line with EU competition law provisions in bilateral agreements which are clearly anti-competitive , namely , obligatory commercial agreements between airlines .
The transfer of Member States ' competences to the European Union is the justification for replacing bilateral air services agreements with new ones to which the Union is party .
The resolution voted on is about specific issues of this nature and aims to harmonise the international law instruments currently in force , as well as to adapt them to the additional requirements arising from EU law .
The subject in question is highly technical , involving the replacing of agreements that were previously in force with others , without involving anything contentious or any significant changes in ideology .
The fact that the vote in committee was unanimously in favour confirms this interpretation .
All that was needed in plenary , therefore , was to ratify a consensual decision .
I voted in favour .
The report tabled by Mr Koch proposes the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the West African Economic and Monetary Union on certain aspects of air services .
The spirit of the European Union in the treaties is to standardise procedures throughout the EU .
Therefore , as the Court of Justice of the European Communities has ruled , it makes no sense for there to be bilateral agreements on air services between EU Member States and the Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this agreement , which will strengthen the bonds of territorial cohesion within Europe and bring about compliance with EU competition law .
In the context of the situation currently being faced by civil aviation , we believe that this draft agreement raises serious doubts about its scope and potential consequences .
Until now , in this area which is strategic in terms of safeguarding national interests for a number of reasons , the Member States made sovereign decisions about how agreements - which have a clear impact on airlines - should be organised and what their scope should be .
Nevertheless , the intention is that , from now on , the market will be king here too .
In particular , we cannot underestimate the contribution that the supposed creation of a level playing field for the various European companies could make towards facilitating the monopolistic concentration of the sector - which is already under way - and the reduction of the Member States ' capacity to defend their flag-carrying airlines .
The ubiquitous and sacrosanct ' free competition ' is defended at all costs and is once again the pillar by which this initiative is supported .
The consequences for this sector are not substantially different from those for others : it is the monopolistic concentration that always ends up being imposed in these cases .
For these reasons , we did not vote for this report .
I voted in favour of this report because the Community has exclusive competence with respect to various aspects of external aviation which were traditionally governed by bilateral air services agreements between Member States and third countries , and consequently , Community agreements must replace certain provisions in the existing 47 bilateral air services agreements concluded between EU Member States and Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union .
To avoid discrimination between EU air carriers , the traditional designation clauses , referring to air carriers of the Member State party to the bilateral agreement , are replaced by a EU designation clause , referring to all EU carriers .
Although traditional bilateral agreements tend to exempt aircraft fuel in general from taxation , Council Directive 2003 / 96 / EC restructuring the Community framework for the taxation of energy products and electricity permits such taxation for operations within the territory of the European Union .
Furthermore , provisions in bilateral agreements which are clearly anti-competitive ( obligatory commercial agreements between airlines ) are brought into line with EU competition law .
African countries situated in particularly difficult geographic and climatic regions require special treatment .
However , the people living there do not need only food and water ; they also need education , and they want to work with dignity and move around .
The agreement between the European Community and the West African Economic and Monetary Union , which replaces certain provisions of earlier agreements , facilitates significantly , and makes more just in market terms , air transport procedures between the parties of the agreement .
It prevents unfair , monopolistic practices and eases travel for ordinary citizens .
There are also new opportunities for tourists from throughout the world and the associated development of this branch of the economy in Africa .
I voted for the recommendation on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the West African Economic and Monetary Union on certain aspects of air services .
The agreement , which was negotiated by the Commission , aims to replace certain provisions in existing bilateral agreements concluded between EU Member States and Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union .
Amongst the most important changes relating to the agreement we voted on today , I feel the need to mention the provisions included to avoid discrimination between European Union air carriers .
Indeed , for this very purpose , the traditional designation clauses , referring to air carriers of the Member State party to the bilateral agreement , are replaced by an EU designation clause , referring to all EU carriers .
in writing . - I voted to give consent to this agreement . The agreement is one of the horizontal air service agreements whose aim is to bring existing bilateral air service agreements in line with EU law .
This is as a result of the 2003 ECJ decision that gave the Community exclusive competence in regard to various aspects of external aviation which had traditionally been governed by bilateral air service agreements .
Just as with other horizontal air agreements , this agreement provides for an EU designation clause permitting all EU carriers to benefit from the right of establishment , deals with safety issues and the taxation of aviation fuel and resolves potential conflicts with EU competition rules .
Not content with underhandedly expediting the division of African regional integration as elsewhere in the world , the European Union is now even imposing its neoliberal diktat in the African sky .
The incentives set up by the Commission do nothing to hide this .
This agreement ' does not aim to increase the total volume of air traffic ' ?
But the total absence of checks on such an increase in traffic is certain !
This agreement ' shall not prevent a Member State from imposing taxes , levies , duties , fees or charges on fuel ' ?
However , ecological efficiency is reduced to zero by the restrictions imposed on it !
In fact , where Member States used to decide how to organise their access agreements with companies themselves , now only the market will decide .
The existence of 47 bilateral agreements between EU Member States and the Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union is clearly insufficient to cover the various aspects of air services .
This agreement is therefore to be welcomed , as it will replace certain provisions in existing bilateral agreements with Community agreements .
It is worth highlighting the references in this agreement to the avoidance of discrimination between EU air carriers and the taxation of aircraft fuel , in line with the directive on the taxation of energy products and electricity .
It is also worth emphasising that the provisions set out in the agreements comply with EU competition law .
This agreement aims to replace certain provisions in the existing 47 bilateral air services agreements concluded between EU Member States and Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union ( WAEMU ) .
It is , in fact , appropriate to harmonise the different provisions of the existing agreements by means of a horizontal Community agreement .
It will re-establish legal certainty for bilateral air services agreements concluded between Member States of the WAEMU and EU Member States and it will also make it possible for EU Member States that have not signed a bilateral agreement with a Member State of the WAEMU not to be adversely affected .
It will prevent discrimination between carriers as regards designation or the taxation of aviation fuel .
The anti-competitive provisions of bilateral agreements are brought into line with EU competition law .
The agreement will strengthen EU-Africa aviation relations and will foster cooperation in the aviation area between the EU and WAEMU on a number of important aspects , such as aviation safety and security .
In order to create a uniform basis for flights to countries outside the EU and , subsequently , to be able to guarantee legal certainty , all bilateral agreements must be reviewed .
With the Council 's authorisation , the Commission negotiated an agreement with the West African Economic and Monetary Union that replaces the existing 47 bilateral air services agreements concluded between EU Member States and Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union .
I am voting in favour of the report because a generally applicable agreement makes perfect sense in this context .
This agreement simply replaces the 47 bilateral agreements with the various Member States and , as a result , the EU gains more foreign policy powers .
Therefore , I have voted against this report .
This report refers to a draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the West African Economic and Monetary Union on certain aspects of air services .
Given that the EU currently has exclusive competence in this area , the Council has authorised the Commission to open negotiations with third countries in order to replace the traditional bilateral agreements on air services between the Member States and third countries .
The draft agreement was examined by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which issued a favourable opinion .
From this , I would like to highlight , among other points , the establishment of a Community designation clause in order to avoid discrimination between EU air carriers and allow the taxation of aircraft fuel for operations within the territory of the European Union .
I would like to emphasise these two points in the favourable opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , as these caused me to vote in favour of this report .
The European Union has exclusive competence with respect to external aviation which was traditionally governed by bilateral air services agreements between Member States and third countries .
In June 2003 , the Commission opened negotiations with third countries in order to replace certain provisions in existing bilateral agreements with EU agreements .
They include an agreement that replaces the 47 existing bilateral air services agreements concluded between EU Member States and the West African Economic and Monetary Union .
The main aspects of the agreement are : the designation clause , which replaces the bilateral agreement and avoids discrimination between European Union air carriers ; taxation of aviation fuel in general on EU territory ; and Article 6 , which brings commercial agreements between airlines in line with EU competition law .
The agreement negotiated by the Commission was provisionally applied on 30 November 2009 .
With the weight of the rulings of the Court of Justice on the Community 's exclusive competence behind me , I must say that I am very much in favour of the renegotiation of these agreements , both because they go against the increasing importance of European sovereignty and because this draft decision is in line with EU competition and budget law .
I voted in favour of the conclusion of this agreement which , under the exclusive competence granted to the EU regarding various aspects of external aviation , is aimed at replacing certain provisions in the 47 existing bilateral agreements on air services between the EU Member States and the Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union , in order to make them compatible with EU law .
in writing . - As the Court of Justice of the European Communities has ruled , the Community has exclusive competence with respect to various aspects of external aviation which were traditionally governed by bilateral air services agreements between Member States and third countries .
Consequently , the Council authorised the Commission in June 2003 to open negotiations with third countries in order to replace certain provisions in existing bilateral agreements with Community agreements .
Thus , the Commission has negotiated an agreement with the West African Economic and Monetary Union that replaces certain provisions in the existing 47 bilateral air services agreements concluded between EU Member States and Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union .
Parliament is entitled to give its consent to the conclusion of this agreement in accordance with Rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure .
Parliament shall take a decision by means of a single vote , and no amendments to the agreement itself may be tabled .
On the basis of the above , the rapporteur suggested that the Committee on Transport and Tourism , first , and then Parliament as a whole , should give a favourable opinion on the conclusion of this agreement .
The Verts / ALE Group did so .
The exclusive competence in certain aspects of external aviation , established by the 2003 open skies judgment , enables the European Commission to negotiate agreements with third countries in order to adapt the European aviation market to EU rules and , at the same time , make it competitive and transparent .
I welcome the adoption of this agreement with the Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union , as I consider it essential for the European Union to table a policy of consistency in the external aviation sector , gradually reducing the various provisions of the current bilateral agreements on air services between both parties .
From the agreement , I would stress the clause on non-discrimination between EU air carriers , the clause on the taxation of aviation fuel pursuant to the directive on the taxation of energy products and electricity , and the fact that it brings the provisions of bilateral agreements in line with EU competition law and under regulatory control .
These measures will enable the opening up of markets and , consequently , the creation of investment opportunities for both parties .
These agreements will have to be understood as a means of strengthening strategic cooperation between both organisations .
I agree that there is a need to take measures relating to the construction sector , as this sector is quite important to the European economy : with 10 % of gross domestic product , it represents almost 65 000 small and medium-sized enterprises with fewer than 250 employees .
This proposal aims , firstly , to ensure a high level of safety for construction products and , secondly , to improve health and safety conditions for the sector 's workers .
Currently , trade on the internal market is being harmed by national technical rules that govern the free circulation of goods and services within the construction sector , which therefore necessitates the revision of Directive 89 / 106 / EEC on construction products .
Given the new market surveillance circumstances , including the new legislative framework , the proposal for a regulation on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products could be an important landmark on the way towards the updating , simplification and replacing of the directive .
I agreed with this document , because due to the scale of the marketing of construction products in the EU and obstacles to trade in the construction sector , it is important to take immediate action .
Bearing in mind that the construction sector is one of Europe 's biggest industries , accounting for 10 % of GDP and employing directly 12 million EU citizens , proper regulation is essential .
I believe that this proposal for a regulation on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products will facilitate the updating , simplification and replacement of the Construction Products Directive in light of changed circumstances concerning , for instance , market surveillance , including the new legislative framework .
Although working conditions in the construction sector have improved in recent decades , the European Union must give itself the means to carry on setting the trend for high quality in this area .
It is on this basis that I voted for this regulation laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products .
In order to ensure a high level of health and safety protection for workers and other construction product users , the new legislation on the marketing of construction products must include labelling of hazardous substances .
This regulation updates and replaces the current rules so as to cut red tape and increase transparency , in particular , through new simplified performance assessment procedures for small businesses .
I voted in favour of this document .
The construction sector is one of Europe 's biggest industries , accounting for 10 % of GDP and 50.5 % of gross fixed capital .
The sector employs directly 12 million EU citizens and an additional 26 million jobs in other sectors are dependent on it .
The economic downturn has hit the EU construction industry hard with companies across the EU going bankrupt and workers losing their livelihoods .
In the EU , there are still barriers to trade in the construction sector , because Member States still use national technical rules to prevent the free movement of goods and services in the construction sector .
The review of the Construction Products Directive in this context is a much needed boost which should help the sector by removing barriers to trade for manufacturers and thereby helping companies stay in business and workers remain in employment .
While breaking down administrative barriers , it is essential to ensure the independence and transparency of technical assessment bodies , and therefore I support the proposal to set standards on transparency and ensure the representation of all stakeholders in the technical committees of European Standardisation bodies in order to avoid conflicts of interest .
As I also emphasised in my speech yesterday , I voted in favour of this report .
We need to make progress in our actions to harmonise the global construction market .
I am referring to matters relating not only to workers ' safety and their migration , but also to the safety of the construction materials in relation to our health .
With regard to the future Product Contact Points for Construction , I would very much like them to provide impartial information , be up and running as soon as possible in Member States , and receive financial support so that they can be beneficial to citizens and the relevant companies .
I hope that the new regulation will make its impact as quickly as possible and that we , as ordinary people , will notice that we have made progress and that the construction industry as a whole is no longer one of the most dangerous sectors of activity .
The labelling of , and providing of information on , hazardous substances contained in products of all kinds , whether they be chemical or construction products , is one of the achievements of the European Union .
Ever since the REACH Regulation came into force , the EU has demonstrated the added value that it brings with regard to the safety and transparency of hazardous substances .
Once again , in Strasbourg , we have adopted a regulation that harmonises the conditions for the marketing of construction products and ensured that the ' declaration of performance ' of each product includes information on hazardous substances .
Health and safety are priorities , and we should welcome the fact that European standards allow for this high level of transparency and safety .
Nevertheless , while our internal market is now protected , can the same be said about the globalised market we are in ?
We must now use our influence with our partners outside the EU , who may not necessarily have the same level of standards .
The need for action on the marketing of construction products in the EU is vitally important , given the scale of this sector .
The construction sector is one of Europe 's biggest industries , accounting for 10 % of GDP and 50.5 % of gross fixed capital .
This sector employs 12 million EU citizens directly with another 26 million workers dependent on it .
The economic downturn has hit the EU construction industry hard with a number of companies in the EU going bankrupt and many workers losing their livelihoods .
This is also true in Romania where , after a boom in the construction market , it is now facing a desperate shortfall in orders .
According to the experts , there will be no upturn in the construction market in 2011 .
In fact , they even reckon that it might fall to its lowest level compared with the last decade .
In this climate , any measure which can be taken to support the construction sector is a welcome boost .
The review of the Construction Products Directive in this context should help the sector by removing the trade barriers facing manufacturers and would , in turn , help companies stay in business and workers remain in employment .
In terms of GDP creation , construction represents 10 % of the economic output of the European Union .
The construction market continues to face a whole range of obstacles preventing the full development of a unified market .
The aim of the submitted regulation is to amend the existing directive and thereby to simplify the conditions for marketing construction products .
It mainly involves market supervision and a common framework for the marketing of construction products .
The aim of the amendment to the directive is , in a period of economic downturn , to assist the construction sector in eliminating commercial obstacles , thereby preserving jobs and sustaining a great many construction firms that would otherwise not survive the economic downturn .
The Council , in its position in the first reading , removed the amendment proposals of Parliament , which aimed at establishing a duty to declare the hazardous materials contained in construction products ( for example , asbestos ) .
I consider this very dangerous , and I therefore support the submitted report , as it again proposes an obligation on construction firms to declare the hazardous materials contained in construction products .
We must protect the health of our citizens .
Last but not least , I would like to applaud the effort to ensure that Member States secure the independence of representatives on the Standing Committee on Construction , which assesses and verifies the properties of construction products .
Among other things , the report also includes amendment proposals for increasing health and safety protection , not only for construction workers , but also for actual users of buildings .
For the reasons mentioned above , as well as for other reasons , I have decided to support the report .
I voted in favour of this proposal for a regulation as it lays down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products and is intended to update , simplify and replace the Construction Products Directive in the light of changed circumstances , especially as regards market surveillance , including the new legislative framework .
Given the size of the construction sector , it is imperative that measures be taken regarding the marketing of construction products in the EU .
I support recognition of the need for high standards of health and safety for workers in this sector .
This proposal will remove barriers to trading for manufacturers and also help companies to remain in business and contribute to workers keeping their jobs .
The regulation on harmonising the marketing of construction products marks a step forward towards improving the operation of the internal market in this area and the free movement of construction products .
One important point to make at the same time is that the regulation 's implementation will help keep to a minimum the occurrence of unintended non-conformities of construction products with their declaration of performance , which will minimise material losses .
Preventing the risk of non-conformity is a necessity so as to avoid placing on the market products intended for sale which do not fulfil the requirements of this regulation , thereby guaranteeing that construction products perform properly and that the basic requirements applicable to construction works are met .
The draft recommendation on the setting out of harmonised conditions for marketing construction products requires the highest possible level of protection , both for workers and for persons using buildings .
I agree with the position of the rapporteur that the power to monitor possible hazardous substances in construction products is vitally necessary , and I support the amendment proposal concerning the need for information on hazardous substances to be declared on construction products .
I cannot understand the position of the Council , which completely removed this from the original proposal .
In order to increase awareness of new and existing construction products , so-called contact points should be established , which must be impartial , in other words , independent in financial and personnel terms of bodies connected with the process of obtaining CE marks .
The Council has proposed too many exceptions from the requirement to carry a CE mark , and it is essential to revise and limit this as far as possible , otherwise the entire CE marking system will become meaningless .
I support the proposed regulation in its amended form , and I will vote for its adoption .
I voted for this report because it advocates the need to remove barriers affecting trade in the construction industry .
The current economic recession has severely harmed this sector .
The proposed regulation , which will replace the directive currently in force , will help to reverse this situation .
Removing barriers to trading for manufacturers will , firstly , help companies to remain in business and , secondly , contribute to workers keeping their jobs .
According to the data in the report , and I quote : the ' construction sector is one of Europe 's biggest industries accounting for 10 % of [ gross domestic product ] and 50.5 % of gross fixed capital .
The sector employs directly 12 million EU citizens with 26 million workers dependent on the sector .
In addition , approximately 92 % of manufacturers of construction materials amounting to 65 000 enterprises are [ small and medium-sized enterprises ] with fewer than 250 employees ' .
These figures give the true scale of the importance of the construction sector to the European economy .
That is exactly why common rules are needed that govern the sector and enable the internal market to function properly .
This proposal for a regulation is intended to harmonise the marketing of construction products , updating and simplifying the current directive while taking account of the new legislative framework ( Regulation No 765 / 2008 / EC and Decision 768 / 2008 / EC ) .
It focuses on various aspects , such as the declaration of performance and CE marking , the transportation of hazardous substances , national contact points for obtaining information on construction products , the independence and transparency of all the bodies involved in this area , the recycling of construction products , greater emphasis on health and safety issues , the improvement of e-communication and the introduction of new information technology methods .
I voted in favour of this regulation which will certainly increase safety in the transportation of these products , protect health and enhance the safety conditions of all the workers in the sector .
It will also contribute to the abandonment , however gradual , of practices that are damaging to the environment .
Although the second reading of this report and the final agreement with the Council include some positive aspects , we must not forget it focuses on the principle of consolidating the single market .
In this context , this is a case of adopting a regulation that aims to establish harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products .
That is , it establishes the rules that the Member States must observe in order for their products to come onto the market in the European Union .
I believe that we can all agree on certain aspects , specifically regarding the defending of health and safety , including for workers , but also in relation to using a product during its life cycle , especially in the case of dangerous substances .
However , we cannot agree on decisions that could end up putting at risk the production of these products in countries with more-fragile economies or by small and medium-sized enterprises that find it difficult to adapt , unless there is some sort of advance support , if only to defend the interests of European economic groups which , in fact , aim to dominate the market .
The move towards the liberalisation of building products in the construction sector represents one of the requests for greater sensitivity received from small and medium-sized enterprises .
Considering the overall importance of the construction sector in all Member States , I think that further liberalisation is a necessary step forward .
In particular , I applaud the elimination of several bureaucratic constraints and the necessary traceability of products containing substances potentially harmful to humans .
For this reason , I have decided to support Mrs Stihler 's recommendation .
The functioning of the internal market is still limited by numerous barriers .
For this reason , I am very pleased to accept the adoption of the resolution on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products .
The resolution should lead to an easier flow of construction goods between Member States .
In addition , the resolution introduces important rules that make it easier for companies to do business .
Firstly , it requires Member States to create product contact points where companies will be able to obtain information about construction products .
Information about regulations will also be available that will help even the smallest company meet the new requirements for preparing user properties and regarding CE labels .
Nonetheless , we should not forget that the resolution contains a range of new requirements regarding the placing of CE labels and preparing user property declarations , which will also have to contain information about dangerous substances contained in construction products .
I hope that both the European Commission and Member States will make every effort for information about the new regulations to reach manufacturers as soon as possible , so that they can start to prepare and adjust to the resolution 's new provisions as soon as possible .
I agreed with this proposal , because the construction sector is one of Europe 's biggest industries , accounting for 10 % of GDP , and the sector employs directly 12 million EU citizens , with 26 million workers dependent on it .
Furthermore , approximately 92 % of companies manufacturing construction materials are small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
As SMEs are the backbone of our economy , this proposal must recognise their role and needs .
The review of the Construction Products Directive ( 89 / 106 / EEC ) is a much needed boost which should help the sector by removing barriers to trade for manufacturers , thereby helping companies stay in business and workers remain in employment .
The proposal for a regulation on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products ( COM ( 2008 ) 311 ) is intended to update , simplify and replace the Construction Products Directive in light of changed circumstances .
I am pleased that attention has been drawn to and particular concern is shown for hazardous substances in these products , and the ability to trace hazardous substances back to products is vitally important .
If we knew where asbestos lay in buildings , workers involved in the construction of buildings and residents alike would not have had to suffer from conditions such as mesotheliaoma .
The retabling of the amendments ( Amendments 7 , 17 , 49 ) on hazardous substances is important for future health and safety and transparency .
It is high time the Construction Products Directive was reformed and replaced with a more workable regulation that would enable us actually to ensure the free movement of construction products in the internal market .
The Commission is right in its initiative to facilitate the practical implementation of the existing directive and make that implementation process more efficient .
Construction products clearly differ from other products whose movement within the internal market is controlled by directives .
Whereas the safety requirements for a product are generally standardised across directives , construction products are intermediate products , intended for building projects , and , thanks to this special feature , the aims of the directive on construction products will be achieved by successfully determining harmonised approaches to ensuring that the declaration of performance for a product is precise and reliable .
In this respect , the new regulation will mean a major improvement .
It is also important to take into account the different circumstances prevailing around Europe in order to ensure the survival of microenterprises operating locally .
Member States naturally set differing requirements for construction works , owing to climatic conditions .
It is nevertheless important to focus attention on pointless test requirements and eliminate them , so that we can reduce the administrative burden .
I believe that this regulation will improve both the functioning of the internal market and the standardisation process for construction products in Europe .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the regulation .
I support this new approach , since the aim of the legal adjustment is not to define product safety , but to create a transparent environment in which reliable information will be provided on the properties of products .
I also applaud the fact that the European Parliament has decided to prefer electronic documents , specifically in relation to declarations on the properties of marketed products .
I have doubts over the legislative method of Amendment proposal No 45 , however , which relates to Article 17 .
While I support the proposed principle of fair and balanced representation for the various participants in the process for creating harmonised standards , I take the view that this issue should be resolved comprehensively within the revision of the European standardisation system , and not piecemeal in individual legal acts .
In my opinion , the approach that has been selected will lead to laws that lack clarity .
I supported Mrs Stihler 's report with a view to the adoption of a regulation laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products , because I believe the construction sector to be very important for the European economy .
In this context , achieving a high level of harmonisation in the rules on construction products is a goal that Europe must force itself to achieve as soon as possible .
At a time like the present , when we need to stimulate economic growth , we cannot neglect the strategic role of this sector .
The aim of the proposal is to ensure precise and reliable information on the performance of construction products , so as to be able to rely on safe buildings , built with materials that have no negative effects on human health .
In addition , I consider the steps taken on safety at work to be essential in order to protect the millions of European citizens employed in this sector , guaranteeing them a suitable level of protection .
in writing . - I wish to congratulate my Scottish colleague , Catherine Stihler , on her good work on this very technical subject .
I voted for the report , which should ensure more transparency for bodies that create standards in the construction industry , places an emphasis on recycling and gives SMEs an easier route to the single market with simplified procedures .
The fact that the civil construction sector accounts for a large part of the European Union 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) , according to the rapporteur , representing approximately 10 % of GDP and 50.5 % of gross fixed capital , justifies the harmonised conditions which have been adopted here .
The recent economic recession has brought serious problems to this industry , with business redundancies and workers losing their jobs .
Hence , any measure that can be taken to help this sector is extremely important .
The review of Construction Products Directive 89 / 106 / EEC in this context is a much needed boost which should help the sector , specifically by removing barriers to trade for manufacturers , on the one hand , and by helping companies stay in business and workers remain in employment , on the other .
The construction industry is , in fact , one of the biggest economic factors throughout Europe .
However , the crisis has hit this sector hard .
Small and medium-sized enterprises , which often serve as distributors , have suffered particularly badly and many have even gone out of business .
In order to secure the survival of companies and thus jobs , barriers to trade should be eliminated .
This can create fairer conditions that would benefit everyone involved .
For that reason , I voted against the motions tabled by the committee responsible at second reading .
The construction sector is a fundamental European sector both in terms of employment and in terms of the development of our small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is therefore imperative to support a regulation that lays down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products , guaranteeing the safety of materials used and the health of workers .
Cases of physical injury and damage to health continue to be recorded , not least for those citizens who come into daily contact with hazardous substances , such as asbestos , used in the construction of urban buildings .
I am therefore in favour of Mrs Stihler 's report , which was adopted today at second reading , because it stresses the importance , in a globalised world , of introducing common rules on the marking of substances and products used , so as to guarantee safety and reliability and , at the same time , to reduce costs for producers , with particular reference to SMEs .
The harmonisation measures in the report are too extensive .
The construction sector is a sensitive area : it is crucial for the development of infrastructure and thus , also for the individual Member States as business locations .
Labour , social and environmental standards are often important for protecting people and the environment in this sector .
Each Member State should , to a large extent , make its own decisions in this regard .
Therefore , I have voted against this report .
The proposal for a regulation of Parliament and of the Council laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products is aimed at ensuring the free movement of construction products on the internal market .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a regulation precisely because guaranteeing clear and reliable information through the use of CE marking on marketed construction products represents another step forward towards a free , competitive market that is capable of protecting small and medium-sized enterprises .
Since construction products are the intermediate goods of a finished structure , the harmonisation of new European rules guarantees the safety and quality of the structure , puts all construction companies on a level playing field , improves controls on materials already on the market , and finally results in greater transparency in the construction products trade .
I voted for this report because I believe that it is necessary to reduce the barriers that are preventing greater fluidity of trade in the construction industry .
The construction industry has been particularly affected by the current economic situation , and the proposed regulation is intended to promote the free , effective and transparent movement of goods and services to the construction industry .
The removal of obstacles to cross-border activity and the elimination of national administrative and technical barriers have a crucial role in the construction industry .
In fact , in the construction industry , the Member States are hiding behind national technical standards in order to block the free circulation of goods and services .
Given that the construction sector represents 10 % of gross domestic product in the EU and is currently experiencing a period of severe recession , all measures that can be taken to help boost construction are welcome and will have my vote .
Indeed , these measures will allow companies to stay in business and workers remain in employment .
Across the EU , there are still too many barriers to trade in the construction sector , resulting in the Member States ' justification of the technical rules put in place to limit the free movement of goods and services .
This fast expanding sector generates 10 % of GDP and 50.5 % of gross fixed capital .
It provides jobs for 12 million EU citizens and 92 % of it is made up of small and medium-sized enterprises - the backbone of our economy .
Therefore , I think it is necessary to bring in measures to harmonise the market in these products , as well as to guarantee a high level of health and safety for workers in the sector .
In view of the recession - which caused major problems in the sector , including company failures - we need liberalisation measures that will ensure the economic survival of businesses and preserve jobs .
This proposal for a regulation is intended to update , simplify and replace the Construction Products Directive in light of changed circumstances concerning , for example , market surveillance .
It also aims to provide greater protection in terms of CE marking , hazardous substances , national product contact points , independence and transparency , health and safety , and e-communication .
The need for action on the marketing of construction products in the EU is vitally important , given the scale of this sector .
According to the European Committee for Standardisation , the construction sector is one of Europe 's biggest industries , accounting for 10 % of GDP and 50.5 % of gross fixed capital .
This sector employs 12 million EU citizens directly , with another 26 million workers dependent on it .
In addition , approximately 92 % of manufacturers of construction materials , amounting to 65 000 enterprises , are SMEs with fewer than 250 employees As SMEs are the backbone of our economy , this proposal calls for recognition of their role and needs , as well as for a high level of health and safety for those working in this sector .
I voted for this report as the proposal helps boost the industry 's competitiveness by simplifying current legislation , increasing transparency and reducing the administrative burden which businesses have to bear , as well as to support Romania 's interest in introducing the compulsory assessment of performance of products covered by harmonised standards , the issuing of the declaration of performance , and affixing of the CE marking .
Given the importance of the construction sector within the European economy , it is vital to remove the technical barriers to trade in the field of construction products in order to enhance their free movement within the internal market .
It is therefore important to support the establishment of harmonised technical specifications which , given the necessary emphasis on health and safety issues , also allow the single market to be consolidated .
Today , we voted in plenary on the recommendation on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products .
Given the sector 's importance , it is essential to develop measures on the marketing of construction products within the EU .
According to the European Committee for Standardisation ( CEN ) , the construction sector is one of Europe 's biggest industries accounting for 10 % of GDP and 50.5 % of gross fixed capital .
This proposal for a regulation lays down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products , through the introduction of common rules on marking , aimed at strengthening the guarantees relating to product safety and reliability and , at the same time , at reducing costs for producers , with particular reference to SMEs .
in writing . - This regulation comes before the Parliament for second reading in view of its final adoption .
Parliament 's first reading took place during the previous parliamentary term .
The Council adopted its position in 2010 and subsequently , there were intense informal trialogue negotiations under the Belgian Presidency in order to reach a compromise solution .
This regulation is very technical but is politically highly relevant for the Greens because its main purpose is to harmonise requirements regarding the marketing of construction products .
The Verts / ALE Group 's major concerns have been to make sure , inter alia , that ( i ) procedures should be transparent ( in particular , the standardisation bodies should not be monopolised by representatives of the major industries , and the concerns of SMEs or other stakeholders should be taken into account ) ; ( ii ) construction requirements and procedures should be able to boost innovative and more ecological patterns ; ( iii ) special procedures for ' micro-enterprises ' should not allow the industry to circumvent the requirements or procedures .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe that there are still too many ' barriers ' to trade in the construction sector in Europe .
The review of this directive should help to eliminate trade barriers , thereby protecting jobs in construction companies , which are still affected by the global economic crisis .
There are plans to introduce specific new measures to verify that construction products are being recycled and to promote their reuse as a way of meeting the EU 's climate change targets .
New safeguards are also needed to protect the health and safety of employees in this sector , in which a high number of work-related deaths are , unfortunately , still recorded .
Lastly , the request to gradually replace hard copies of documents with computerised versions is intended to make the construction product market even more harmonised .
Despite the fact that the introduction to the regulation contains some unacceptable general statements , in particular , regarding the completely free movement of services in the construction sector - which we cannot support because there will be a risk of unfair competition until labour costs have been harmonised between the various Member States - we shall vote in favour .
We shall do so because the regulation deals exclusively with the legislation on the marketing of products for the construction sector , which , in this period of economic recession , has had very serious repercussions with the closure of many businesses and the loss of jobs .
The proposal provides for the harmonisation and labelling of products containing hazardous substances , and also simplifies , updates and supersedes current rules so as to eliminate certain regulatory obstacles for the benefit of workers and of small and medium-sized enterprises alike .
in writing . - I am extremely pleased that the construction report , for which I was rapporteur , was supported and voted into legislation by my colleagues .
The report will result in hazardous substances being listed on the labelling of construction products and further studies to follow on the subject from the Commission .
There are also provisions to make it easier for SMEs to place their products on the internal market .
The need for greater transparency in approving products with the ' CE ' marking has been addressed and I look forward to the measures being introduced in July 2013 .
I voted for the proposal for a regulation laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products and repealing Council Directive 89 / 106 / EEC .
The construction sector is a large industrial sector in Europe , employing 12 million EU citizens directly , with another 26 million workers dependent on it .
The economic downturn has hit the EU construction industry hard , with many workers losing their jobs .
This led to a drop of up to 14.2 % in the sector 's activity between 2008 and 2009 .
The review of the Construction Products Directive ( 89 / 106 / EEC ) in this context offers a measure of support for the construction sector by removing the trade barriers facing manufacturers , thereby helping companies to stay in business and workers to remain in employment .
Construction works , both as a whole and in their separate parts , must be fit for their intended use , taking into account , in particular , the health and safety of those involved throughout the life cycle of the works .
Construction works must also be energy efficient , using as little energy as possible during their life cycle and , therefore , at the lowest cost to users .
I believe that the construction sector broadly reflects the economic situation .
In the second quarter of 2010 , the Lithuanian construction sector shrank by up to 42.9 % , one of the steepest declines in Europe .
Since then , the situation has improved slightly , but let us be under no illusions - the Lithuanian construction sector is taking a long time to recover .
Therefore , it is rather premature to talk of a steady recovery .
There is still room for improvement .
For instance , my country 's construction sector would recover more quickly if the take-up of EU aid was improved .
The construction sector is one of the biggest branches of Lithuanian and European industry .
The sector employs 12 million EU citizens directly , with 26 million workers dependent on the sector .
The construction sector is very important for Lithuania because it creates a lot of jobs , strengthens internal demand and brings money into the budget .
This sector is also important for small and medium-sized enterprises , the cornerstone of our economy .
Approximately 92 % of companies manufacturing construction materials are SMEs with fewer than 250 employees .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to use e-communication and IT methods to improve the single market in construction products .
This is important as we look to the future .
in writing . - The construction industry represents various vital issues in the European Union , ranging from its significant contribution to the economy to the safety of EU citizens in their homes and places of work .
My vote in favour of the Construction Products Regulation reflects the need for a modernised , safe and transparent directive on construction products .
The proposal calls for improvements to health and safety procedures across the sector and clear declarations of hazardous substances .
Furthermore , the provision of a ' CE ' mark of confidence on products will give those conducting their own projects the confidence that the materials they are using are safe .
The European economy is based heavily on the construction sector , which accounts for 10 % of EU GDP and directly employs 12 million EU citizens .
Most of those employed find themselves in SMEs , which form a vital part of the European economy .
However , construction remains one of the most dangerous areas of work .
I thus support this regulation to improve the safety of European citizens in their places of work and at home , whether they be carrying out projects independently or professionally .
I voted for this report , which seeks to make EU humanitarian aid more effective .
The European Consensus on humanitarian aid is major step forward .
Nevertheless , the review of its action plan must be more coherent , using objectives that are more measurable and indicators that are more reliable .
That is the only way that we will manage to deliver aid more effectively .
Given the increasing number and severity of natural disasters caused by climate change , I agree with the position put forward that it is important , not just to provide one-off aid , but also to provide support for communities ' own disaster-preparedness capabilities : the Hyogo action plan needs to be strengthened .
Efforts also need to be concentrated on human rights issues arising from internal conflicts and complex crises , improving the capacities of the bodies involved to access populations ; this will only be possible by making a clear distinction between military , political and humanitarian roles .
I also agree with the effective application of a European rapid-intervention capability .
I voted in favour of this document , because it is crucial for more effective provision of humanitarian aid .
The European Consensus on humanitarian aid is the first common document on humanitarian aid policy to have been produced since the adoption of the 1996 regulation .
It is a fundamentally important tool , particularly against the background of profound change in humanitarian affairs , such as the abundance of natural disasters and armed conflicts , resulting in the displacement of huge numbers of people , etc .
I hope that the European Consensus on humanitarian aid will be an important step towards achieving the most effective EU actions in the field of humanitarian aid and will contribute to the promotion of humanitarian principles and international humanitarian law , coordination and consistency in the delivery of EU humanitarian aid , clarification on the use of military and civil protection resources and capabilities , disaster risk reduction and reinforcement of the link between emergency aid , rehabilitation and development .
This report commits the European Union to close cooperation revolving around a shared vision on humanitarian aid .
I think that the severity of natural disasters is also down to the human actions at the root of climate change .
I also encourage Member States to get involved in implementing this European Consensus on humanitarian aid .
I support the actions promoted in this area : the promotion of humanitarian principles and international humanitarian law ; improvements in terms of quality of the coordination and consistency in the delivery of EU humanitarian aid ; clarification on the use of military and civil protection resources and capabilities in accordance with the Humanitarian Consensus and UN guidelines ; disaster risk reduction and reinforcement of the link between emergency aid , rehabilitation and development .
Consequently , I voted in favour of this report .
The European Union is a global player .
It is with this strong belief that the authors of the Treaty of Lisbon strengthened Europe 's ambitions on the world stage .
The humanitarian dimension has an important place in this major project .
The Union is already the world 's largest donor , providing 40 % of all contributions .
This joint declaration ' is based on common principles and approaches and designed to encourage concerted and coordinated action within the EU and with other actors and thus improve the collective response to humanitarian crises ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , which recalls that humanitarian aid must be provided in an appropriate and effective manner ; stresses the importance of good coordination ; emphasises the secondary nature of assistance provided by military and civil protection capabilities and the vital importance of reducing risks caused by natural disasters ; and , lastly , calls on the Union to strengthen the link between emergency aid , reconstruction and development .
I voted in favour of this report .
The European Union is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid , providing more than 40 % of all official international humanitarian assistance .
There has been a significant increase across the globe in the number and severity of natural disasters caused , particularly , by the impact of climate change .
The humanitarian context has changed profoundly in recent years , hence , the need to improve the EU 's disaster response capability .
I believe that the European Union must invest greater efforts in disaster risk reduction and provide support - in addition to one-off aid - for local communities ' disaster-preparedness capabilities .
It is worrying that violations of international humanitarian law are increasingly common and the situation in the field is deteriorating .
I agree that the European Union must take action to improve the coordination of humanitarian aid and stop any kind of abuse of this aid .
There were many humanitarian crises in 2010 : Haiti , Pakistan , and I could go on .
The tragedies that certain populations , often the most disadvantaged ones , experience throughout the world require swift and effective action by international organisations but also by the European Union , which is a major player in the fields of development assistance and crisis management .
Hence , today , Tuesday 18 January , we have adopted Mrs Striffler 's report in order to call for increased funding for humanitarian aid .
We should also create a European rapid reaction force for all these crises .
The European Commission is receptive to this idea , and it ought to present a proposal with a view to optimising the existing civil protection system .
Clearly , we will have to use the resources that are already available in the Member States but , at the same time , we also need to coordinate ourselves in a much more effective and much more practical manner .
Slow responses , duplicated aid and inconsistency on the ground are just some of the things that we need to eliminate .
There is great scope for improvement , and the resolution adopted by this House is intended to provide an initial response along these lines .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's report on implementation of the European Consensus on humanitarian aid : the mid-term review of its action plan and the way forward .
The European Consensus on humanitarian aid commits the Union to close cooperation around a shared vision of humanitarian aid .
The Consensus aims to improve the European Union 's effectiveness , to defend and promote the basic humanitarian principles of humanity , neutrality , impartiality and independence , and to advocate the observance of international humanitarian law .
When the mid-term review was carried out , it was observed that there is a lack of specific information about actions undertaken or yet to be taken , and that apart from representatives involved in humanitarian work , few people have any awareness of the Consensus .
A major effort is therefore required to raise the profile of the Consensus and make the Member States , other institutions and military bodies more familiar with it .
The humanitarian context has changed profoundly in recent years , making it all the more important that the European Consensus on humanitarian aid be applied rigorously and energetically .
I would like to stress the need to invest greater efforts in disaster risk reduction and to provide support - in addition to one-off aid - for communities ' own disaster-preparedness capabilities .
In addition , more efforts ought to be focused on incorporating gender and protection against sexual violence , which is increasingly being used as a weapon of war , into humanitarian responses .
The European Union is the biggest donor in the world , contributing 40 % of the global aid provided .
More than 100 million people in 70 plus countries received aid amounting to nearly EUR 1 billion from the European Union in 2009 .
Unfortunately , however , we very often advocate making donations to states which choose later on to accept direct foreign investments from China .
Donations and investments perhaps ought to be at least coordinated instead of us bemoaning the fact that China has become the second biggest economy in the world .
The humanitarian context has changed profoundly in recent years , making it all the more relevant that the Humanitarian Consensus be applied rigorously and robustly .
In this changing context , the first factor to mention is the significant increase in the number and severity of natural disasters caused mainly by climate change .
This implies a need also to provide , in addition to one-off aid , support for communities ' own disaster-preparedness capabilities .
Political undertakings to this effect have been made - in the form of the EU strategy and the Hyogo action plan - but they are still fraught with problems in terms of their implementation .
in writing . - UKIP believes that the best reaction to a humanitarian disaster is for independent nation states to coordinate their aid efforts voluntarily , and not to have them set centrally by the undemocratic EU .
We note the debacle of the EU 's slow and small efforts in Haiti , and thus we feel that the EU cannot be trusted in future humanitarian crises .
I voted in favour of this report because the European Union is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid , contributing more than 40 % of all official international humanitarian assistance .
In 2009 , it granted humanitarian aid to approximately 115 million people in more than 70 countries , to a total of EUR 950 million .
Through its humanitarian policy , the European Union has demonstrated its commitment to supporting people in situations of extreme vulnerability in third countries .
I agree with the mid-term review of the humanitarian consensus as I believe that it is vital to make an effort to increase its visibility among Member States , the other institutions and military players .
I would urge the Commission to redouble its efforts in reducing disaster risk , and to pay attention to the ever increasing violations of international humanitarian law and to the most vulnerable groups , such as women , children and people who have been forcibly displaced .
It is also important to encourage dialogue between the political , military or humanitarian bodies active in the same working environment , along with the creation of a European rapid reaction capacity , namely , a European civil protection force .
I voted against the report on humanitarian aid for two reasons .
Initially , because it insists on linking civil protection and humanitarian aid with the European External Action Service and its foreign policy , whereas , obviously , intervention criteria should be clearly humanitarian and humanitarian alone .
Also , because I do not believe that linking civil and military capabilities in order to deal with humanitarian crisis situations is a move in the right direction .
Obviously , particular knowledge and the use of special equipment , which has always been owned and used by the military , are needed in certain circumstances .
Therefore , in order to preserve and safeguard the purely civil character of humanitarian missions , civil protection could be financed so that it has such specific equipment and , of course , so that civil protection workers can be trained , rather than keeping up all this military spending .
It is the only way to provide real and effective help in humanitarian crises without facing the dangers of a military presence .
While carrying out the mid-term review of the European Consensus on humanitarian aid , I cannot fail to point out that it is regrettable that public awareness of it has not been at the desired level and that the Member States have played little part in implementing it .
However , instead of finding fault , we must promote and set out the path that we should be following as regards humanitarian aid .
The humanitarian situation has changed a fair amount in recent years , with natural disasters , more displaced persons , the multiplication of various internal conflicts , food crises , etc .
More than ever , there is an urgent need for a balanced and effective global reaction that is based on specific needs , is results-oriented , and is guided by the principle that saving means of subsistence is saving lives , whilst considering the involved areas ' need for self-development and self-sufficiency .
To achieve this , it is crucial for the Consensus to promote these humanitarian values , and for various players to optimise resources .
Once again , I would argue that there is an urgent need to create a European Civil Protection Force following the Barnier report of May 2006 .
I would congratulate my colleague , Mrs Striffler , on the positive content of the proposals she has tabled , and I would reiterate my position that the Consensus is an essential instrument , with every relevance to the current situation .
The Humanitarian Consensus is a key instrument which especially shows its worth in the current humanitarian context of profound change .
We have witnessed the significant increase in the number and severity of natural disasters caused mainly by the impact of climate change , the increasing incidence of complex crises , especially internal conflicts , as well as the changing nature of conflicts , many of which entail the displacement of huge numbers of people .
Violations of international humanitarian law are increasingly common .
One particularly shocking aspect of such violations is the increasing use of sexual violence as a weapon of war .
I support the rapporteur 's position and I think that strong measures are required to increase protection against acts of sexual violence in humanitarian circumstances .
I concur with the position of the report 's author , indicating that the recent humanitarian disasters in Haiti and Pakistan have demonstrated once again the need to improve the EU 's disaster-response capability in terms of effectiveness , speed of response , coordination and visibility .
I also support the creation of a European rapid response capability ( European civil protection force ) .
The European Consensus on humanitarian aid reached on 18 December 2007 by Parliament , the Council and the Commission represented an important step forward in terms of the definition , scope and spectrum of European humanitarian aid .
We are proceeding with this report , the conclusions of which I strongly support , to its mid-term review , as envisaged in the Action Plan of May 2008 .
At this juncture , I would like to congratulate Mrs Striffler on the excellent work that she has done .
As regards the ideas expressed in the report , I would like to highlight the emphasis on ' genuine and continuous ... participation ... of beneficiaries in the management of aid ' .
I have been advocating this principle , which should lead the EU to focus its action increasingly on civil society and local authorities .
This will reduce the focus on EU-Member State relations , which should continue to play a role , but not in an exclusive relationship , as it has often manifested itself up until now .
I would also like to highlight the need to submit proposals aimed at ' the establishment of a European civil protection force , based on optimising the existing Community Civil Protection Mechanism and pooling existing national resources , ' which would mean an increase in the marginal cost for synergies achieved , through the capacity that has already been established in the Member States .
Humanitarian aid now has a larger and more important role than in the past .
Differing rates of development and growing inequality in opportunity and resource distribution in geographical , social and generational terms , increasing climate change ( for which humans are partly to blame ) and the associated increase in natural disasters , increased environmental pollution , imbalanced anthropic pressure concentrated in large urban areas , and uneven population growth in some areas of the planet , have led to a rising number of humanitarian disasters in which aid takes on an essential role in restoring basic living conditions and human dignity .
In view of this , if humanitarian aid is needed to assist people hit by disasters , then in turn , any interventions as a result of EU foreign policy - which is still to be defined - cannot be apportioned according to each Member State 's areas of interest and influence , but should take on a European dimension .
in writing . - I support this report on implementation of the European consensus on humanitarian aid .
The EU 's humanitarian policy is the practical expression of its commitment to supporting people in need of assistance when they are at their most vulnerable .
The European Union is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid .
Its contribution represents more than 40 % of all official international humanitarian assistance .
In 2009 , we provided a total of EUR 950 million to approximately 115 million people in more than 70 countries .
The European Consensus on humanitarian aid , signed on 18 December 2007 , underscores the will of the EU to cooperate closely in this field in order to be as effective as possible , to defend and promote the basic humanitarian principles of humanity , neutrality , impartiality and independence , and actively to advocate the observance of international humanitarian law .
There are many challenges ahead .
The recent humanitarian disasters in Haiti and Pakistan demonstrated once again that the EU 's disaster-response capability needs to be greatly enhanced .
Disaster risk reduction needs to be fully integrated into policies for development aid and humanitarian aid .
We also need clarification on the use of military and civil protection resources and capabilities in accordance with the consensus and the UN guidelines .
The recent humanitarian disasters in Haiti and Pakistan demonstrated once again the need to improve the EU 's disaster response capability in terms of effectiveness , coordination and visibility .
That is why I voted in favour of this report , which advocates the establishment of a European rapid reaction capability ( European civil protection force ) - a concept launched by Commissioner Barnier following the tsunami in Asia and repeatedly urged since then by the European Parliament .
This capability should constitute an optimisation of the tools already available , which would become more effective and visible , the aim being to enable , through closer cooperation , the immediate mobilisation of all necessary resources .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that the action plan of the European Consensus needs to be reviewed .
The humanitarian situation has changed significantly in recent years , not least with the significantly increasing number and severity of natural disasters , which are also caused by the impact of climate change .
It is essential to fully integrate disaster risk reduction into policies for development aid and humanitarian aid , making it all the more important that the Humanitarian Consensus be applied rigorously and energetically .
It is clear that disaster situations and humanitarian emergencies are multiplying throughout the world today .
The European Union has been taking on an important role in combating these scourges , and I hope that it will continue to do so and even that it will strengthen this role , in as far as is possible .
However , it is not enough to give a hungry person a fish : they must be taught to fish .
I think that helping to provide less well-off countries with human and material resources capable of facing up to future crises is almost as important as confronting emergencies that occur .
The European Consensus on humanitarian aid merits my support , and I hope that the compromise between the European institutions will translate into making increasingly better use of the resources available to the Union , whilst always prioritising giving to those who have least and suffer most , and total neutrality in terms of political or ideological agendas .
In recent years , the world has witnessed a significant rise in disasters , in terms of both the geographic area affected and the number of victims .
Although it is a matter of great importance , it does not fall within the scope of this discussion to address the impact of climate change on these disasters .
The signing of the European Consensus on humanitarian aid by the Council of the European Union , Parliament and the Commission on 18 December 2007 represented a significant step forward in terms of humanitarian aid , especially as an action plan was envisaged for five years , providing for a mid-term review .
That is the objective of this report .
The whole world knows and recognises the key role of the EU in humanitarian aid .
Parliament has tackled this issue at several sittings , particularly through our speeches .
Indeed , recent events in Brazil , Haiti , Pakistan , Madeira and other places cause us to ponder the effectiveness of support for civil protection and humanitarian aid .
As was demonstrated in this report , in spite of the limited information available , there are positive developments at a European level , as evidenced by the creation of the Council 's Working Party on Humanitarian Aid and Food Aid .
However , much remains to be done .
The EU 's so-called ' humanitarian aid ' plays a not insignificant role in what is increasingly defined as its foreign policy .
It frequently makes use of genuine needs for aid and cooperation to which it is important to respond , particularly emergencies , whilst a great variety of objectives are being pursued in practice .
The actions taken and the methods used , which include military intervention and occupation , seek to reproduce and deepen forms of political and economic domination , and to attempt to control the markets and natural resources of developing countries .
Against the current backdrop of the deepening crisis of capitalism , these intentions also never fail to include the containing of peoples ' struggles for greater justice and social progress , taking on diverse expressions and forms all over the world .
Disguised by supposed ' humanitarian ' interests , a number of non-governmental organisations , logistics companies and others are beneficiaries of and accomplices to these policies , promoting their own interests and those of their backers ; these interests may be public or private , and may include political , financial or religious motivations , amongst others .
In principle , we are in favour of specific expressions of solidarity with the victims of any type of disaster or conflict .
However , these must be based on the interests of these peoples , on respect for international law , and on the independence and sovereignty of these countries .
I believe that we must improve the tools available to the European Union for responding to the kind of disasters that Haiti has endured , with the earthquake just a year ago followed by the more recent cholera epidemic .
My group and I believe that we must promote increased funding for humanitarian aid so as to allow for more interventions , in particular , to help the most vulnerable people .
In doing so , we must ensure that we make a clear distinction between the remits of military and humanitarian bodies , since military resources should be used as little as possible and as a last resort .
in writing . - The EU as a bloc is the world 's largest contributor of humanitarian aid .
Nevertheless , recent catastrophes have highlighted certain shortcomings in the EU 's ability to act in a speedy , efficient and coordinated manner .
The Striffler reports underlines some of these concerns and it is to be hoped that positive action results from today 's vote .
I agreed with this report because this report is not only a formal exercise but also an opportunity to reflect on humanitarian aid today .
The humanitarian context has changed profoundly in recent years .
In this changing context , the first factor to highlight is the significant increase in the number and severity of natural disasters caused , particularly , by the impact of climate change .
This implies a need to invest greater efforts in disaster risk reduction and to provide support - in addition to one-off aid - for communities ' own disaster-preparedness capabilities .
Further factors are the increasing incidence of complex crises , especially internal conflicts , and the changing nature of conflicts , many of which entail the displacement of huge numbers of people ( refugees and internally displaced persons ) , as well as increased violence against civilians .
Violations of international humanitarian law are increasingly common and the situation in the field is deteriorating .
One particularly shocking aspect of such violations is the increasing use of sexual violence as a weapon of war .
Major efforts ought to be focused on incorporating protection against sexual violence into humanitarian responses .
Therefore , more specific attention should be directed at the most vulnerable groups of people , including women , children and people who have been forcibly displaced ( whether internally or as refugees ) .
The recent humanitarian disasters in Haiti and Pakistan demonstrated once again the need to improve the EU 's disaster-response capability in terms of effectiveness , coordination and visibility .
A year on from the earthquake in Haiti , we can see that the steps we are taking , or the way in which we are helping , are not perfect .
For this reason , the European consensus that arose to facilitate the provision of humanitarian aid must not be squandered .
The EU , as one of the richest and most developed regions in the world , has a moral duty to help the weak and those in need .
In particular , we must maintain solidarity with the victims of natural disasters and catastrophes who are not prepared for what happens to them .
We should , therefore , take action to strengthen cooperation between Member States in this area and facilitate the sharing of best practices .
We should do everything so that the aid system is efficient and effective and not one cent is wasted .
Cooperation is , therefore , necessary with other international , non-governmental bodies and organisations that also provide aid , in order to make this more effective .
I voted in favour of the Striffler report because there is still a great need to emphasise the importance and , hence , the sensitivity of this issue .
Parliament 's aim , with its vote , was to stress the need for the European Union 's objective to become one of upholding the human rights of neutrality , impartiality and independence .
As far as solidarity is concerned , we are never fully prepared or equipped with excellent plans .
We must increasingly urge all the European players , including the Commission and the individual Member States , to encourage the promotion of universal respect for human rights .
For my part , I shall continue to support this modus vivendi , including within the Committee on Budgets , of which I am a member , and to support any measures designed to increase the financial assistance given to those activities that are more specifically aimed at safeguarding these important rights , so that the European Union continues its efforts to assist and support the sections of the population that need it most .
A dramatic rise has been seen recently in the number and severity of natural disasters , whether man-made or not , along with an increase in the adverse impact caused by violations of international humanitarian law and poor governance .
As is well known , the European Union is the world 's number one donor of humanitarian aid , contributing approximately 40 % of official international humanitarian assistance .
This is borne out by the 115 million recipients of aid from approximately 70 countries who have benefited from a total contribution of nearly EUR 1 billion .
I voted for this consensus as I think that the EU demonstrates in action through its humanitarian policy its commitment to people who are truly in need of aid .
In this respect , we need sufficient human and material resources and we must support improved coordination between the institutions and organisations involved in this process .
in writing . - I strongly welcome this report , which makes suggestions on how the Consensus on humanitarian aid can be strengthened .
It highlights a number of areas that require more attention , including the promotion of humanitarian principles and international humanitarian law ; issues of quality , coordination and consistency in the delivery of EU humanitarian aid ; clarification on the use of military and civil protection resources and capabilities in accordance with the Consensus and the UN guidelines , and reinforcement of the link between emergency aid , rehabilitation and development .
The submitted report is a very timely response to the many natural disasters we have experienced in recent years .
It is essential for the EU to learn from the experience of providing effective aid after previous disasters , for example , in Australia , Haiti and Russia , in order to have completely clear procedures and resources for providing effective humanitarian aid .
The continent of Europe has so far avoided disasters on such a scale , but this does not mean that we should not prepare an effective range of structures and resources .
Experience from recent years shows that securing transport into affected areas is not possible without technical and organisational support from military units .
Non-governmental humanitarian organisations do not have these capabilities .
It is evident that the inhabitants of affected areas very often remain cut off in terms of transport links around the country , and the capacity of civil aviation resources is limited .
If the use of military forces is justifiable and acceptable anywhere , then it is surely in the case of humanitarian or natural disasters .
Natural disasters have certainly been occurring with increasingly severity in recent times .
It is also the case that the EU is one of the chief global players in terms of humanitarian aid , and it is important that this role be maintained in spite of the crises that we are experiencing .
Nevertheless , I believe that in addition to helping the most disadvantaged and all those who are affected by these disasters , it is also necessary to provide the poorest countries , and therefore those that are most vulnerable to this type of situation , with human resources and funding so that external aid is not so critical .
This can only be achieved with development policies and aid to these countries on the basis of a medium- and long-term perspective .
The humanitarian environment is increasingly complex and difficult : humanitarian law is frequently infringed ; confusion over roles means that humanitarian workers are increasingly targeted , and natural disasters are increasing in number and intensity .
In 2010 , we witnessed the three greatest humanitarian catastrophes in recent years : the earthquake in Haiti ; the drought in the Sahel ; and the floods in Pakistan .
However , as Commissioner Kristalina Georgieva said , ' The quality of our humanitarian aid is of the utmost importance ' .
It ' saves some 140 million people every year ' .
With these considerations in mind , I agree with the rapporteur when she calls for a substantial increase in funding for humanitarian aid and when she observes that the Consensus on humanitarian aid is not sufficiently known .
We must continue to raise awareness and to promote humanitarian principles and the principles of international law .
We must , as I have already had the opportunity to , advocate the creation of a European rapid reaction capability .
We must increase the focus on disaster risk prevention .
The report on implementation of the European Consensus on humanitarian aid contains some important proposals which need to be acted on in the future .
One example is the development of capabilities and resources for civil protection , with the key idea being the creation of a European civil protection force .
Also of significance is improved coordination , not only between the Member States , but also at the international level , with the United Nations .
The approach of procuring foodstuffs and the like locally in crisis situations and thus supporting the local economy is also a sensible idea .
Unfortunately , in a few areas , the report is not specific or ambitious enough , for which reason I abstained from the vote .
I voted in favour of this report because , as the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid , the European Union must pay greater attention to humanitarian aid in those areas where it is needed as a matter of urgency , given that there has been a dramatic increase in the number of natural disasters and internal conflicts .
The Member States should contribute more effectively to the process of implementing this Consensus , by including it in national humanitarian strategies .
Given the need for humanitarian aid , it is necessary to allocate increased funding to it , making rapid and effective funding of operations possible .
I agree with the proposal that a very clear distinction needs to be maintained between the remits of military and humanitarian bodies , so that military resources and capabilities are used only in a very limited number of cases and as a last resort , particularly in those regions affected by armed conflicts .
Furthermore , in order to ensure appropriate and effective coordination of humanitarian aid , a European civil protection force and a European rapid reaction capacity must be created .
The European Union is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid .
Its contribution represents more than 40 % of all official international humanitarian assistance .
The EU 's humanitarian policy shows its commitment to the people of countries that need assistance .
Following the EU 's signature of the European Consensus on humanitarian aid , many actions have been taken on cooperation in this field in order to optimise its effectiveness and to promote the basic humanitarian principles of humanity , neutrality and impartiality in acting to assist those most in need .
This aside , it would appear that there is still a lack of awareness of the Consensus .
We therefore need to make a greater effort to bolster its visibility .
I believe that , in a sector as fragile as humanitarian aid , it is important to be aware of how circumstances have changed over the years , bearing in mind the significant increase in the number and severity of natural disasters .
As a result , I think we need to invest greater efforts in disaster risk reduction and provide support for communities ' own capabilities in this regard .
In order for humanitarian aid to follow a steady path to its full deployment , we must continue doggedly to argue for the preservation of the ' humanitarian space ' .
By voting in favour of the Striffler report , I hope that we can move on to the adoption of a practical action plan .
The European Union , through the Commission and the Member States , is the world 's largest provider of humanitarian and development aid .
Its contribution represents more than 40 % of all official international humanitarian assistance .
A rigorous mid-term review of the implementation of the European Consensus on humanitarian aid can only conclude that it is necessary to encourage greater awareness of this mechanism , and greater coordination and efficiency among all the entities involved .
Economic contributions alone can be fruitless if they are not accompanied by close and effective coordination at all stages and for all forms of EU aid .
We are living in a critical time : the humanitarian situation has changed profoundly over recent years , making it all the more important that the Humanitarian Consensus be applied rigorously and energetically .
I am voting in favour of this report , and I would like to call for a policy of systematic dialogue , greater cooperation on the ground , better management and a commitment to preventing disasters .
I support the creation of a European civil protection force , following the Barnier report published in May 2006 .
The EU is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid , providing more than 40 % of international humanitarian assistance .
The European Consensus on humanitarian aid , signed on 18 December 2007 by the Council , Parliament and the European Commission , on the basis of a five-year action plan , commits the EU and the Member States to close cooperation in this field .
Action No 33 provides for a mid-term review of the action plan to deal with the lack of awareness of the humanitarian sector , serious climate change , the rising incidence of complex crises and growing violence .
We therefore advocate the establishment of a European rapid response capability ( European civil protection force ) , as conceived by Mr Barnier , in order to optimise the tools already available , the aim being to enable , through closer coordination , the immediate mobilisation of all necessary resources .
In view of the figures reported and the Treaty of Lisbon 's introduction of a proper EU humanitarian aid policy , I totally agree that we need a mid-term review focused on strengthening the action plan regarding the promotion of humanitarian principles , on the delivery of humanitarian aid , on clarifying the use of military and civil protection resources , and on disaster risk reduction and reinforcement of the link between emergency aid and development .
I voted in favour of this report , which presents an overview of the implementation of the European Consensus on humanitarian aid , formulating proposals which aim to help strengthen its visibility and greater efficiency in achieving its objectives .
This instrument has taken on even greater importance in the current humanitarian context , which has been marked by a significant increase in the number and severity of natural disasters , and it is vital that efforts be made towards the complete fulfilment of the commitments arising from this , and that the Member States have greater involvement in its implementation .
Today , we voted in plenary on the report on the European Consensus on humanitarian aid .
The European Union , through the Commission and the Member States combined , is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid .
Its contribution represents more than 40 % of all official international humanitarian assistance .
The Union 's humanitarian policy is the practical expression of its commitment to supporting people in third countries in need of assistance when they are at their most vulnerable .
It is important to emphasise that the provision of aid must be based solely on identified need and the degree of vulnerability , that the quality and quantity of the aid are determined primarily by an initial evaluation , and that the evaluation process needs to be further improved , particularly with regard to the application of vulnerability criteria , especially regarding women , children and disabled groups .
Furthermore , the genuine and continuous involvement - and , if possible , participation - of beneficiaries in the management of aid is one of the essential conditions for the quality of humanitarian responses , particularly in the case of long-term crises .
in writing . - Since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty on 1 December 2009 , the Union 's humanitarian activities have been governed by Article 214 TFEU , establishing a specific EU policy for humanitarian aid as a competence shared between the Member States and the Union .
Thus , when Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1257 / 96 of 20 June 1996 concerning humanitarian aid is revised under the codecision procedure , it will have its own legal basis .
The Lisbon Treaty also provided for the creation of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
The DEVE Committee expressed its concern that humanitarian aid should not be instrumentalised under EEAS and advocates preserving the independence of DG ECHO .
It also asks for the roles of Commissioners Ashton and Georgieva to be clarified .
As the mid-term review offers an opportunity to step up the EU 's efforts in a number of areas , the report draws attention to the following issues , among others : the promotion of humanitarian principles and international humanitarian law ; the issues of quality , coordination and consistency in the delivery of EU humanitarian aid ; clarification on the use of military and civil protection resources and capabilities in accordance with the consensus and the UN guidelines ; disaster risk reduction and reinforcement of the link between emergency aid , rehabilitation and development .
The European Union , through the Commission and the Member States combined , is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid , contributing more than 40 % of all official international assistance .
In 2009 alone , the Commission provided a total of EUR 950 million to approximately 115 million people in more than 70 countries .
The Union 's policies are the practical expression of its genuine commitment to supporting people when they are at their most vulnerable .
Our aim is to be able to plan a more coordinated civil and military response so that our intervention with regard to natural disasters becomes increasingly effective .
These tragic events are occurring more and more frequently and have caused hundreds of thousands of deaths throughout the world in recent years .
Particular attention must be paid to women and children , especially refugees and displaced persons , as violations of international humanitarian law in relation to these groups are becoming increasingly common .
As well as ensuring more effective intervention , a great deal of work must be done in the area of active and passive prevention .
Those communities that are at greatest risk must be better prepared for this kind of phenomenon , through the promotion of all sustainable development policies aimed at minimising damage .
in writing . - 14 / 1 : I voted in favour of this as I perceive it to be a weakening of EU legislation and will result in it becoming easier to import non-GM soya beans into the UK .
This is a critical issue for our poultry sector .
14 / 2 : I voted in favour of this as it will reduce the negative impact of EU legislation on cargoes of non-GM soya beans destined for the UK .
14 / 3 : I abstained on this because although it may be a desirable aspiration ( for a UK government free of EU control ) , it is not yet a critical issue in my view and I do not wish to extend EU power .
The EU should be turning to innovative initiatives that , firstly , make use of food surpluses and , secondly , enable people suffering shortages to be fed : provision should be made for this when revising the common agricultural policy .
Speculation has been responsible for almost 50 % of the recent price rises , so a concerted strategy within the G20 should be used to encourage the creation of price stabilisation instruments within international forums .
The EU must lead an international movement that aims to create an agreement within the United Nations seeking to permanently and effectively provide food for countries with shortages .
I would also stress the importance of supporting the agricultural sector 's credibility , in particular , by promoting it amongst trained and enterprising young people as an activity that may be linked with innovation and research .
I voted in favour of this resolution which recognises that food security is a human right .
It is achieved when all people , at all times , have physical , social and economic access to sufficient , safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life .
It is important to draw attention to the fact that global stocks of staple foods are much more limited than in the past , having fallen to a record low of 12 weeks ' worth of global food stocks during the food crisis of 2007 .
At the same time , world food production is increasingly vulnerable to extreme weather events linked to climate change , which can cause sudden and unpredictable food shortages .
Therefore , the EU should provide for its contribution to this global food stock system .
I believe that it is very important to promote not only competitiveness in the agricultural sector , but also traditional agriculture , small-scale farming , organic farming and local distribution .
Furthermore , in the context of an ageing rural population , I believe it is very important to guarantee access to land and credit for young farmers .
Recent volatility in food and basic food product prices has raised serious concerns about the operation of the food supply chain at a European and global level .
Food price rises have hit the most vulnerable sections of the population hardest .
This report encourages the provision of healthy , good quality food to consumers at reasonable prices and the safeguarding of farmers ' incomes , which are two of the European Union 's key objectives .
I voted in favour of this report .
Europe can contribute to global food security by becoming more competitive .
As the first policy to have been implemented and the main item of expenditure until recently , agriculture occupies a central place in the European project .
The last few decades have certainly seen something of a fall in this area for the benefit of other important areas , but we must not lose sight of the fact that Europe 's agricultural independence is a major strategic challenge .
As the Chair of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Joseph Daul , moreover emphasised at the beginning of this new year , food security will be the major issue in 2011 .
Indeed , world food shortages and the resulting crises must alert us to the seriousness of the situation : a sharp rise in prices and a scarce supply of essential resources .
Europe must respond to this new challenge .
Environmental issues add to the complexity and scale of the problem .
That is why I voted in favour of this resolution , which seeks to ensure that the strategic nature of the issue is recognised .
It points out the role that the Union can play in the management of global stocks and the suitability of the CAP with respect to these challenges , and draws attention to the harmful impact of speculation on commodity prices .
Currently , 900 million people worldwide suffer from the hunger that accompanies abject poverty , and up to 2 billion cannot be certain of their food supply because they are living under the threat of poverty .
Since an increase of 70 % , at the least , is needed to meet the needs of the growing global population , the agricultural sector must be strengthened .
To this end , I support this important report on agriculture and the food supply .
A strong , funded common agricultural policy must be developed to provide high quality food at a reasonable cost , as we face up to the demand for food in the EU and worldwide .
The school fruit and milk schemes and the programme for deprived persons must be strengthened .
The people of the EU must have access to sufficient wholesome food , despite economic difficulties .
It is a matter of concern that global food stocks are not as plentiful as before and , considering the threat posed by climate change and natural disasters , I support what the report says on the establishment of a global system devoted to developing food stocks .
I voted in favour of this document .
With the rapid growth in the world 's population , the agricultural sector must meet a growing need for safe and sufficient food , despite the obstacles of limited natural resources , high energy prices and climate change .
According to the UN Food and Agricultural Organisation ( FAO ) , food production must increase by at least 70 percent to meet the growing demands of a world population , which is expected to exceed 9 billion by 2050 .
Furthermore , around 900 million people worldwide are chronically hungry due to extreme poverty , while up to 2 billion people lack genuine , long-term food security due to varying degrees of poverty .
Therefore , the accessibility of food remains a key issue to be dealt with .
I agree that the new CAP to be put in place after 2013 needs to promote not only competitiveness , but also traditional agriculture , small-scale farming , organic farming and local distribution , in order to contribute to food security .
Furthermore , in the context of an ageing rural population , I believe it is very important to guarantee access to land and credit for young farmers and to maintain reasonable food prices and a sufficient income for farmers .
I voted for this report because poverty and hunger persist in the European Union .
79 million people in the EU still live below the poverty line .
My amendments highlight the fact that the right to food is a basic human right and it is met when everyone has permanent physical , social and economic access to sufficient , safe and nutritious food in order to meet their nutritional needs so that they can lead an active , healthy life .
I would like to stress , in particular , the importance of European agriculture 's diversity and of ensuring the coexistence of different farming models , as well as of the diversity and quality of food and nutrition across the whole of Europe .
I have voted in favour of the resolution .
In its programme , my party , the delegation of the Dutch Reformed Political Party ( SGP ) , has clearly highlighted the strategic interest of the agricultural sector and agriculture has even been called the basis for food security .
However , noble as the ideas themselves may be , I must make two marginal comments on the text .
The EU should not interfere with school milk or school fruit programmes .
Leave that to Member States , if they so desire .
Moreover , I have also voted against the paragraph relating to the liberalisation and promotion of GMO imports .
My party takes the view that GMOs are not the solution to the issue of global food supply .
No link has yet been demonstrated between genetic modification and higher yields .
In our opinion , we also need to ask ourselves ethical questions about genetic modification .
I am happy with the overall tone of the resolution , though , which has demonstrated once again how important it is to ensure powerful and proper funding for the CAP after 2013 .
Moreover , I think that the call for developing countries to use their land to ensure the food supply for their own population , first and foremost , is of major importance and a matter of extreme urgency .
Providing access to food for all , against a backdrop of rising global demand and food shortages for several billion people across the world , is a huge and essential challenge .
In the European Union alone , 16 % of people live below the poverty line and struggle to have their most basic needs - housing , health and , of course , food - met .
It is with this in mind that , in order to fuel debate , we voted for a resolution recognising agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security .
At a time when we are considering the future of the CAP , it seems necessary not to overlook this need and this right - which should be universal - to food for all .
One of our aims is to combat speculation in the agricultural sector : we call for a review of the legislation on financial instruments .
We need less price volatility and more transparency .
We also propose the idea of a ' targeted global system of food stocks ' in order to manage crises more effectively , and we invite the Commission to give thought to this type of measure .
It is the European Union 's duty to rise to the challenges posed by food security , the provision of high quality food , protecting the environment , the diversity of rural areas and maintaining the territorial balance through improving living conditions in rural areas .
The common agricultural policy offers answers and solutions to these challenges of the future .
It is important that the objectives and instruments identified by this policy endeavour to meet as fully as possible the need to integrate a specific national dimension into the common agricultural policy 's structure .
Farmers obviously need substantial direct support , including in the future .
However , the current disparities between Member States in terms of direct payments can no longer be maintained because this has a direct impact on the competitiveness of agricultural products in the single market .
The CAP must assume responsibility for how EU money is spent by focusing payments on cultivated land areas only and , in the case of the livestock sector , only on the animals currently on the farm in the year relating to the payments .
Pillar I of the CAP ought to cover compensation payments for agriculturally less favoured areas and agri-environmental payments , thereby helping prevent agricultural land from being abandoned and rewarding environmental benefits resulting from extensive agricultural practices .
I voted in favour of this report as food security is a human right which is achieved when all people have access to suitable , safe and nutritious food which can meet their needs for an active and healthy life .
In Europe , 16 % of citizens still live below the poverty line , and the accessibility of food remains a key issue to be dealt with .
Thus , food security continues to require a robust common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
The new CAP , which should come into force after 2013 , needs to respond to food security and other challenges , particularly climate change , the economic crisis and keeping territorial balance within the EU .
On the other hand , the EU 's ambitious energy targets have been encouraging the cultivation of biofuels on a large scale , but biofuel production competes with food production for land , which has a potentially negative impact on food security .
I voted against the report , despite the fact that it contains serious positive points and recognises the role of farming in safeguarding food security and adequacy .
However , there is one very serious drawback in the report , which cannot be overlooked .
One specific point was adopted , under which the European Parliament ' calls on the Commission to propose a faster approval procedure within the EU for the importation of a new GM feed variant once it has been proved safe ' .
Our position against the importation and use of any modified material , food or feed remains firm and under no circumstances could I vote for a report which , for the first time , formulates a positive stand on the part of the European Parliament to the modified organisms that Mr Barroso is trying so keenly to introduce into Europe .
Food security is a basic human right .
Today , it is estimated that around 900 million people worldwide are chronically hungry , while many others lack sufficient healthy food due to varying degrees of poverty .
Food security can be achieved when all people , at all times , have physical and economic access to sufficient food that is safe and meets their dietary needs .
Food security requires a robust common agricultural policy , but it needs to be consistent and address social concerns .
It must be consistent in the sense that it does not allow surpluses in production which distort the market and cause environmental problems , and it must be socially engaged by ensuring that all people from all social backgrounds have access to quality food .
On the other hand , I welcome the way that the issue of diversity in European agriculture is being addressed : competitiveness and innovation can , and should , go hand in hand with traditional agriculture , small-scale farming , organic farming and local distribution .
Financial investment in these sectors will be crucial for the effective use of land in different regions , along with investment in terms of energy , which reduces dependency between food security and energy security .
The motion for a resolution on the recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security is a much needed and timely document , as it has appeared just when an increasingly rapid rise is being noted in the prices of a large number of food products .
The recommendations contained in the report are realistic and relevant , addressing real issues in this area .
I would like to mention the importance attached to training and encouraging new generations of farmers in the EU , which is vital in the context of an ageing population .
I also want to mention the focus on maintaining the diversity of agriculture within the Union so as to give a further chance to traditional agriculture as well .
Given that the right to food security is a basic human right , I think that the European Union must create better conditions for implementing nutrition programmes in Member States , as well as the school fruit and milk schemes .
This is an own-initiative report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development which includes ideas and suggestions from all the political groups .
Thus , with a view to reaching workable compromises , we have achieved a very comprehensive text , linked by a common denominator with which I generally agree .
Besides believing that food security is a basic human right , I also regard agriculture as a strategic sector which is absolutely essential to the future of our continent .
In other words , I see it as an inalienable part of our sovereignty as a union of peoples and countries .
In saying this , I wish to assert that the right to food security , besides being a basic human right , should be guaranteed by our internal production .
A common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is thus essential in order to ensure this objective .
I would therefore like to say again that the fundamental objective of the CAP should be to maintain the competitiveness of European agriculture and support for farming in the EU , so as to ensure food production , principally at local level , and balanced territorial development .
I also believe fair returns should be ensured in the agricultural sector , as it is only possible to stimulate productive systems that are sustainable and ethical if farmers are duly compensated for the investments and commitments that they make .
Agriculture plays a key role in the development of communities .
Defining its output as a primary sector in economic terms relates not only to the historical trend of its development , but also , and above all , to its role in stabilising societies and their economies .
Balanced agricultural production has to be attentive not only to the quantities produced , but also , and primarily , to the quality of the output , so that it assists in the healthy development of the population .
From this perspective , therefore , food security plays a key role , and its protection - particularly in terms of traditional and local produce - increases the opportunities for development throughout the territory .
The positive correlation between food security and the quality and healthiness of agricultural products also involves increasing their eco-friendliness , while particular care must be paid to the domino effect caused by the uncontrolled introduction of genetically modified organisms , in order to provide , in the first instance , the necessary certainties as regards the medium- and long-term effects that these products could have on health and local economies .
We are at a crossroads in the definition of what the future reform of the common agricultural policy must be .
This is an issue that concerns Europeans , naturally , but also citizens throughout the world .
This new policy should therefore be part of a global vision .
With one major challenge : to be able to respond to the doubling of demand for food production and supply that will take place between now and 2050 , in a context marked by scarcity of water , by a reduction in arable land and by a new energy situation dictated by the fight against climate change .
The global organisation of agricultural markets needs to be rethought , taking into account the two main inspirations of the common agricultural policy : guaranteeing food security and saving the lifeblood of small farmers and their families , both at home and in the world 's poorest countries .
This also hinges on the creation of a targeted global system of food stocks , consisting of emergency stocks to reduce hunger and stocks to be used to regulate commodity prices .
This system should be managed by the UN via its global Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) .
900 million people worldwide are chronically hungry due to extreme poverty .
In spite of apparent sufficiency of supplies , a significant proportion of the world population cannot afford the basic food it needs ; accessibility of food remains a key issue to be dealt with .
Food security as an objective cannot be reached without tackling two of the most important questions of the day : market and price volatility and dwindling food stocks .
We should support , in this context , a revision of the existing legislation on financial instruments , which should provide for more transparent trading and minimum thresholds for the operators allowed to trade on these markets .
What is more , global stocks of staple foods are much more limited than in the past , with global food reserves having fallen to a record low .
Lastly , the CAP needs to respond clearly and unequivocally to food security and other challenges , most notably , climate change and the economic crisis within the EU .
I voted in favour of the report on recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security , because it tables important proposals on how the common agricultural policy to be put in place after 2013 needs to respond to challenges relating to food security , climate change , the economic crisis and keeping territorial balance within the EU , amongst other things .
The Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations ( FAO ) recently warned of a possible increase in food prices in 2011 after they reached new historic highs in 2010 in the wake of the food crisis of June 2008 .
The FAO Food Price Index of 55 basic foodstuffs has increased for the sixth consecutive month to 214.7 points , higher than the previous historic high of 213.5 points in June 2008 .
The prices of sugar and meat are reaching new historic records , and unless there is at least a 2 % increase in cereal production , the prices of these commodities will continue to rise .
This initiative should , therefore , be welcomed and , as I stressed in a question put to the European Commission last week , given that price volatility affects everyone involved in the market , I believe that specific measures should be taken with respect to the common agricultural policy to increase production , better supply the markets and ensure greater price stability , as well as guaranteeing that production responds to Europe 's production needs .
As I have been arguing , agriculture should be viewed as a strategic sector , especially in times of crisis .
As food security is a human right , it needs to be given special attention by the institutions of the European Union .
Besides the need for the agricultural sector to provide a secure supply of food , it is also vital that this should be sufficient .
For this reason , we cannot forget the recommendations of the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation on the urgency of an increase in food production of at least 70 % to feed a world population which is expected to reach 9 billion by 2050 .
I am glad that this resolution has been adopted , as it acknowledges the role of the European Food Safety Authority as the body responsible for monitoring and reporting risks inherent to the food chain , and encourages the Member States to establish bodies to cooperate with it .
I would also like to highlight the recognition given to traditional agriculture , particularly organic and small-scale farming , which exists in the more disadvantaged regions , and which represents not only an economic asset but , above all , an environmental asset , as it is essential for preserving biodiversity .
I hope that the new common agricultural policy will respond efficiently to the problems facing this sector : climate change , keeping consumer prices steady and guaranteeing incomes for farmers .
The rapporteur tackles a burning issue , pointing out relevant problems that threaten food security , such as price volatility as a result of financial speculation , the usurping of land in developing countries , or insufficient strategic stocks .
Nevertheless , the approach to each of these problems , as to all other problems relating to food security , is very incomplete , at times contradictory and , in some cases , wrong .
The consequences of current agricultural policies - specifically the common agricultural policy and successive reforms of it - are omitted , as are the liberalisation of the markets and dismantling of regulatory instruments , and the resulting ruin of thousands of small and medium-sized producers , faced with prices for their products that often do not cover the costs of production .
It is increasingly being argued that ' we will need to make use of all forms of farming in order to be able to feed Europe and third countries ' : this is an implicit argument for unsustainable production models that produce intensively and for export , as well as for genetically modified crops ; the report also calls for the process of approving the importation of these genetically modified crops to be streamlined and made faster .
Finally , the rapporteur ' welcomes the Commission proposal for a regulation on [ over-the-counter ] derivatives ' , which is a proposal that the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food condemns for failing to prevent speculation .
I voted in favour of Mrs Sârbu 's report .
At this point in time , when we are preparing to reform the common agricultural policy after 2013 , today 's vote shows the direction that Parliament is intending to take .
In order to ensure a secure supply of affordable food , the EU must equip itself with a strong common agricultural policy ( CAP ) that discourages speculation on food commodities and helps young people to enter the farming sector .
I think it is important to emphasise that the future CAP must also provide citizens with access to an adequate supply of food , allow for the dissemination of nutritional information and create better conditions for the implementation of programmes such as school milk and fruit schemes .
Furthermore , today 's vote instructs the Commission to work out how to implement a ' targeted global system of food stocks ' with emergency stocks to reduce hunger and other stocks to be used to regulate commodity prices .
Particular attention also needs to be paid to the issue of genetically modified organisms .
As this is such a sensitive issue , a measure of caution will be necessary to avoid their indiscriminate and unrestricted introduction .
Achieving food security and independence in Europe is absolutely essential , which is why I voted in favour .
I welcome the fact that reference is made to an ambitious vision for the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
We must remember that the CAP is essential to support farmers , who , as well as producing commodities and public goods , also maintain and look after our lands .
In order to tackle the new food challenges we are expecting to face in the future , we must make sure that we become self-sufficient producers , importing ever fewer agricultural products from third countries , as they fail to respect not only environmental and health legislation , but also workers ' rights .
Improving food security is one of the challenges that will need to be tackled with the reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) after 2013 .
The ability to guarantee sufficient food stocks to EU citizens must reflect the predicted sharp increase in world food demand by 2050 .
In the light of this , it is a priority for the European Union to continue safeguarding this fundamental human right within and without its borders , seeking to increase agricultural productivity and , at the same time , ensuring a secure supply of affordable food , in addition to the now essential need to protect Europe 's rural environment .
We cannot allow financial speculation to continue causing uncontrolled price rises and global food market volatility .
To safeguard European production , we need to restore balance to the contractual relationships between producers and the modern distribution system .
We must not underestimate the fact that unequal bargaining power , anti-competitive practices and a lack of transparency are often at the root of market distortions , with major consequences for the competitiveness of the entire food supply chain .
Yes , the agricultural sector is a strategic sector and food security is an imperative .
It has taken Europe decades to realise this .
However , the title of the report is misleading .
At no point does it denounce the devastating consequences of global free trade and market logic .
We will continue to eat strawberries in winter , whether they come from the southern hemisphere or energy and water guzzling greenhouses .
We will continue to promote the importation of African beans at the expense of local food crops and in competition with our own producers .
We will continue to call for the regulation of the markets for agricultural products and their derived products , even though this latter notion is absurd and we should be promoting quality agriculture and short food circuits , while mercilessly pursuing the abuses of intermediaries and large retailers .
We will stand powerlessly by as foreign countries that have wasted their own potential take control of the arable land of the most vulnerable countries , leaving us increasingly worried , but failing to act in the face of what is potentially an explosive situation .
You have made progress , but there is still some way to go .
By refusing to get to grips with the very system that has created these problems for us , you are bound to fail .
Food security is a central issue to which the European Union must respond effectively .
That is why I endorsed the report by my Social Democrat colleague , which supports a strong , responsible CAP that is geared towards young farmers ; proposes combating speculation on the agricultural markets and the price volatility that it causes ; and reaffirms that the fight against poverty within the EU and worldwide must become a priority , by making food security and access to food a basic human right .
The EU must address today 's food challenges and anticipate future difficulties in this area .
That is why the idea of creating a targeted global system of food stocks is , in my view , entirely relevant , even though it will not be easy to implement .
in writing . - I voted against the Sârbu report despite its numerous good points .
Food is a fundamentally important issue and one which is going to be of increasing significance .
It is essential that the EU takes a coordinated stance in relation to its agriculture sector in order to face the challenges which lie ahead .
However , I do not consider that GMOs have a legitimate role to play in achieving security of food supplies and I could not support a report which proposes to give the green light to genetic modification .
I agreed with this report because food security is a human right , guaranteeing an active and healthy life .
A large number of people worldwide are chronically hungry or lack genuine , long-term food security .
In spite of apparent sufficiency of supplies , a significant proportion of the world 's population cannot afford the basic food it needs , and accessibility of food remains a key issue to be dealt with urgently .
It is important to be sure that food is accessible to all social categories of people .
Food security as an objective cannot be reached without tackling two of the most important questions of the day : market and price volatility ( strongly influenced by speculation on commodities markets ) and dwindling food stocks .
Under no circumstances must we allow food price speculation .
We must promote not only competitiveness , but also traditional agriculture , small-scale farming , organic farming and local distribution , ensuring agricultural diversity throughout Europe .
Furthermore , in the context of an ageing rural population , I believe it is very important to guarantee access to land and credit for young farmers .
Our objective is to maintain reasonable food prices and a decent income for farmers .
However , under no circumstances will I approve of the use of genetically modified materials , their import to consumers and other activities , or the authorisation of production methods brought to bear in third countries , because there is no data that would lead us to reasonably believe that these do not harm people 's health or the environment .
Unfortunately , as a result of the votes of the conservative Members , a clause was included in this text for the proposal of a faster approval process within the EU for the importation of a new GM feed variant once it has been proved safe .
However , under no circumstances must the demand for food be met by genetic engineering methods .
I continue to be categorically opposed to genetically modified food and would like to remind the European Commission of the precautionary principle : even if there are scientific studies that regard genetically modified foodstuffs as not harmful to health , we perhaps do not yet have the right test methods to confirm this .
Ultimately , we have to respect the wishes of consumers , who reject this type of food .
Agriculture is enormously important for global food security and we therefore need to take action .
Securing the incomes of farmers and an adequate supply of good quality food must therefore be key goals of the common agricultural policy .
The fluctuating market prices in the agricultural sector also represent uncertainty factors and need to be dealt with .
I support the report , which clearly demonstrates that food security is a central concern in the European Union , too , and requires coordination of the individual policy areas .
Only if the areas of agricultural policy , development policy , trade policy , financial policy and energy policy , as well as research , work together can improvements be achieved .
I voted in favour of the Sârbu report because ensuring constant , yet also secure , food stocks is the main role that society assigns to agriculture .
Food security is a basic human right , meaning that all people , at all times , should have physical , social and economic access to sufficient , safe and nutritious food in order to lead an active life .
In some parts of the world , this right is often foregone , whilst in others , it is scarcely guaranteed , for a variety of reasons and factors that combine to pose a serious threat to consumer health .
At a time like the present , characterised by the debate on the common agricultural policy after 2013 , this report allows us to map out some guidelines relating to the ethical , social and economic role that agriculture must play , including in the short term , identifying the risk factors that threaten it and seizing the opportunities to turn it into a bastion of the global fight against hunger .
I voted for the Sârbu report on recognition of agriculture as a strategically important sector in the context of food security .
Historically , food security has , for centuries , been among the highest priorities of all governments .
Financial and economic criteria cannot , therefore , be deciding factors .
The production of cheap but good food is very important from the point of view of the market and people 's purchasing power , particularly for those on low incomes .
Even more important , however , is the ability to produce food .
We cannot allow a situation in which we import food only because someone can sell it to us more cheaply at the time .
We can import , but we must maintain our ability to produce the amount of food we need .
At the present juncture , when food prices are steadily rising and there is ever-increasing talk about a future food crisis , a large section of the European Union 's population is living below the poverty line and it is crucial for us to ensure that food is available to every section of society .
I voted for this report because I consider that the European Union needs a strong agricultural policy which will be based on innovation and primarily aimed at bringing stability to the markets and encouraging and supporting farmers .
At the same time , European consumers are entitled to enjoy healthy , high quality food at reasonable prices , which are the main objectives of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and key objectives of the European Union .
in writing . - I voted for this report , but abstained on the three parts of amendment 14 which dealt with GMOs .
I am not intrinsically against GM foodstuffs but was nervous at this attempt to speed up the importation of GM material and the use of production methods from third countries .
The scientific evidence that GM is safe must be robust , and the public must have full confidence that the appropriate authorities have taken all necessary safety precautions and carried out rigorous testing .
This cannot be rushed .
This report reaffirms food security as a basic human right .
In this context , two of the main issues that this right should address are identified as price volatility in the markets , which are heavily influenced by speculation , and the fall in food reserves .
The report notes that speculation has been responsible for 50 % of the recent price hikes and thus endorses a revision of the existing legislation on financial instruments in the interests of transparency , making them serve the economy and agricultural production , and preventing speculation from jeopardising efficient agricultural holdings .
In a situation where the price of food is heavily influenced by speculators who have no interest whatsoever in agriculture , the report supports the limiting of access to agricultural markets .
Nonetheless , the financialisation of agricultural markets is not called into question in structural terms .
The report also proposes the establishment of a global system of food stocks administered by the UN .
In addition , it urges the Commission to expedite the approval of the importation of genetically modified foods , with which I completely disagree .
In view of this , but so as to encourage the good intentions and suggestions contained in the report , I abstained .
Noting that food security is a fundamental human right , which must be guaranteed , calling for the payment of farmers for their efforts and proposing a system of food stocks administered by the United Nations are all concessions to our theses .
I welcome them .
Accommodating the difference , among financial products , of commodity derivatives , and limiting access to agricultural financial markets to operators linked to agricultural production , also indicate a change in attitudes .
However , relocation and the end of productivism , which are necessary for self-sufficiency in foodstuffs and for preserving biodiversity , are still a long way off .
The financialisation of the agricultural markets is not fundamentally called into question .
Worse still , authorisations of genetically modified varieties are emerging .
To encourage good intentions , I therefore abstain .
The concept of food security is very clear , and it is achieved when all people , at all times , have physical , social and economic access to sufficient , safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life .
Therefore , there is no doubt that the constant increase in food prices , as a result of increased prices for raw materials , is an increasingly pressing concern for the EU .
On the other hand , the agricultural sector has to meet the food needs of an ever-growing number of people , despite having to contend with dwindling natural resources and high production costs .
In view of future needs , there is no doubt that agriculture has to become a strategic sector , or indeed a crucial sector for the economic development of the EU and the whole world .
When it comes to food security , in particular , there is a problem in that the Member States of the EU are increasingly losing their self-sufficiency .
It has not , as yet , proved possible to bring a halt to the worrying trend of farmers moving away from full-time farming and towards farming as a sideline business and of farmers leaving the land .
If we are discussing food security , then , we need to come up with plans for how this worrying trend can be halted and also for how to increase consumers ' awareness of regional products .
In particular , there is a need , in this context , to scrutinise EU subsidies with regard to how the transport of foodstuffs criss-crossing the Union can be reduced .
This is not only for the benefit of the environment , in which regard it helps to implement the Kyoto targets on reducing emissions , but it also reduces noise pollution , especially for those people who live or work along the transit routes .
Last but not least , we should consider the extent to which we can better promote alternative propulsion systems , as the production of biofuels is beginning to threaten conventional agriculture , pushing it towards food shortages and higher prices .
These aspects are not covered in the report , and I therefore chose to abstain .
The rapporteur stresses the importance of agriculture in relation to the new food challenges .
The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) has declared that food production must increase by at least 70 % , insofar as the world 's population is expected to exceed 9 billion by 2050 .
Thus , food security continues to require a strong common agricultural policy .
The main objectives of the CAP have been : to increase agricultural productivity ; to help farmers attain a fair standard of living ; to stabilise markets ; and to ensure a secure supply of affordable food .
However , its success resulted in unintended overproduction and surpluses which distorted the market and raised environmental concerns .
The new CAP should therefore improve food security by increasing productivity , whilst simultaneously encouraging environmentally sustainable food production .
The report stresses that it is essential for the financing of the CAP to reflect its ambitious vision and policy objectives .
To maintain reasonable food prices and , above all , a decent income for farmers , and to ensure food security , the CAP should be maintained at the current level .
Improving and strengthening food safety controls in the Union and in third countries is essential , and hence , I am in favour of the resolution .
Food security is a human right , and one of the objectives of the common agricultural policy must be to ensure easy access for all to food , taking into account population growth , climate change , high energy costs and the obstacles of limited natural resources .
I agree with and support the rapporteur , Mrs Sârbu , in her plan to ensure that the new post-2013 CAP is able to respond to the requirements and challenges of food security .
It is important , therefore , to promote diversity in agricultural production , which spans large merchant chains , traditional agriculture and small-scale farming ; to guarantee access to credit for young farmers ; and to encourage the development of food stock management programmes , so as to facilitate world trade and bring world market prices down .
I am , however , opposed to the development of GMOs and their use as feed variants until such time as they are deemed safe for livestock and European consumers .
I voted in favour of this report .
However , I regret that a few important provisions were removed at the time of the vote , such as the provision which involved examining the possibility of authorising the implementation of production methods used in third countries with regard to genetically modified organisms .
Some states have made huge strides in this area , while the European Union has been left behind and is not utilising the entire potential available .
I also regret the removal of the point referring to the problem of huge areas of uncultivated agricultural land in some Member States .
The report contains some very good initiatives , such as incentives for traditional and organic agriculture , support for small-scale farmers in particular and the protection of domestic farmers from competition pressure from third countries with significantly lower quality standards .
On the other hand , the rapporteur advocates the use of GMOs .
Therefore , I have abstained from voting .
in writing . - ( PL ) Food security is a key challenge for agriculture , not only in the European Union but throughout the world , particularly in developing countries .
According to the FAO , global food demand will double by 2050 , and the number of people in the world will grow from the present 7 billion to 9 billion .
Global food production will therefore have to increase correspondingly , against a backdrop of pressure on natural resources .
Global food production will have to grow at the same time as water , energy , fertiliser , pesticide and land use is reduced .
It is alarming to learn that there are a total of over 1 billion people starving , while in the European Union , over 40 million people living in poverty go hungry .
For this reason , too , I believe that scientific progress should be exploited if it can provide appropriate solutions aimed at alleviating hunger throughout the world , particularly by means of a more effective use of resources .
The EU must continue to guarantee food security for its citizens and participate in supplying food to the entire world , whereby cooperation with the rest of the world , in particular , with developing countries , must be closer and more coherent in order to help them with the long-term sustainable development of agricultural sectors .
It was for this reason , among others , that I voted in favour of adopting the report on the recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security .
I voted in favour of this motion for a European Parliament resolution on recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector in the context of food security because , due to the increasing amount of consumers , the large amount of people suffering from hunger , the situation faced by farmers , fluctuating food prices and speculation in equities , it is particularly important to use certain measures to regulate the agricultural sector .
Above all , every effort must be made , through financial inducements , to promote traditional , small-scale or organic farming , in order to ensure continuous food security .
Given the dangers to public health posed by genetically modified materials , I do not agree with the proposal to allow the import of non-GM products in which there is a low-level presence of GM material .
We must take all necessary measures to ensure that the importation of a new GM feed variant to the EU and the possibility of using production methods brought to bear in third countries do not receive approval .
We cannot solve the issues surrounding the accessibility of food by violating food safety requirements and putting people 's health at risk .
Given the increasing size of the ageing rural population and in order to attract and encourage young people into farming , preferential conditions must be made for young farmers to obtain credit .
Food security is a basic human right that is achieved when all people have physical , social and economic access to sufficient food .
In spite of apparent sufficiency of supplies , a significant proportion of the world 's population cannot afford the basic food it needs ; around 900 million people worldwide suffer from hunger due to extreme poverty .
Accessibility of food remains a key issue to be dealt with .
Food security continues to require a strong common agricultural policy capable of increasing agricultural productivity , stabilising markets and , above all , ensuring a secure supply of affordable food .
However , this objective cannot be reached without tackling market and price volatility .
As the food issue is very important , I voted in favour of the Sârbu report , which also approves a faster process within the EU for the importation of new genetically modified feed variants , while also looking into the possibility of authorising the use of production methods brought to bear in third countries .
My vote is also intended to support the presence of small quantities of genetically modified organisms in products entering the EU .
I voted in favour of the Sârbu report because agriculture is an important and growing sector which should be a priority in the policy agenda due to its strategic role in the context of food security .
The review of the common agricultural policy for 2013 should submit proposals relating to this matter .
The recent volatility in prices of food and basic products has raised great concerns in Europe and worldwide .
The financial crisis and increasingly severe weather phenomena such as those that occurred in 2010 , with the prolonged drought and fires in Russia and the major floods in Pakistan , have contributed to enormous instability .
The EU cannot remain dependent on the protectionist decisions by countries such as Russia and Ukraine , which export about 30 % of the world 's wheat , or Argentina , a large global producer of meat .
I believe that the EU has a duty to feed the European public and the world 's population , which is expected to increase by 2 billion and therefore necessitate a 70 % increase in the food supplied by the year 2050 .
Increased production should meet criteria relating to the environment , food security , animal welfare and labour .
Distribution has been shifted to the least developed countries , but these do not appear to have the capacity to meet these criteria .
Food security is a fundamental right that is impeded by limited natural resources , high energy prices and climate change .
According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation , production will have to increase by 70 % by 2050 , since around 900 million people worldwide suffer from hunger , and in Europe alone , 16 % of the population live below the poverty line .
A strong common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is essential and indeed the CAP follows this line , but it needs a reform that will make it sustainable and improve food security .
This objective can only be achieved by resolving the issue of price volatility ( caused by speculation ) and dwindling food stocks .
In this context , the report supports the need to revise the existing legislation on financial instruments and the creation of a global system of food stocks to ease world trade when price spikes and instances of protectionism occur .
The new CAP after 2013 must be prepared for all of this , and that is why I am backing this report , which promotes competitiveness , traditional agriculture , access to land and credit for young farmers , and improved integration of food and energy .
On a planet with what will soon be 9 billion inhabitants , food supply for the future is a key issue .
This report focuses on this enormous challenge and asks several important questions , for example , in relation to the problem of land grabbing , and this is , of course , something that we support .
At the same time , the report unfortunately contains demands for several joint measures - such as European nutrition , school milk and school fruit programmes , as well as an increased budget for these programmes - which we consider to be something that each Member State should decide on for itself .
We therefore chose to abstain in the final vote .
According to the FAO , food production needs to increase by a minimum of 70 % in order to meet the ever-growing demands of the world population , which is expected to exceed 9 billion by 2050 .
Furthermore , around 900 million people are chronically hungry due to extreme poverty , while up to 2 billion people lack genuine , long-term food security due to varying degrees of poverty .
Given that the demand for food is steadily rising and 16 % of EU citizens live below the poverty line , the right and access to food are becoming a priority .
This is why , in order to achieve food security , we continually need a strong , market-orientated , decoupled and environmentally conscious common agricultural policy ( CAP ) which will also have a significant rural development component and will tackle other challenges , in particular , climate change , the economic crisis and maintaining territorial balance within the EU .
Food security as an objective cannot be achieved without tackling two of the most important current issues : market and price volatility and dwindling food stocks .
I have highlighted the fundamental nature of this issue of food security on several occasions .
In the current environment , the Member States should not view agriculture as a simple economic issue , but rather as a strategic defence issue .
To this end , it is vital , as the rapporteur stresses , to ensure that the new , post-2013 common agricultural policy can give an adequate response to the demanding challenges facing this sector today , particularly in terms of price stability , and that it can safeguard the interests of farmers and strengthen food reserves .
I congratulate Mrs Sârbu .
In order to ensure a secure supply of affordable food , the EU must provide itself with a strong common agricultural policy ( CAP ) that discourages speculation on food commodities and helps young people to enter the farming sector .
In fact , the future CAP absolutely must do more for young farmers .
Only 7 % of farmers in the EU are under 35 years of age , while the EU will need 4.5 million farmers in the next 10 years .
I therefore call for the existing measures for attracting young people to farming , such as installation premiums and subsidised interest rates on loans , to be strengthened .
Furthermore , to ensure that the existing financial instruments help farmers weather the crisis , rather than help speculators cause extreme price volatility , I call for a review of the European legislation on financial products in order to make the negotiations more transparent .
I also urge the European Commission to take strong and permanent steps without delay in order to impose clear restrictions on speculation and tackle the instability of food commodity markets .
in writing . - The report was adopted without the support of the Verts / ALE Group , which voted against .
The reason for that negative vote was that paragraph 14 remained in the text .
It ' calls on the Commission to propose a technical solution to the problem of low-level presence of GM material in non-GM imports , and to propose a faster approval process within the EU for the importation of a new GM feed variant once it has been proved safe ' .
Food security is a basic human right , and it is achieved only when a person 's dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life are met .
In particular , looking ahead to the common agricultural policy reform planned for 2013 , the support given to European farmers must always enable them to meet food safety and environmental standards in full .
Despite the efficiency of European production , around 80 million people still live below the poverty line today , and many of them are helped through food aid programmes .
A strong CAP will preserve farmers ' economic role as food producers , but it will also guarantee the livelihood and jobs of more than 28 million citizens employed in Europe 's rural areas .
If we factor in the economic crisis , too , direct payments to farmers will have to be maintained after 2013 in order to stabilise their incomes and help them withstand market volatility .
Lastly , specific initiatives will be taken to encourage young people to enter the farming sector , such as providing easier access to loans and promoting professional training and specific technical education , while ' good agricultural practices ' will be disseminated across Europe .
Leaving aside the dubious reference to data on world population growth , which does not reflect the recent reduction in birth rates in various non-European countries , food security is undoubtedly linked to good use of agriculture .
Clearly , then , a common agricultural policy that is aimed at increasing high quality , environmentally friendly farming and helping farmers to attain a decent standard of living is desirable .
If we also factor in energy policies , which come under the agricultural sector through the use of biofuels , this is an argument that should be examined further , since biofuel production is in competition with food production .
The report 's conclusion is also sound : we cannot conceive of reducing the CAP budget .
On the whole , this report is a fairly worthwhile contribution to the debate on the role of agriculture in food supply .
Parliament has rightly identified the problems which farmers have to contend with in times of extreme market and price volatility and drawn attention to the difficulties which farmers are currently going through in this respect .
The Commission must come up with tough and lasting measures to address volatility in the agricultural markets .
That is crucial to maintaining production in the EU .
The huge price increases in the financial markets for agricultural commodities have largely been caused by speculation .
Speculative behaviour accounts for almost 50 % of recent price increases .
It is good that the European Parliament has supported the conclusions of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food concerning the disastrous role of large institutional investors such as hedge funds , pension funds and investment banks , because they affect the price indices of raw materials , through their activities on the derivatives markets .
Parliament has produced a generally sound analysis of the situation , but has then totally missed the mark by failing to formulate pertinent observations on the role of GMOs in agriculture in the report .
This debate is being conducted elsewhere and does not belong here , which is why I have ultimately voted against the report .
I cannot support an initiative which facilitates or accelerates the import of any genetically modified plant .
The excellent characteristics of agricultural land in the European Union enable many countries , including Hungary , Poland , Italy and France , to produce good quality feed .
We do not need genetically modified feed variants .
I also do not support the importation of genetically modified products to the European Union because of their long-term detrimental effect on health .
The term food security highlights the need to take concrete measures to increase the global food stock : a human right that includes physical and economic access to healthy , sufficient and nutritious food .
I consider the adoption of this report emphasising the agricultural sector to be extremely important .
The population growth that is forecast and the poverty that persists mean that at least a 70 % increase in food production is needed to satisfy the population 's needs .
Climate phenomena , speculation and price volatility have been impacting negatively on farmers ' capacity .
A common agricultural policy is needed after 2013 that is able to guarantee the right to food security by committing strongly to competitiveness and innovation , and to increasing numbers of young farmers who can respond to new global challenges .
Agricultural policy must be adjusted by promoting traditional and local agriculture , not least , organic and locally sourced food .
The European Parliament adopted a report on the recognition of agriculture on which I had to abstain .
This report takes account of many concerns that are of crucial importance to farmers , such as assistance for small production , young farmers and combating price speculation .
This report also highlights the need for substantial funding for the future common agricultural policy .
Even though this report is positive overall , it incorporates an intolerable measure : the speeding up of GMO authorisation procedures by the Commission .
This measure refuses to consider properly evaluating the products before they are placed on the market and makes absolutely no mention of the dangers , denounced time and again , of the marketing of GMOs .
This measure fails to take the slightest account of food security and the precautionary principle .
It is a dangerous measure , and it is scandalous that it has been integrated into a report aimed at taking into account the strategic importance of agriculture .
The GMO issue should be the subject of a debate in its own right , which the European bodies refuse to conduct .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which stresses the need for European policy to give priority to agriculture .
European citizens are making ever more demands in relation to food security , which must be guaranteed along the whole production , processing and distribution chain .
The challenges to be addressed in order to ensure sustainable , secure and fair agriculture are many : adapting to climate change , controlling the effects of globalisation , preserving biodiversity , maintaining farmers ' standard of living and guaranteeing our food self-sufficiency in a global market subject to strong pressure .
Agriculture is an integral part of our heritage and has always shaped our identity , way of life and landscapes .
I welcome the EU 's efforts in relation to agriculture , but important work still needs to be carried out in connection with the reform of the CAP .
I therefore call on the EU to concentrate its efforts on small farmers , who are the largest but , above all , the most vulnerable group .
Recognising that agriculture is a strategic sector should be an opportunity to strengthen its social dimension , to which insufficient consideration has been given hitherto .
Farmers need security too .
I am quite sure that the recognition of agriculture as a strategic sector will make it possible to create better conditions for the implementation of aid and information programmes .
There can be no doubt that food aid programmes should be put in place for the poorest members of society .
We often forget that nearly 80 million people in the European Union live below the poverty line .
As well as aid programmes , we should develop programmes promoting healthy eating , above all , for children and secondary school pupils .
The consequences of neglecting such matters can be seen very clearly in the US , where the number of obese teenagers has tripled in recent years .
It is particularly important for programmes promoting the consumption of fruit and milk to be implemented in educational institutions , since learning the right eating habits will have a positive impact on the health of young Europeans , thus reducing health and social spending in the future .
The greatest possible number of local food producers and distributors should be involved in the implementation of programmes of this kind , since this will strengthen the position of small and medium-sized agricultural holdings .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is the Question Time with the President of the Commission .
It is the usual procedure , namely , questions lasting one minute , and answers also lasting one minute .
If there is a supplementary question , thirty seconds are allowed , with thirty seconds also allowed for the reply .
The first questions to be put to the President of the Commission will be by leaders or representatives of the political groups .


Mr President , President Barroso , I would like to put a question to you in this House about the European Emergency Fund .
In so doing , I would like to place emphasis on the fact that you became involved in the debate on the Emergency Fund because it concerned a European emergency fund .
My question to you is : how do you feel about the expansion of that fund ?
You have , indeed , already spoken on this matter , but mainly on how the fund ought to secure its funding and over how long a period .
Currently , the situation in the government bond market is fairly quiet , but it could change at any moment .
Hence my question : what is your view on the expansion of the Emergency Fund ?
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like , first of all , to thank Ms Wortmann-Kool .
In fact , this is not just my position but the unanimous position of the Commission .
It says in this document , about the annual growth survey , that the Commission considers that the effective financing capacity of the European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) must be reinforced and the scope of its activity widened .
We consider this as part of a comprehensive response and not , of course , as the entire response .
There is only one sentence in this document about the EFSF .
It is also about structural reform , fiscal consolidation and growth-enhancing measures .
But , in fact , it is important for the stability of the euro area to increase lending capacity because , as you know , the EFSF is currently endowed with EUR 440 billion .
I am not asking now for this ceiling to be increased , but we know that the EFSF cannot , de facto , lend this EUR 440 billion if need be , due to the need to secure a triple-A rating for the EFSF .
So the minimum we can and should do is to increase the capacity of the fund .
I think this is a very constructive proposal that should be adopted sooner rather than later .
Mr President , I have an additional question : you say ' sooner , rather than later ' .
What exactly do you mean by that , because , in my view , ensuring stability in the financial markets over the coming months is a matter of urgency .
Decisiveness on this point would be helpful .
At the moment , we are mainly seeing debates between government leaders and finance ministers , so what kind of timescale do you have in mind when you say ' sooner , rather than later ' ?
Can you please be more specific about that ?
President of the Commission . - Mr President , ' sooner rather than later ' means precisely that : that we should not procrastinate .
We have seen in the past that many analysts in the market consider the European Union and the euro area to be reacting rather than acting .
We need to be ahead of the curve , not behind the curve , so as soon as possible it shall be !
In fact , it seems that the euro area meeting yesterday and today 's ECOFIN meeting made some progress .
We are contacting our Member States .
I believe that is important .
And I think it will be wise , since we have the European Council on 4 February , to address these issues there .
We are ready to do so .
The Commission is ready to address these issues on 4 February .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - President Barroso , I know that the European Trade Union Confederation has already raised very strong objections about the detailed interference by the Commission in the Greek and Irish labour markets , riding roughshod over collective bargaining and social dialogue .
Your new annual growth survey promises more of the same .
Your officials are calling for a revision of indexation clauses and pay deals , the promotion of flexible work , a review of unemployment benefits and a reduction of over-protection of workers .
Do you not agree that the Commission should be looking to promote social dialogue and collective bargaining rather than undermining it ?
And , as the issue of pay is specifically excluded from the social chapter of the Treaty , what legal basis is the Commission using to interfere in national collective bargaining systems ?
Also , the doubling of the fiscal consolidation effort called for in the survey is going to choke off any possibility of achieving the 2020 process goals .
What is your answer to that ?
President of the Commission . - Let me tell you , without any ambiguity , that we fully support social dialogue .
We do it at European level but afterwards , we have to do it also at national level ; that is a Member State responsibility .
I have been actively promoting all this social dialogue with ETUC , with BusinessEurope and with other relevant partners .
But , in fact , we are of the opinion that we should now create more incentives to work ; we have to address the situation of our labour markets .
I think this is part of the structural reforms which are needed to increase Europe 's competitiveness .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - President Barroso , why is it that all the focus seems to be upon labour markets ?
What about the other markets that we need to deal with here - the financial market , the internal market , the commodity markets ?
All the focus seems to be on labour markets .
Why should the least well off , the workers , be carrying the cost of this recession and the need to repair it ?
President of the Commission . - The focus is not only on the labour market .
We are reforming the financial markets with the active support and participation of this Parliament .
We also discussed at length the need to deepen internal market reform in the annual growth survey .
We are now specifically discussing energy markets , but the labour market is also part of the structural reforms needed to increase Europe 's competitiveness , especially in those countries that are now most vulnerable .
As you know , some of them are already undertaking important labour market reforms .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I know that you conveyed your concerns over the Khodorkovsky case in a private conversation with President Medvedev .
If the Khodorkovsky case was a test case for the rule of law in Russia , then we naturally have to say that the case failed .
On top of this , Boris Nemtsov was arrested on 31 December .
Article 31 of the Russian Constitution , however , guarantees the freedom of assembly .
As you know , the Opposition organises a protest meeting every 31st of the month .
As far as I can see , there are seven months in 2011 which have 31 days in them .
That means there is a chance , if this continues , that events similar to the arrest of Mr Nemtsov could happen in 2011 .
So what joint action can the EU institutions take on this matter ?
Russia is a member of the Council of Europe , the OECD , the G8 and potentially a member of the WTO .
I think urgent action from the European institutions is needed .

President of the Commission . - As you said , Mr Verhofstadt , we have been raising the issue with our Russian partners and , in fact , the European Union has already publicly reacted to the proceedings against Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev through the declaration by High Representative Catherine Ashton .
We believe that judicial independence and the right of each and every citizen to a fair trial - as enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights , to which Russia is a party - are of crucial importance to the strategic partnership between the European Union and the Russian Federation .
The Rule of Law is also a cornerstone of the ' Partnership for Modernisation ' that we are now developing with Russia .
We will continue to closely follow this and raise the issue in different formats and meetings with Russia , as emphasised in the last European Union-Russia Summit on 7 December in Brussels .
The European Union expects Russia to respect its international commitments in the field of human rights and also to respect the Rule of Law .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - This is not a question but simply a comment .
I think that this House also has to deal with this problem as urgently as possible .
The situation cannot continue as it is now in the Russian Federation .
I do not think that , just because we have many important commercial links , we have to stay silent on this issue - on the contrary .
In Russia , freedom of the press and of the media is a really major problem .
If you want to come out of this debate well , Mr Barroso , you cannot tolerate what is taking place at the moment in Hungary .
I would like to ask you why the Commission is being so lax about Hungary 's Media Act .
In every area , it violates principles that apply in Europe and beyond .
We sought expert legal advice .
In summary , the advice is that the Act violates the Copenhagen criteria , the Helsinki Final Act , the Audiovisual Media Services Directive , the European Convention on Human Rights , the UNESCO Convention , which does cover the media , the Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
I could continue , but I will stop there .
I would like to ask you , therefore , when will you intervene in Hungary appropriately ?
What is the timetable ?
Why have there still not been any infringement proceedings ?
My criticism is also backed up by existing jurisprudence in this field .
President of the Commission . - With Hungary , as with any other Member State , we have to implement European law in an objective , impartial manner .
We have to look at it very cautiously from a legal point of view , so we need to follow a clear methodology .
That is what we - in the shape of Vice-President Kroes - have been doing .
Yesterday , she gave extensive reports to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Culture and Education .
We have some concerns about Hungary 's media law .
By the end of this week , we intend to send a first letter to the government of Hungary to which the Hungarian authorities should respond .
I repeat : we have to follow clear , objective , impartial , legally-based procedures , because Hungary , just like any other EU Member State , has the right to impartiality on the part of the Commission .
I can reassure you , however , that we are following this matter very attentively .
I would like to ask that all the documents that Hungary has provided to the Commission be made available for inspection .
We would very much like the opportunity to judge for ourselves , and we think it is time judgment was made on this issue .
We have the suspicion , however , that Hungary may not have provided the full text of the Act , that it is playing for time .
Give us the documents , please !
In addition , I believe it to be downright difficult to play politics , for example , in the accession negotiations with Turkey , and to repeatedly harp on about the Copenhagen criteria only to forget them once a country is a Member States of the European Union .
President of the Commission . - Of course we are keeping this Parliament fully informed .
As I said earlier , Commission Vice-President Kroes met the relevant committees of this Parliament yesterday .
At the same time , you will understand that these issues have a legal dimension and that we have to follow the methodology in a very clear , objective way .
The Commission has a very good reputation and a level of credibility in all these matters that we certainly do not want to put at risk .
I can reassure you that we are following the issue with great attention and we have already expressed these concerns .
I have personally taken up this issue with Prime Minister Orbán .
Tomorrow , he is coming to this Parliament .
We can discuss this politically , but we also have to follow the clear procedures in this matter .
Mr President , a few days ago , the International Aviation Commission , which is conducting an investigation in Moscow , published its report concerning the causes of the disaster on 10 April of last year in Smoleńsk .
The Polish public is surprised at the report 's findings and is treating it as a document which is anything but objective .
It has already been proved during the last few days that facts which might be uncomfortable for Russia have been hidden , and the whole report is targeted in such a way that Poland has been held responsible for the tragic incident at Smolensk .
In Poland , no sensible person is questioning the fact that there were mistakes made by us during the whole process of preparing and carrying out the late President 's visit .
However , the Russian report bears all the marks of a political game which aims to absolve the Russians of any blame .
In relation to this , I would like to ask the following question : how does the Commission view this report and does the European Commission intend to do anything to clarify the causes of the tragedy at Smoleńsk where the Head of a Member State died as well as many representatives of the political élite of my country ?

President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to say to Mr Kamiński that nobody will ever forget this terrible tragedy , either in Poland or elsewhere .
We felt deeply the death of President Kaczynski and all those who were with him on that tragic day .
I am , of course , aware of the Russian report published last week and I am also aware of the Polish reactions to it , for which I have a great deal of understanding , given the scale of this tragedy .
That said , the Commission can act in these situations only when we have the right legal basis on which to do so .
By the way , we have never been approached by the Polish authorities to intervene in this matter although , of course , we remain ready to do whatever lies within our legal competence , should we receive such a request .
Mr President , I would like to make sure I have understood you correctly .
Until now , the Polish Government has not asked the Commission to investigate the reasons for the Smoleńsk disaster .
However , if the Polish Government were to ask the European Commission for help , would such help be forthcoming ?
President of the Commission . - As I said , we have to see the legal basis for it .
According to my information , it was a military flight and a state visit , and the regulation entered into force after the terrible accident .
So , from a legal point of view , it seems that there are not many arguments on the basis of which the Commission might intervene .
But we can , of course , always discuss this matter informally with the Polish authorities or with other authorities that may ask us to do so .
Mr Barroso , we are all aware of how important the stability of the euro is .
That being the case , there is one event that I found myself not quite able to understand .
This was the debate about the increase for the rescue package , where you gave the green light but Chancellor Merkel gave the red one .
My question , therefore , is whether you do not coordinate with one another at all .
I appreciate that such things do happen sometimes , but this is not the first time that I have come across or heard about something like this .
The media have taken a great interest in this in the meantime .
Yet this is not a mere domestic quarrel between you and Chancellor Merkel .
It is an important political issue .
I can understand that - believe me , I do not always see eye to eye with the Chancellor , either - but the issue concerns whether such publicly differing opinions do not help the financial speculators .
President of the Commission . - In the European Union , each institution and each government has its own responsibilities .
The Commission has some responsibility to present what it believes to be the right way forward for the euro area and for the Union and so , in a very comprehensive document regarding the annual growth survey , we expressed our opinion .
I think we had not only the right but also the duty to do that .
So that is what we did , and I think it was extremely well received by the markets , as we have seen in recent days , because they understood that now there was a real willingness to move in a decisive way on all aspects of a comprehensive response , including on the EFSF .
The market analysis is unanimous on the need to do more on that matter .
This is not just the Commission 's opinion ; it is also the opinion of the European Central Bank , and it was expressed in extremely clear terms .
I hope that the Member States will come to an agreement on the basis of the Commission 's position .
Mr Barroso , I fully and completely accept that you expressed your opinion , and the report .
My question remains , however - on such an important issue , where the euro is being speculated on , at a point in time as important as this one , how can it be that your opinion comes across as uncoordinated with Chancellor Merkel or President Sarkozy or other Heads of Government ?
That is the public perception , in any case .
President of the Commission . - The Commission does not need the Member States ' permission before we express an opinion .
Our proposal was made very much in line with the conclusions of the last European Council , when the Member States stated that they were ready to do whatever was necessary to protect the financial stability of the euro area .
They specifically mentioned the EFSF and said that they were ready to reinforce it .
So , in fact , there was no contradiction .
I cannot comment on the comments of others , but I can tell you what the position of the Commission is : it is a unanimous position that is shared by the President of the European Central Bank ; it is the position of the other relevant institutions that are keeping a very close eye on the financial stability of the euro area .
I think that we should highlight what unites us rather than some specific issues about the way we communicate .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Last week , a member of the European Court of Auditors , who retired recently after 15 years of service , made serious allegations in the media .
The allegations , which come as no surprise to me , pointed essentially to the lack of independence of the EU auditors , which affects the level of transparency in the reporting of irregularities .
The clarification letter published yesterday by Mr Engwirda does nothing more than confirm the Commission 's power over the auditors , and it calls into question the basis on which this Parliament has been granting discharge for the past 15 years .
It is now time for this Parliament to demand that the EU budget and accounts are audited by a truly independent body external to the EU institutions .
Without such an independent audit , the Council and Parliament are in no position to continue discharging the Commission of its financial responsibility .
Will you , Mr Barroso , allow an external auditor to review the accounts and tell us the truth about how European taxpayers ' money is being spent ?
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should point out that the European Court of Auditors is a fully independent body .
The Commission has absolutely no influence over its methods or audit priorities , nor would we seek to have that kind of influence .
It is in the Commission 's own interest , and in the European interest , to respect the independence of its external auditor .
I have never made negative comments about decisions of courts , be it the constitutional courts , the European Court of Justice or the Court of Auditors .
That is a basic principle of democracy : respect for the Rule of Law and respect for independent institutions .
A regular dialogue exists , of course , between the Commission as auditee and the Court as auditor , as part of the audit process .
This is normal and necessary to ensure the audit process works well and that all findings in the audit process are on a solid basis .
Such a dialogue is fully in accordance with all international standards .
I should probably also point out that in previous years , the Commission was subject to extremely critical reports from the Court of Auditors .
I think we should respect our institutions , namely the independent institutions .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr Barroso , I disagree with your response .
In response to the criticism made by the European Court of Auditors in the last ten years , the Commission has turned to the auditors - and this is recorded by the media - and asked them to change their methodology of work so that the report on EU expenditure would show a better figure .
In my 30 years of professional experience in the area of accounting and audit , I have never seen the auditee instruct the auditor on how to do its own work .
How can we now know if a reduction in the error rate is due to the change in methodology requested by the Commission or to an improvement in the controls ?
President of the Commission . - The Commission , like the European Parliament , has the right to express its opinions on the audit process .
You are now expressing an opinion on it , and you are fully entitled to do so .
The Commission is also a political body .
We have been elected by this Parliament , so we have the right to express our opinion .
In no way can this be regarded as a form of pressure , unless we are also to regard your comments as intolerable pressure .
This is , in fact , an exercise in transparency .
So , once and for all , we fully respect the Court of Auditors , we do not put pressure on the Court of Auditors and we try to do our best to implement the recommendations of the independent audit institution that is the Court of Auditors .
( NL ) Mr President , Jerusalem is the only , the eternal and the indivisible capital of the Jewish State of Israel .
Jerusalem , from its easternmost point to its westernmost , is and always will remain Israeli territory .
The European Union may rightfully be proud of Israel .
It is the only democracy in the Middle East , surrounded by a sea of dictatorial regimes .
In its struggle against Islamic Jihad , Israel is defending not only itself , but all that Europe , with its Judeo-Christian values , stands for .
The Commission will agree with me on that .
The European Union 's support for the Jewish state of Israel should therefore be beyond question .
The European Union needs to send out a clear signal to the international community that the EU 's diplomatic representation , simply and solely , belongs in Jerusalem .
That is why I would very much to like to ask Mr Barroso whether he agrees with me that the EU should immediately relocate its diplomatic representation in Israel from Ramat Gan to the Israeli capital Jerusalem ?
If not , why not ?
The same should , of course , apply to situating the future EU embassy in Jerusalem .
We are against having such an embassy , at all , but if they do have to exist , then establish the Israeli one in Jerusalem .
President of the Commission . - First of all , you know the position of the European Commission regarding Israel .
We fully support the existence of Israel .
As you said , it is a democratic state in a very difficult environment and we fully recognise the right of Israel to exist .
At the same time , we would like Israel to respect the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people , and we believe the best solution is for two states - Israel and the Palestinian State - to exist in full respect of each other and of international law .
Regarding the issue of a change of capital or our representation in Israel , we see no reason to change it .
( NL ) Mr President , I am , of course , disappointed with your answer , but you are indeed speaking about East Jerusalem and the fact that , this week , the Commission condemned Israel for beginning construction of 1 400 homes in Gilo .
Now , I wonder how exactly the local authority of Jerusalem ought to respond to that condemnation , when they are receiving applications for permits to build in both East and West Jerusalem .
They are , indeed , issuing permits to both Arabs and Israelis in both parts of the town , but what the Commission is saying now , and also said last week , is : you have to discriminate against Israelis in East Jerusalem because the city is one whole entity , anyway , and that cannot be changed , the town is governed by a single local authority .
What are you telling the board of the Jerusalem local authority , then ?
What should be their response to Israelis who are perfectly justifiably applying for permits to build in an area where they are quite entitled to live ?
President of the Commission . - I think the European Union 's position regarding the settlements has been fully in line with that of the international community , including Israel 's closest allies .
We believe the way the settlements issue has been dealt with by the current government has not always been helpful in terms of the current efforts for peace in that region .
The comments you made show precisely why we should not have a representation in Jerusalem as a result of the difficult situation in that extremely important city for Israel and for all of us .
So let us keep our commitment to peace .
Let us support Israel .
At the same time , let us not forget the rights of the Palestinian people .
I think they also deserve our attention and support .
We now come to the second part of Question Hour , a specific and concrete topic on innovation and energy .

( ES ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , the Commission is encouraging innovation in various areas of our energy system .
Among these are second generation biofuels , fusion , fourth generation fission , smart grids , renewable energy sources in general , energy efficiency in general , the use of hydrogen in fuel cells , CO2 capture , transport and storage , electric vehicles ; the list could go on .
Resources are scarce , Mr President , and not everything can be done .
Many Europeans are wondering which of these things the Commission is going to focus on in the current difficult circumstances , and I am relaying that concern to you today .
Which of these priorities is or are a priority for the Commission ?
President of the Commission . - That is a very difficult question , because all priorities are linked , so we need to complete the energy market - we need an integrated energy market .
This is also a way to have renewables and energy efficiency .
Energy efficiency is certainly a priority , but we also need to invest in low carbon technologies , because there is also an external dimension and we need to pursue our external ambitions - to speak , as far as is possible , in unison with our partners in the energy field .
There are four priorities which I would like the European Council to address on 4 February : completion of the energy market and implementation of all the rules of the internal market ; energy efficiency ; low carbon technologies ; and accepting joint efforts where the external dimension is concerned .
( SL ) Mr President , as things currently stand , the European Union must reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % by 2020 .
However , at the political level , we are also discussing a more ambitious target and we know that , in this regard , the sectors covered by the Emissions Trading System ( ETS ) , and energy in particular , would bear the brunt .
I would therefore like to hear your personal view as to when the conditions will be right for us to make this target even more ambitious .
What additional measures would the European Union need to introduce in the energy sector , or do these measures also include the conditions you mentioned when replying to my fellow Member 's question .
President of the Commission . - This is also a global process , not only a European process .
Cancún was a significant step in the climate negotiations .
At least it was able to keep alive the multilateral process and this was good , but , in fact , it was not enough from our point of view .
For us to go forward and commit to binding targets , I think we should ask others , namely the biggest polluters , the developing and emerging economies to make a comparable effort .
So far , they have not committed to it .
So that is why we have to find the right way to make them move .
At the same time , those countries that are ready to go forward and make more commitments can and should do so , and the concrete way that I am going to propose to the European Council on 1 February is to achieve more in terms of energy efficiency , an area in which we are falling short of where we should be .
On renewables , I think we are on target to reach our goal for 2020 but not on energy efficiency , so that is a concrete area where we can make more progress .
To ensure energy security and low costs to consumers in the future , Europe must use all types of low carbon energy .
That includes clean coal technology - an area in which , until now , development has been very slow .
Can the President of the Commission therefore give an assurance that support for research into carbon capture and storage will continue into the future ?
President of the Commission . - I can give an assurance that we will try to achieve it .
But in the end , you know , the Member States decide on the funding for research .
That is a matter that we are going to discuss when we present the multiannual financial perspectives .
But I certainly hope that Member States will give priority to investment in renewables and low carbon technologies , and focus on the technology priorities established in the European Strategic Energy Technology plan .
We are indeed proposing this for the next European Council .

President Barroso , you said just now that Member States are achieving less than half what they set out to achieve on the 20 % target for energy saving by 2020 , so why is the Commission not pushing hard to make that target binding on Member States ?
President of the Commission . - We are pushing for that .
We are trying to put the issue forward for the next European Council .
Energy efficiency is still lagging behind , as you said .
I am not happy with the situation and the Commission intends to reverse it .
Energy efficiency is now an integral part of the headline target of the EU 2020 strategy .
We are currently in talks with the Member States to establish national targets to underpin this objective .
We have already estimated that , with existing policies and measures , the saving by 2020 would be no more than 10 % .
However , the combined national indicative targets emerging in the Europe 2020 discussions give a result that is clearly more ambitious than that , but still likely to be well below the 20 % .
That is why we intend to follow a two-step approach , by closely monitoring the progress made with the implementation of national targets defined in Europe 2020 , and reviewing this progress in 2013 .
If these reviews show that our target of 20 % is unlikely to be achieved , the Commission will consider proposing legally binding national targets for 2020 .

( DE ) Mr President , President Barroso , I would like to ask you a question about the harmonisation of feed-in tariffs within the Union .
Commissioner Oettinger , the energy commissioner , is pursuing a strategy here that , in our opinion , and also in the opinion of the German Minister for the Environment , would result in the destruction of the most successful programme of innovation that Germany has in the area of renewable energy .
What are you going to do to prevent German feed-in tariffs being destroyed in the name of harmonisation , thereby preventing innovation in the area of renewable energy ?
What also are you going to do to ensure that Commissioner Oettinger does not buy time in this way when it comes to energy efficiency ?
He does not want to do anything until 2012 , even though you yourself have just said that it is already clear that the non-binding targets are not sufficient .
How are you going to speed things up ?
President of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , let me say that the Commissioner is the one who is proposing this additional approach to energy efficiency and I fully trust that he is doing his best to achieve that goal .
We are also trying to link this energy issue to other policy objectives , like the fight against climate change .
That said , we believe this is not just a matter of setting targets , it is also about work in the Member States , and so we believe that it is better for the Member States to establish their own national targets and then we shall see .
If they are on track , great .
If not , we will at least propose binding legislation .
But to achieve success , it is sometimes better to start with a kind of voluntary target .
At least , that is what we have done in the past and it has proved to be the right approach .
We do not exclude - quite the contrary - a possible need for binding targets for each country , but let us also give the Member States ownership of this policy and see how they develop their strategy .
( DE ) Mr President , on 4 February , the summit on energy will be held .
At present , there are two directives up for debate : on the one hand , the Water Framework Directive , and on the other , the EIP - the directive on environmental impact assessments .
In both cases , we need to consider how we can make these two variants compatible with each other in the long term .
The issues here are the environment and power generation .
It is my belief that approval procedures in this area should not take longer than a year .
The Commission has currently proposed a period of five years .
In the current situation , I do not think we can afford to take five years - which is , after all , an entire legislative period !
Is the Commission prepared to reduce the time accordingly ?
Is it possible to adapt the Water Framework Directive so that in the future , storage power plants can also be given an opportunity to ensure there is a balance between solar energy and , on the other hand , wind energy ?
President of the Commission . - In general , the Commission wants to reduce as much as possible the time for adoption and implementation .
The issue is that Member States usually ask us for a realistic lapse of time , so that implementation can proceed , as far as possible , in a coherent manner , avoiding distortions in the internal market , or at least in what we believe should be the internal market .
One of the concerns in the energy sector is precisely the fact that we still have very different regulations .
Some progress has been achieved , and we are not starting from scratch now .
On 4 February , there will be the communications that we presented recently , and there is also of course the historic ( I think we can now call it historic ) climate and energy package that we presented some years ago under my previous Commission .
We are open to reducing the time gap but it is important to have an agreement with Member States so that they act more or less at the same time in order to avoid these problems of distortion of competition in the internal market .
Research and innovation are vital to drive the competitiveness of our economies .
Last year , for the first time , a European university topped the world league tables for scientific research .
It was Cambridge University , based in the region I represent .
At that university , but also at many less well-known institutions and businesses large and small , I have seen cutting-edge research funded by the EU through the EUR 50 billion framework programme .
Sadly though , this framework programme also has a reputation for being the most complex and bureaucratic in the world .
Last autumn , this Parliament voted unanimously on a series of recommendations to simplify that bureaucracy .
What is the Commission doing to implement those reforms ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , I should like to congratulate Cambridge University and your region .
Secondly , I hope to have the support of your group in the discussion on the multiannual framework for appropriate budgetary commitments to support research , technology and innovation at European level .
Cambridge is one of the most developed universities in the world , but there are other universities in Europe in the poorest regions that unfortunately do not have the same kind of access .
Thirdly , simplification is indeed one of our priorities for energy and innovation , and in this case , for research .
We are also going to discuss innovation in the other part of the European Council .
It is certainly one of our priorities and we are very happy to have the support of the European Parliament for that .
We hope also to have the support of the Court of Auditors and others .
It is important to understand how important it is for scientists that they do not lose so much time on paperwork and that they have more time to concentrate on what they do best , namely research .
( PT ) Mr Barroso , in the name of financial consolidation , so-called austerity programmes are exacerbating divergences in the European Union , promoting antisocial policies , and putting worker 's rights at risk , and cutting public investment , particularly in the area of innovation and energy .
This means that if the same guidelines , policies and pressures continue to be applied to Portugal and other countries with weaker economies , divergences will worsen and we will be in an increasingly serious situation because of the European Union 's lack of solidarity .
Therefore , the question is : what measures will be taken to change the situation ; to effectively guarantee support for innovation in countries like Portugal and others for which there is not sufficient provision for public investment in these areas ; and , given the high prices that are being charged and the difficulties that are being experienced in many places , to guarantee people and industries access to energy ?
Mrs Figueiredo , you know our position on budgetary consolidation .
It is particularly indispensable for a country like Portugal that is facing certain sovereign-debt problems , but it also needs to be undertaken for the European Union in general .
However , in the recommendations that we made in a document that we have just published , we called on the Member States not , where possible , to reduce investment in education or research , and specifically not in the energy sector .
Moreover , there are Member States that are doing this with great success : Member States that are undertaking budgetary consolidation exercises but are even increasing funding for research and education .
In relation to countries with greater financial difficulties , the way we play it must involve solidarity and cohesion .
That is why I will not tire of advocating economic , social and territorial cohesion at European level .
Solidarity is important .
Solidarity cannot be an empty word .
We must , if you will pardon the phrase , make solidarity operational .

( NL ) Mr President , innovation will change our economy and society and should also create jobs ; that makes innovation one of the European Union 's most important initiatives .
I would therefore ask that all the Directorates General of your Commission jointly adopt a more holistic approach .
For example , there are , in fact , innovation partnerships currently under way which fall mainly within the remit of a single directorate general .
However , the approach needs to be more holistic .
I also think that the funds should be merged to a greater extent and that we should prevent fragmentation .
Ideally , we should have a single fund , which ought to include structural funds , as well .
I ask you to really look into this and create , in cooperation with Member States , a single , powerful momentum for innovation .
Just one more thing about energy .
We are always particularly interested in the big picture .
The picture needs to be big when it comes to innovation , too , but sometimes the answer is to be found in the small things .
It seems to me that very little attention is being paid to locally generated energy and , yet , that is key to our citizens ' empowerment .
Could I and all my fellow Members here then ask that you establish binding targets ?
President of the Commission . - You are rightly concerned with this problem of the lack of synergies at European level .
That is precisely why I expect the European Council to address this matter in a comprehensive way .
In fact , European Innovation Partnerships are an instrument for creating synergies between already existing programmes at European , national and regional levels .
By bringing them together under a single umbrella , I believe we can tap into their inherent innovation potential in order to deploy Europe-wide solutions that address societal challenges .
So one of the goals is precisely that of speeding up the step from research to market , from market-oriented innovations to market-oriented products and services .
This will create the necessary pull for participation .
Hence , we are seeking - in the Commission and now with the Member States - this comprehensive approach to innovation , looking beyond DGs ' portfolios and even national origins .
( EL ) Mr President , according to scientific research published in the international press and , recently , more frequently in the Greek , Israeli and Cypriot press , there are large quantities of natural gas and oil in the Aegean south of the island of Crete .
Therefore , there are energy resources in the territorial area , within the territorial borders , of the European Union .
This being so , how does the European Commission intend to encourage and assist research to locate and exploit these energy sources which can , in any case , be transported more easily to the European Union and better than any other planned pipeline ?
I should like to take this opportunity , Mr President and Mr President of the Commission , to state that I consider you to be very lucky people , given what fate has had in store for you .
You , Mr President , preside over a Parliament with broader powers following the application of the Treaty of Lisbon and you , Mr President of the Commission , are handling a major economic crisis in Europe .
I endorse all the action taken by Mr Barroso in this direction , but I should like to add something : there is also the American method , the method of quantitative easing .
Please investigate the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
President of the Commission . - Mr President , you cut the honourable Member off just when he was saying something nice about me , for which I thank him .
Regarding the first part of his intervention , we do not have the means - and it is not our priority now - to explore , or support the exploration of , other sources of energy in Europe .
Our priority in terms of infrastructure is to establish interconnections , because that has a critical European dimension .
We are going to make proposals on that matter to the European Council .
Something has been achieved already - for instance BEMIP , the Baltic Energy Market Interconnection Plan , for the Baltic countries .
Now we are working also with Central and Eastern European countries to establish , if possible , North-South interconnections , and things are going well .
I have just been to Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan in connection with work on the Southern Gas Corridor , a new potential means of bringing energy - in this case gas - to Europe .
This is where I believe the European Union can make some investments in energy infrastructures .


( LV ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , the Commission has come forward with what , to my mind , is a most welcome initiative to improve the energy infrastructure throughout the European Union - in terms of both electricity networks and interconnections for gas networks .
Your report estimates that the cost will be approximately EUR 200 billion .
Improvements to these networks will be carried out until 2020 .
The report also states that around one half , EUR 100 billion therefore , will come from the private sector .
My question to you is this : the remaining EUR 100 billion that will be needed to carry out improvements to energy networks by 2020 - where are these funds to come from ?
Are they going to be Union funds , are they going to be bonds issued specifically for this project , or some other source of finance ? Thank you .

President of the Commission . - As you said , it is correct that EUR 200 billion of investment is needed for gas infrastructures and power grids up to 2020 .

It is estimated that EUR 100 billion of this total investment need will be delivered on time by the market alone , whereas the other EUR 100 billion will require public action on permitting and leveraging the necessary private capital .
That is why we are now proposing , for instance , unbundling .
We are proposing many measures that will make this private investment more rational and more useful .
We will also take a closer look at tariff regulation practices in order to liberate adequate cost allocation principles .
To fill the remainder of the gap , the Commission proposes a new financial instrument to support projects of European interest for the new financial perspective after 2013 .
Beyond grants , innovative market-based solutions may be proposed such as equity participations , guarantees and public-private partnership loans .
As you know , I already spoke about European funds through project bonds specifically designed for this kind of project .

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , Directive 2001 / 77 / EC lays down the definition of renewable energy sources with the aim of identifying those for which public incentives may be provided .
Renewable energy sources exclude the incineration of the non-biodegradable part of waste .
Since 1992 , Italy has provided incentives by increasing its citizens ' energy bills and building incinerators , which are scientifically proven to be bad for people 's health and the environment and which the European Union has thus classified as a residual integrated waste management option .
Two infringement procedures have been launched with regard to these incentives and , despite formal legislative intervention , in Italy , waste incineration is still being encouraged as a source of renewable energy , with the Acerra case being just one example of this .
I realise that it may be difficult for you to remember the details of the situation concerning the CIP 6 , which is why I have submitted a written question .
However , I would ask you to confirm that incentives may not be provided for the incineration of non-biodegradable waste as a source of renewable energy and that there are no derogations in place for this .
I would also like to know whether it is not considered inconsistent for the Waste Directive to establish incineration as a residual waste disposal option , while Directive 2001 / 77 / EC encourages it as a form of renewable energy .
Does the Commission intend to review this matter ?
President of the Commission . - As Mrs Alfano rightly said , this is a detailed question .
I cannot know the detail of all the infringement procedures .
Let me tell you - I think it is an important point - just on energy and the internal market for energy , we have now 77 infringement procedures with Member States in general , and 55 on the internal market .
So if you provide me with that question in writing , I will be more than happy to send a reply in writing .
( DE ) Mr President , innovation , climate protection , renewable energy - on reading the EU 2020 strategy , one might actually think that the EU takes its environmental and energy policy measures seriously .
If you look behind the façade of environmental protection , however , a different energy strategy very quickly emerges : atomic energy as a so-called less polluting energy source .
In his response to a question asked by me , Commissioner Oettinger made his position quite clear when he said that nuclear energy is currently making an important contribution to low carbon electricity generation in the EU and will continue to do so in the near future .
The European Commission has no plans for a directive on the maximum service life of nuclear power stations .
All this 25 years after Chernobyl - for indeed , we will be marking a sad anniversary on 26 April .

My question , President Barroso , is this : do you , too , believe that we can really - and with a clear conscience - sell atomic energy to the citizens of Europe as a clean form of energy that is less damaging to the climate ?
President of the Commission . - You know the position of the Commission regarding nuclear energy .
With full respect for subsidiarity in that matter , some Member States have it and some do not .
No one is forced to have nuclear energy , but , in fact , it is true that nuclear energy is , in terms of climate change , less polluting than other sources of energy .
Having said that , the Commission has certain obligations under the Euratom Treaty .
At the beginning of the European Union , we had the Euratom Community , and the Commission has not only the right but also the duty to provide assistance to Member States that require it in the fields of nuclear safety or research into nuclear matters .
That is certainly what we intend to do .
Mr President , you are bringing an optimistic message from Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan .
The only shortage is figures .
I understand that at this stage , you cannot set the figures with Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan in terms of millions of cubic metres of gas , but does the Commission have any estimates or expectations of its own , obviously non-binding , which point to whether it would be able to fill the Southern Corridor as a whole or Nabucco in particular , which is supposed to provide 31 million cubic metres ?

President of the Commission . - From this visit to Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan , I have brought the clear commitment of both countries to give their full support to the European Union in terms of the Southern Corridor .
In fact , I signed a joint declaration with the President of Azerbaijan , Mr Aliyev , and the President of Turkmenistan , Mr Berdimuhamedov , said publicly that he was ready to supply enough gas for Europe - even more than we need at the present time .
Having said that , there are still problems to address .
Some of those problems have to be commercial decisions taken by the companies involved .
They also concern the way in which the different pipelines can be built and developed .
However , there is enough gas in that area to come to the European Union if the Member States of the European Union are ready to cooperate with those countries and others to make that project available - either Nabucco or other projects in the Southern Corridor .
( RO ) Given that an ever-increasing number of families in Europe , especially in the context of the economic crisis and rising unemployment rate , are spending in excess of 10 % of their monthly income on energy bill payments , I would like to ask you what specific measures the European Commission is intending to take to reduce energy poverty .
I would also like to ask you whether you are intending to increase significantly the percentage of the European Regional Development Fund which can be used by Member States to improve energy efficiency in housing , starting from the future financial perspectives .
President of the Commission . - The internal energy market legislation sets high standards of consumer protection with regard to the provision of a minimum service , transparency of billing , effective complaint handling and so on , and it provides choices to consumers .
I could quote many other areas in which we are proposing measures that directly address consumers ' concerns .
Regarding lower energy bills , we think that , in the medium term at least , in a real integrated energy market , true competition can achieve more than the current situation , in which there are many dysfunctions and examples of dominant market positions .
Regarding funding for energy security projects , as I said earlier , we certainly intend to propose it in the next financial perspectives .
So part of it has to come from market solutions , but part of it has to come from public investment .
The European Commission is preparing some proposals that will move in this direction for the next financial perspectives .
Colleagues , thank you for the discussion on innovation and energy which is a very important topic as we know very well .
Our thanks to you , Mr President of the Commission .
It is the second time today that you have been here in a hard discussion in the European Parliament .
Patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare ( 11038 / 2 / 2010 - C7-0266 / 2010 -
( Rapporteur : Françoise Grossetête ) .
Mr President , I will speak for four minutes and keep the remaining two minutes for the end of the debate .
Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , finally we can see the light at the end of the tunnel on this subject , which is extremely important for patients .
We could no longer remain in a confused situation in which the law was decreed by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
The directive now sets clear rules for the mobility of patients within Europe .
What type of treatment can one receive abroad ?
How and based on what criteria can one be reimbursed ?
How are the responsibilities shared between the Member State of affiliation and the Member State of treatment ?
All the answers to these questions now appear in the draft directive .
Allow me , first and foremost , to thank the Belgian Presidency for its excellent work throughout the negotiations .
Its capacity to convince played a decisive role , because it must be stressed that several Member States did not want this directive .
I think that was a question of irresponsibility .
I would also like to pay tribute to my friend and former Member , Mr Bowis , who is in the gallery .
As the rapporteur at first reading , he was also involved in creating this directive , and has always fought for patients ' rights .
I would , of course , also like to thank Commissioner Dalli , and my fellow shadow rapporteurs , who all made a very active contribution to the conclusion of the negotiations , and without whom nothing would have been possible .
What is at stake here for patients ?
Medical progress means that healthcare can no longer be provided locally for all diseases and that sometimes , it must be provided across borders .
This may be the case for patients who live in border regions , where healthcare provided abroad is sometimes closer than that provided in their own country .
It may also be due to the fact that there are more resources and expertise available in another Member State , such as for certain highly specialised treatments .
Finally , for some Europeans , it may quite simply be more practical to receive healthcare outside their country of affiliation because they have family living in another Member State .
Consumers , employees , students and now patients will be able to benefit from mobility rights within the Union thanks to clear legislation .
The idea is not , of course , to encourage any sort of medical tourism , as social security systems , their organisation and their management remain the full responsibility of the Member States .
Patients will now generally be able to receive all the healthcare to which they are entitled at home in another Member State , and be reimbursed up to the level of costs assumed by their own system .
For hospital treatment involving an overnight stay or using specialised or cost-intensive technology , the Member State may establish a prior authorisation system .
This will mean that the needs for planning and investment by the Member States in their healthcare structure can be taken into consideration .
Parliament has succeeded in ensuring that the conditions for refusing prior authorisation are limited and set out in an exhaustive list , in order to give patients legal certainty .
Parliament has made progress on other points , too : each Member State will have to establish national contact points to provide patients with the best possible information and guidance based on their needs .
Each national contact point will act as a one-stop shop and must cooperate with the other national contact points .
This will mean that patients receive clear and accurate information .
The issue of reimbursement , which is , in fact , a fundamental obstacle , has been greatly improved , and either a compensation mechanism can be used , as is currently the case with Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 on social security , or the patient will have to pay up front and be reimbursed as quickly as possible .
We also ultimately succeeded in ensuring that patients suffering from rare diseases do not have to fend for themselves so much , and can access external expertise to diagnose the disease and help ensure that prior authorisation for healthcare is granted .
I will conclude by saying that , thanks to European cooperation in areas such as the European reference networks , patients will have access to highly specialised care , the aim being to encourage the sharing of experiences in order to improve performance , diagnosis and treatment in the interests of patients .
This is why we can say to ourselves today that we have achieved our goal , and once again I would like to thank all my fellow Members .
I could say that what is being built through this directive is the Europe of health .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , Ms Grossetête , distinguished Members , let me continue in my mother tongue , Hungarian .
( HU ) I am very pleased to have the opportunity to participate in the debate about the directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
This is a very important moment , because now , after two and a half years , our talks about this legislative act are coming to an end .
First of all , let me express my thanks to everyone who made it possible for us to reach this very important agreement .
First , to the previous members of the Presidency trio , Belgium and its predecessor , Spain , for the excellent work with which they contributed to the achievement of this compromise within the Council .
Furthermore , on behalf of the Council , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its excellent cooperation and its willingness to reach a compromise , which resulted in this agreement .
I am convinced that the agreement will provide many benefits to patients in the European Union , and that it constitutes another important step in guaranteeing European patients ' rights .
As we all remember , the talks between the three institutions were not easy , but they remained constructive and result-oriented until the very end , and were imbued with the spirit of compromise .
I acknowledge that the debates within the European Parliament were not easy either , and that the report you will be voting on tomorrow reflects a compromise between the political groups in Parliament as well .
I would therefore also like to express my appreciation to everyone whose work contributed to the establishment of a single position here in Parliament and , in particular , to Mrs Françoise Grossetête , with whom I have been sitting almost side by side in this House for a year , and to all co-rapporteurs , without whose cooperation this legislative process could not have succeeded .
I am convinced that the text adopted will create an appropriate balance between patients ' rights related to cross-border healthcare and the Member States ' obligation to organise and provide healthcare services and medical care .
During the consultations between the three institutions , solutions that were acceptable to everyone could be found in several political issues .
Above all , we agreed on issues relating to the quality and safety of healthcare services .
We laid down the criteria for prior authorisation and determined the general conditions applicable to the reimbursement of the costs of cross-border healthcare .
Furthermore , we agreed on issues relating to the treatment of patients diagnosed with rare diseases , as well as on further cooperation between Member States in connection with e-health systems .
The Council believes that we have achieved the most important goal , that is , the consolidation of the case-law of the European Court of Justice relating to the free movement of goods and services in the area of healthcare .
There are , however , additional important factors which could contribute to patients having easier access to cross-border healthcare services in the future .
Notable among these are the national contact points to be created by Member States , which will serve to provide information to patients .
Moreover , the mutual recognition of prescriptions between Member States , as well as mutual assistance and cooperation , are also significant steps .
Last but not least , the directive will clarify the relationship with Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 on the coordination of social security systems , thereby guaranteeing increased legal security for patients .
During the implementation of the directive , Member States will be guided by principles which have already been acknowledged by the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on several occasions .
These are the principles of universality , the right to good quality care , equity and solidarity .
I would also like to add that this time , we will also be able to decide on measures that are efficient and , at the same time , improve competitiveness .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Hungarian Presidency is committed to the Council adopting this law as soon as possible .
According to the legal procedure , the Council will adopt the text after the usual legal and linguistic finalisation , after which the directive can be published in the Official Journal of the European Union within the shortest possible time .
Thank you very much , and let me congratulate once more everyone whose work contributed to the creation of this directive .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me congratulate Parliament on the major achievement of reaching an agreement on this directive .
I am particularly grateful to the rapporteur , Ms Grossetête , and the shadow rapporteurs for their hard work and their commitment to patients ' rights .
I would also like to thank the previous two presidencies - Spain and Belgium - for the hard work they did to conclude this dossier .
I believe that the new directive will provide a coherent and uniform set of rules for patients all over Europe .
It will also generate a new phase of cooperation between 27 national health systems .
The path towards today 's successful conclusion was far from easy .
I remember last year , when I took up office , people told me that negotiations on the directive were at a dead end .
The directive is a good example of the need for political leadership : it shows that , with courage and determination , decisions which are important for our citizens can be taken .
I believe that legislators must not leave the European Court of Justice to decide in their place , nor leave citizens with no other means of having their rights recognised than by going to court .
The Court recognised the right of patient mobility under the Treaty .
It is the legislator 's role to decide how to deliver such rights .
Allow me now to share with you some views on the directive .
Firstly , the directive makes clear that all Member States have a duty to invest at home , to provide their citizens with the healthcare they need without undue delay .
The directive will thus contribute towards reducing inequalities in access to care by helping to minimise delays across the EU .
Patients will be able to seek primary care with the provider of their choice across Europe .
As regards hospital care , the directive provides that , when the delay - I mean the waiting time for receiving treatment - is too long , the patient will be able to choose a provider in another Member State and will be reimbursed .
However , what precisely constitutes an acceptable waiting time will need to be carefully considered and defined .
The main progress achieved by this directive , as compared with existing legislation , is that patients will be able to choose their healthcare provider and will have access to information on the quality and safety of the care they will receive .
I can assure you that the Commission will carefully monitor how Member States implement the directive in that respect .
Secondly , the directive will give patients access to information on their rights and on cross-border healthcare - information validated by national contact points and not left to private initiatives on the Internet or other media .
Thirdly , on quality of care , the directive offers transparency and accountability in relation to national standards .
This should gradually lead to some convergence across Europe on the quality and safety of care .
Lastly , the directive lays the foundation for European collaboration on health .
While the cooperation networks set up by the directive are voluntary , I am convinced that all Member States will see that they have much to gain by working together .
This is a matter of solidarity in Europe .
I am therefore counting on the Member States to launch cooperation initiatives in key areas such as e-health and health technology assessments .
The directive also provides for European reference centres , which will facilitate the pooling of expertise and its dissemination across Europe .
I believe such centres can lead to better healthcare for our citizens .
Mr President , Minister , honourable Members , the final compromise which is on the table today reflects the essential spirit and fundamental purpose of this directive : to enhance patients ' rights to cross-border healthcare , while taking into account the sustainability of health systems .
This is a good day for the building of a ' Europe for health ' .
I should like to conclude by making the following statement on an institutional aspect of the text :
' The Commission has certain doubts that some of the future acts which the Commission has been given the power to adopt by the legislative act would be implementing acts .
When exercising its implementing powers , the Commission will not adopt , on the basis of the powers granted , acts that it considers as being delegated acts within the meaning of Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ' .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr Dalli , ladies and gentlemen , this really is an important day for patients all over Europe .
It was totally unacceptable that the Court of Justice of the European Union ( ECJ ) had granted patients the right to travel to another Member State , but that many Member States had not put this judgment into practice .
The only option available to every single patient has been to take legal action and even to go as far as putting their individual cases before the ECJ .
I think that this is a cynical approach , because these people are not strong .
They are ill , otherwise they would not need treatment , and , in the worst case , they could die before the ECJ has decided on their cases .
This is why it is high time for us to clarify the legal situation .
Mrs Grossetête and everyone else involved have also achieved a great deal for those patients in countries where the judgment has been implemented to a greater or lesser extent , including the establishment of national contact points and European reference networks .
The result has been an improvement in the situation in those countries where the ECJ judgment has , in principle , been put into effect , in the form of a move towards a Europe for patients and a healthy Europe , just as Mr Dalli has said .
I do not have much time , so I would like to use my last 15 seconds to thank the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Dalli the Commissioner , who has really committed himself to the cause and , above all , Mr Bowis , who is sitting in the gallery and is the father of this directive .
My sincere thanks and congratulations go to everyone involved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this legislation is actually superfluous .
I hope that it will continue to be superfluous because patients will not need to make use of it .
In an ideal world , patients would receive the best healthcare most quickly in the country of their birth or the country where they live .
The fact that we are discussing this today and adopting the legislation tomorrow is , as Mr Liese has rightly said , indicative of a cynical approach among the Member States .
It means that the Member States have not recognised what they owe to their citizens , in other words , rapid , effective and high quality healthcare .
It also shows that they would rather invest in other things than in these areas which provide services for their citizens and that is a disgrace .
In addition , the negotiations in the Council on this subject are not something to be proud of .
However , if this legislation is actually applied at some point , because patients need it , and that is not a good thing , I will be very pleased about what we have achieved .
I am grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , and to my fellow Members for their cooperation .
We have achieved a great deal .
We have succeeded finally in putting the focus on rare diseases .
People with these illnesses have always been sidelined and have found it difficult to obtain any treatment at all .
We have at last managed to establish information points in the Member States which will inform people about their rights .
There has been nothing of this kind available in the past .
If reference networks are set up in future , it will finally be possible for the Member States to share best practices , information about gold and platinum standards and scientific progress .
This has not been coordinated until now .
There are some individual beacons of excellence , but no coordination .
All of these things represent major successes , together with outpatient care and other areas which I will not go into now .
Of course , there are also things that make me feel sad .
I would have preferred not to have had the fuss and squabbling about prior authorisation , which simply shows that the Member States have not recognised the things that are really important .
Fortunately , however , there are some Member States with which we can work well and we have demonstrated that today .
Our objective must be to ensure that the healthcare system in every country is so good that no one wants to travel to another country whose language they do not speak .
If what we are doing today and tomorrow is a small step towards this , because it will become clearer which countries have good services and which have poor services , which are doing something for their citizens and which are not , then we will have achieved a great deal .
I hope that one of the minor side-effects of this will be transparency .
We need to know which Member States have high standards and which are at a low level .
I come from a country where I can feel relatively relaxed .
However , I am aware of the problems of people in many other Member States and I feel ashamed about this , because it is not worthy of the European Union .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for her hard work and , in particular , the Commission , Mr Dalli and his team , who have given the European Parliament and the father of this legislation in the previous parliamentary term , Mr Bowis , as much support as we could have wished for .
I would also like to thank particularly the Belgian Presidency , which is not present today , but which has done everything possible to ensure that this process was successful .
Although the Belgian Presidency did everything in its power , it could not always achieve a great deal , because of the sometimes stubborn , antediluvian attitudes of other Member States .
However , something has been done and I believe that we will be able to vote in favour of this legislation tomorrow with a clear conscience .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , looking back four years to the launching of the ALDE campaign ' Europe for patients ' , I have good reasons to welcome the agreement reached with the Council in December .
I would firstly like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , as well as the other shadows for their good cooperation and the great work accomplished , and also the father of this initiative , our colleague , Mr John Bowis .
The Parliament remained united and stayed firm during the negotiations with the Council .
We stood for patients and , for the first time , there will be a clear legislative framework in the EU for patients seeking treatment in another Member State .
We have to consider the agreement reached as a small step , but it is a real achievement for patients in Europe , which will strengthen their rights while focusing on their needs , the information available to them , and the quality and safety of care .
I am sure , however , that Parliament would have supported a more ambitious result .
Though I recognise the need for Member States to be able to set up prior authorisation to maintain the sustainability of their health systems , I regret that they - including the Belgian Presidency - have sometimes put organisational considerations above patients ' interests and needs .
But we represent our citizens and are responsible for representing them here in this House .
Let me just mention one example : quality and safety .
While Member States were keen on establishing quality and safety risks as a criterion for the refusal of prior authorisation , they have been reluctant to accept - and have opposed - any system for the sharing of information and upgrading of requirements in this field at EU level .
The ALDE Group welcomes the future directive , but we will be strict about its implementation and make sure proper reporting and monitoring is in place to ensure that the directive is correctly implemented , and that the prior authorisation and reimbursement provisions do not become an unjustified obstacle to patients .
Finally , let me highlight one of my regrets : the lack of ambition of the provisions agreed for cooperation in the field of e-health , again due to strong opposition from the most advanced Member States in this area .
The initial proposal from the Commission has been significantly watered down .
I would therefore like to ask Mr Dalli the following question .
Would the Commission consider the development of a stand-alone proposal on e-health , fostering cooperation and enabling interoperability of data and safety for patients , thus making it a reality in Europe ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , many in this House will remember that at first reading , this was an extremely hot topic , and I think we are hearing only some of the differences between us .
There were concerns about whether market forces would win out over services of general interest ; and that people who were concerned about patients ' rights to choose , and to travel , were being pitted against those who were asking which patients would actually exercise that choice .
I think what we have , at the end of the day , is a reasonable compromise .
As people have pointed out , in cases where things are medically necessary , with a need for urgent treatment , we already have a system in place under social security coordination .
This directive is more concerned with the market system , with choice , and with people 's ability to choose where to go , and to have money follow them .
So we have clarity now , in that Member States can put in place systems to enable them to ensure that needs can be met .
This directive should also be welcomed because it deals with issues around the legal dimension and legal certainty : with where responsibility for follow-up treatment lies ; with the question of redress if there are problems ; and with issues around ensuring that procedures are carried out by qualified medical professionals .
On the issue of rare diseases , we have also achieved a compromise that is better than what we were pursuing first time round .
As people have said , for many patients , this will work well , but we also need to take care of our patients in our own Member States .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking both of the rapporteurs , Mrs Grossetête and Mr Bowis .
Today , it is precisely two years six months and 16 days since the European Commission submitted the long-awaited directive on patient rights in cross-border healthcare , but the history of this directive goes back long before , when this issue originally formed part of the Services Directive .
It is now clear what a huge mistake it was to leave health services out of the Services Directive .
We must not forget that the agreed directive addresses only the rights of patients , and the issue of the free movement of health services in the EU remains unresolved .
The health systems in the Member States may be based on the same general principles , but the organisation of healthcare provision varies greatly between individual Member States .
The text we will vote on tomorrow , and which I support , is a major compromise between the rights of citizens and patients , and the concerns of Member State governments .
Despite the many concessions and adversities , the submitted proposal represents a small but important advance .
The proposed directive clarifies , albeit imperfectly , the rights of patients , providing them with access to information , fully confirming , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the exclusive responsibility of Member State governments for organising and financing healthcare , and for the quality , safety and accessibility of care within their territories , giving them the possibility to specify the rules according to which a citizen must , where appropriate , seek consent before receiving care abroad .
I hope , ladies and gentlemen , that we will also continue to work on the directive in this Parliament in the coming years , and that we will improve patient rights in the EU .
Mr President , tomorrow is the big day when healthcare becomes an internal market product .
The new directive treats healthcare as a piece of commercially tradeable goods .
Those who have the most money will be the first to access the places with the largest and cheapest supply of care .
This proposal , however , will maintain the existing two-tier healthcare system .
I wonder how many of my fellow Members can identify with what I 'm saying .
Healthcare is a basic need and one to which everyone should have equal access .
Those of you who are going to vote in favour tomorrow are probably thinking that you will be striking a blow for patients , but that will most definitely not be the case .
I am in favour of anything that advances the rights of patients , but if we adopt this directive , we can actually expect numerous problems in the area of patient rights ; I will give you a few examples .
Insurers will be only too happy to send patients across the border if there is a cheaper treatment option there .
That will decrease the supply of care in the patients ' countries of origin .
Any treatments that are no longer profitable will no longer be offered in the more expensive regions .
Far from giving them more rights , that will leave patients with no choice and they will have to travel across the border .
Besides , patients from regions where care is cheaper will not be able to travel to other regions , as they will not automatically be compensated for the additional costs which that will entail .
Health tourism , which is the intended objective of this directive , will , therefore , be restricted to just the rich .
Turning now to regions where healthcare is cheap and to those where waiting times are short .
Eventually , they will have so many health tourists coming in that their own local patients will be squeezed out .
We were able to read an example of this in Monday 's edition of the Belgian De Standaard and I can assure you that more such examples will follow .
I believe that every patient has the right to quality care and care which is provided in their own language , close to where they live , with their family close at hand .
Instead of that , Europe is encouraging patients to seek care abroad and then letting the market do its work .
Those of you who agree with that will vote in favour tomorrow ; those of you who agree with me should definitely vote against .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the directive initially contained some difficult areas .
During discussions in committee and in trialogue , we reached an agreement on a text that is balanced on the whole and which takes into account the needs of healthcare quality and safety , the general principles of reimbursement , prior authorisation , cross-border cooperation on the treatment of rare diseases and electronic health services .
We set out to achieve the goal of recognising the right of all patients to cross-border healthcare , thus preventing medical tourism .
The costs that are incurred by a health service to treat a national of another Member State should rightly be borne by the patient 's State of origin .
We also wanted to oblige Member States to guarantee basic levels of healthcare , but this was not possible .
In view of the improvements to the text achieved through mediation , we will be voting in favour .
This also applies to the other text under discussion concerning the European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias , which is a preliminary step towards submitting a legislative proposal aimed at achieving integration between the various existing policies .
The common objective of both measures is to stress the need for better coordination between Member States in the exclusive interest of citizens .
( HU ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , ladies and gentlemen , personally , I support the report on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
Numerous examples have demonstrated that a large number of patients seek appropriate healthcare services in other Member States .
We are all familiar with the Kohl case in Luxembourg , which is proof positive of this phenomenon .
Unfortunately , the external and internal differences within the EU , by which I mean the differences between the Western European and Eastern European regions , are not confined to economic differences and differences in social services .
There is also a wide gap in respect of healthcare , and it is the task of the European Parliament to reduce these differences , that is to say , the differences between Western and Eastern Europe , as healthcare of a uniformly high standard of quality can provide the means to reduce the number of people from one Member State using the healthcare services of another .
In addition , it is vital to standardise the role of health insurance companies , as thereby we could ensure that there would be no prejudice to the universal European principle of the freedom of movement .
Furthermore , I believe that it is important to coordinate the recommendations of the professional college to ensure that the individual Member States apply the same treatments to the same disease categories .
Health must not be a privilege , and the same diseases cannot be treated differently in Hungary and in Sweden just because the former is in Eastern Europe and people live under less favourable financial conditions , while the latter belongs to Western Europe and people there are better off .
( SV ) Mr President , I believe that tomorrow 's vote will be one of the most important votes that I have been involved in during my six years in the European Parliament .
That is not because it affects a lot of people - most people , of course , want , and have a right , to receive good , timely care where they live .
It is because , for those it does affect , it may be incredibly important .
It may even be a matter of life or death .
This also concerns the fundamental idea of European cooperation - free movement .
It is actually disgraceful that we are only now extending the freedom of movement to those who need it most ; those who are sick , those who are patients .
This is a compromise , and I know that both I and my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) would have gone further on many aspects , but we must now remember how things stood not so very long ago , with all the talk of healthcare tourism , the threatened collapse of national healthcare systems , the requirement for advance notification , or , to put it plainly , as patients , we were to be forced to ask permission before exercising the rights that the European Court of Justice has given us .
That was how things stood before and , in light of that , the fact that we have a decision at all constitutes an enormous success .
I do not regard this as a decision that we are taking as a result of what the Swedish or European Left has done , but rather in spite of it .
I remember the previous wording and the fact that , for example , the Swedish Social Democrats abstained from the vote on this at first reading .
Yesterday , someone called for the introduction of advance notification in Sweden .
I hope that Sweden does not do this .
We have managed without advance notification for many years and I hope we will continue to do without it in the future , too .
However , our decision will be made here in the European Parliament tomorrow , and then it will be up to the Member States and the Commission .
Implement this so that we strengthen patients ' rights instead of reducing them .
That is my plea to the Member States .
To the Commission , I would say : keep a close eye on the Member States , because we know that they will want to avoid implementing this .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , first of all , allow me to express our satisfaction regarding the progress made by the directive that we are going to adopt tomorrow .
For years , only the Court of Justice of the European Union has settled disputes regarding cross-border healthcare and patients ' rights .
Today , patient mobility is no longer an uncommon phenomenon in Europe , but has become a part of everyday life .
Cross-border treatment now represents 1 % of total health expenditure in Europe .
We should not , however , confuse patient mobility with the medical tourism that has developed over recent years .
The latter is becoming organised and , unfortunately , is proving to be increasingly profitable .
Health is gradually becoming a competitive market .
A German goes to Hungary for dental treatment , a British national - if he has the means - goes to France so as to be operated on more quickly .
There are numerous examples of this .
However , we must ensure that health is not treated as a commodity , so that we are all equal .
This is why , over the last three years , we have defended the principle of prior authorisation by the Member State of affiliation for hospital and non-hospital treatment .
I would like to pay tribute to the work of the rapporteurs - Mrs Grossetête and our socialist rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , whom I would particularly like to congratulate - which has enabled significant progress to be made , such as , for example , the reimbursement of care , the establishment of national contact points and European reference networks , the treatment of rare diseases and enhanced cooperation between the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , our work is not finished .
We need to go further , beyond the progress that has been made , in order to eliminate the disparities that we still have in Europe , and I know that together , we can ensure that European patients and citizens receive equal treatment .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , the primary merit of this agreement is that it provides a degree of legal clarification , as my fellow Members have said .
Until now , it was the Court of Justice that was responsible for these issues , which is the reason for the legal uncertainty that we are now eliminating , and I think that we should be very grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , the shadow rapporteurs and also Mr Dalli for their work .
This legislation improves patient information , quality of care , costs and reimbursement procedures .
I am also satisfied with the prior authorisation system for more expensive treatment , including hospital treatment , specialised treatment or treatment presenting a particular risk for patients .
The aim is obviously not to prevent patients from receiving treatment abroad , but to prevent medical tourism and also prevent risks to social security systems .
However , I have mixed feelings regarding the conditions for implementing this procedure , which could present risks of unequal treatment among patients from the Member States .
First of all , what does ' a reasonable time ' mean ?
We must take care to ensure that the term ' reasonable ' does not put patients ' needs at risk .
We must also see to it that the Member States establish financial procedures to ensure that patients , particularly those who are least well off , do not have to pay too much up front .
It would not be acceptable for administrative difficulties to diminish patients ' rights .
Finally , the various decisions of the Member States regarding the reimbursement of costs incurred for healthcare could also lead to inequalities between patients if there is minimum reimbursement , on the one hand , and something else , on the other .
Mr President , Commissioner , those are the points that I wished to make .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Bowis , this directive creates clear , transparent rights .
If I want to travel abroad , the situation will be clear and the decisions will no longer be arbitrary , as was the case in some countries .
In addition , better information will be available if I choose to go to another country .
However , the directive will have to be implemented by the national governments .
What the directive has prevented from happening is something which some members of the Commission and perhaps of this Parliament have dreamed of , and that is the opening up of borders in order to improve national healthcare systems .
I am proud of the fact that with the two rapporteurs , including Mrs Grossetête , we have succeeded in maintaining a balance .
We have shown our opposition to health tourism and our support for ensuring that the national systems are not undercut .
The directive will not resolve the problem of differences in the quality of medical care .
This can only be achieved by sufficient levels of investment in each Member State .
Mr Dalli and the Commission , I would be pleased , now that we have this directive in place , if you would focus more closely on the regulation on social security , which is the system on which everything is based , and which makes it clear who is paid and where everything is well organised .
You should put more pressure on the Member States to ensure that this regulation is implemented more effectively , instead of coming up with new ideas about deregulation and competition .
Mr President , this directive has taken concrete steps to consolidate patients ' rights in accessing healthcare services across the EU .
I have taken an interest in this directive as the implementation will have a particular impact in my constituency of Wales where , despite the UK Government negotiating with the EU on health matters , the subsequent management and delivery of healthcare is a devolved competence delivered through the Welsh Assembly Government .
My initial concerns are at the potential impact on the Welsh healthcare system , regarding reimbursement and prior authorisation , have been resolved as a degree of flexibility has been built into these proposals .
The ability for Member States and regional pairs to have the capacity to decide on eligible treatments with prior authorisation and a setting of a cap on reimbursements will go some way in alleviating concerns about the already overstretched and burdened healthcare systems .
As a result of the work of my colleagues in this Parliament , past and present , especially Mr Bowis , we can be content in having taken a step forward in ensuring clarification for patients , improved healthcare choice and greater cooperation between the different EU healthcare systems .
This should lead to a rise in standards throughout the EU , through patient choice .
( PT ) Mr President , the intention behind this directive has been clear from the start : to include health services in the objective of liberalising services and so satisfy the interests of economic and financial groups by expanding their areas of business in the healthcare field in all the countries of the European Union , and by treating healthcare as if it were just another commodity and its users as if they were mere consumers .
This proposal will exacerbate the inequalities between Europeans , harming those who do not have the means to resort to private health services or to healthcare in another EU Member State .
Even with the amendments that have been included in it , its adoption and the very high costs that it could involve would have grave consequences for some countries , not least Portugal and its National Health Service .
In practice , the same European Union that is imposing severe restraints on national budgets when it is a case of financing public services , such as health , is not concerned about overloading these budgets when it is a case of channelling public money into any private economic and financial group involved in the healthcare business , or into encouraging medical tourism .
In fact , in its eagerness to promote business , this proposal has not provided the proper safeguards for user safety or healthcare quality , particularly as regards non-hospital healthcare .
In contrast to what some people have said , the prior approval system does not make adequate provision for these cases .
It is therefore necessary for these intentions to be blocked as well , in a similar way to what happened in 2007 with the exclusion of healthcare services from the infamous Bolkestein Directive .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing a measure of disappointment over the position of the Council in relation to the directive on patients ' rights in cross-Border healthcare , since the Council has failed to adopt in the first reading many of the good proposals for amendment from the European Parliament .
The European Parliament , namely , established in the first reading a good foundation for the correct application of the rules of cross-border healthcare provision in the Member States in such a way that patients could , where justified , and in compliance with the stipulated rules and without burdening the courts , receive the outpatient or hospital care they need in another Member State .
It is therefore good that in drawing up the report in committee for second reading , it was possible to continue the original philosophy expressing the position of Parliament from the first reading and , starting from the currently opaque situation in cross-border healthcare provision , progress to a dignified solution to the problem .
The compromise text , backed by the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice and submitted for today 's debate , provides our citizens with new possibilities and new quality in healthcare , and we must therefore - in my opinion - strive for this directive to be applied in everyday life as quickly as possible .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after a legal process that has lasted for years , tomorrow , we will finally vote on the report that will put European citizens who are forced to go abroad each year to obtain appropriate medical care on a sound legal footing .
This will allow all patients , and not only the best informed or richest , to benefit from rights that have already been recognised over the years in judgments of the Court of Justice of the European Union .
By opening up national contact points , cross-border access to healthcare will no longer be a leap of faith in which , to date , patients already debilitated by disease have unfortunately all too often had to deal with bureaucratic , linguistic and financial problems .
With regard to hospital care , the State of affiliation may ask patients who decide to seek treatment abroad for prior authorisation , and this is obviously necessary to protect the stability of its health system .
More could perhaps have been done on certain points to protect patients , for example , with regard to the prior notification system , which will allow Member States to advance medical expenses , but only on a voluntary basis .
Lastly , I would like to stress my enthusiasm in taking part in a debate that has been conducted absolutely across the board with only one common denominator , namely , the priority of ending the ordeal of thousands of patients across Europe , and this moment seems at last to have arrived .

( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr Dalli , as I understand it , the job of politics is to help safeguard and improve the quality of life of our citizens .
This is not an easy task in the field of healthcare at the moment .
It is primarily the responsibility of the national states to guarantee the provision of healthcare and access to the best medical treatment , regardless of the patients ' incomes and of the regions in which they live .
However , even given the best possible national healthcare systems , there will still be cases where patients will need or want help , support and medical treatment from another country .
This directive lays down the legal foundations and guarantees that patients can access these services without additional red tape , without legal uncertainty , and without having to make large advance payments .
After the long process of negotiations , I see this directive as a genuine success , even though it will take a major effort by the healthcare systems in the individual states and by the insurance companies to implement it .
I very much hope that you will continue to apply pressure in this respect , because even the best directives can only be effective if they are properly implemented .
I am also calling on you to persevere in your attempts to extend preventive measures and healthcare provision .
I believe that we want the citizens of Europe to remain healthy for as long as possible and to have the best possible access to high quality medical care at the lowest possible cost .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , I would also like to thank and congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , who has done a brilliant job in grasping the baton passed on by our former fellow Member , Mr Bowis .

With all the congratulations that he is receiving , it seems a little like we are celebrating Mr Bowis today !
I think it is important to highlight the significant role played by the Belgian Presidency , which did what was necessary to reach this difficult compromise with Parliament , and particularly with certain Member States , whose position was - how can I describe it ? - resistant in certain cases .
This directive on cross-border healthcare is essential , even if it does concern only 1 % of national health budgets , because , aside from the figures , what we should be focusing on is the strength of the symbol , which is the legitimate right for every European citizen to be treated abroad and be reimbursed for the treatment received with all the correct information .
It was also important to clearly establish the safeguards in order to prevent any form of medical tourism , but also to introduce sufficient flexibility into the text in order to encourage diagnosis and treatment on both sides of a border .
I am thinking of certain diseases in particular , such as rare diseases .
I will conclude , Mr President , by saying that this is an essential first step , but that we will need to go further and battle further in order to move forward with the Europe of health that we all hold so dear .
( PL ) Mr President , there are no ideal laws .
They all have disadvantages as well as advantages , but this directive definitely raises more hopes than fears .
Europe , despite the rapid changes which are taking place , remains a continent of great differences and even contrasts .
This concerns both the level and the scale of healthcare , and it is evident that more fears are being expressed by the poorer countries , which are at a stage of transformation and are trying to catch up with the wealthier ones .
The level of funding and provision for medical needs in countries which are undergoing transformation is , however , far , far lower .
The directive , therefore , is a huge opportunity and a source of hope for all patients in the countries to which I refer .
Governments are facing a great challenge , but paradoxically , in fact , this directive will force many reforms and will draw attention to the scale of the under-funding of healthcare , because under-funding is not only the result of the limited financial capabilities of these countries , but is also the effect of mistakes in current policy and of underestimating the huge importance which health has for European citizens .
In thanking you for your attention , I appeal for support for this directive , regardless of the final form of what is being called the safeguard clause .
The safeguard clause is an expression of compromise , and ' compromise ' is a word which we welcome .
( DE ) Mr President , the draft directive on patient mobility could quickly lead to healthcare in the EU being reduced to the level of the lowest common denominator , by means of a service-based approach .
My group is strongly opposed to the ability to pay becoming a criterion for the provision of healthcare and to patients being turned into customers .
The proposed directive will enable health insurance companies to send patients abroad for cheaper treatment .
This will lead to high levels of competition and pressure on prices in the healthcare sector .
If a specific treatment is available more cheaply a few hundred kilometres away , and if patients are sent there by their insurance companies , the result will be that this particular treatment will no longer be available locally .
Therefore , the health sector will simply be following the neoliberal logic of the market , instead of giving priority to patients ' welfare .
I would like to ask you , ladies and gentlemen , whether you want to see health tourism in this sensitive sector .
I am in favour of patients receiving healthcare close to where they live .
This is a public responsibility as part of the provision of services of general interest , which must be available for everyone in their local area .
( DA ) Mr President , no one who is sick wants to go to a foreign country if the treatment is just as good in their home country .
That being said , this proposal is the best that we can achieve .
We are ensuring that the financing model is changed and that the national health systems are not undermined , while , at the same time , making sure that patients get better opportunities to be treated in other EU countries .
Patients can more easily seek treatment in another country if , for example , the expertise and treatment offered is not found in their home country .
This is important when it comes to very rare diseases that require very specialised knowledge .
If we can concentrate the treatment of these rare diseases into a few places in the EU , the patients ' chance of recovery are much greater , as doctors who use their specialist skills frequently are better at achieving good results .
However , this should not mean that the Member States thin down their health systems - something that the text also states .
Thank you Mr President , and I would also like to thank Commissioner Dalli and the rapporteur .
Thank you for your excellent work .
( PL ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , who has done a very difficult job .
It was not an easy job , because of the different positions of the European Union 's Member States and the different healthcare systems in different countries .
Achieving a compromise between expectations and possibilities not only required negotiating skills but , above all , needed knowledge of the subject .
We are all aware that the measures contained in the directive on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare - and the rapporteur has spoken about these measures in great detail - are what is wanted by the residents of the European Union , particularly in those countries where access to specialists and modern procedures is limited .
It is important that during work on the text of the directive , and thanks to the compromises which were reached , it was possible to change the attitude of Member States which initially blocked its provisions .
The essential features of the directive are accessibility , ease and certainty with regard to healthcare , and also the patient 's right to use the healthcare services of another Member State and to have specified costs reimbursed .
The directive is based on patients ' needs , and not on financial resources .
I would like to point out that the provisions of the directive will mean not only an improvement in the condition of patients ' health , but I believe that it will be the basis for improving the systems of healthcare in some countries of the European Union .
It should be emphasised that the directive is the first and a fundamental step towards patient mobility , strengthening patients ' rights and eliminating inequalities in the level of services in different Member States .
( ES ) Mr President , I think it is right to congratulate the rapporteurs , especially Mrs Grossetête and Mrs Roth-Behrendt , from my own group , on the work they have done to take a stagnant piece of legislation and make it useful , because it has enabled the right to public health to be included as a legal basis and has provided a new direction to enable us to lay the foundations for guaranteeing citizens the safety and quality that they always choose .
More importantly , their work has also meant that the role of the Member States of origin that have to pay and of those in which treatment is received can be clearly regulated .
I do not , however , believe that we should be satisfied with this alone , but rather that it should be the beginning of a much greater step forward , so that , as Mrs Roth-Behrendt was saying , this directive becomes just a formality because the level of equality achieved in all Member States means it is unnecessary for each citizen to be returned to their country .
In this battle , what we need to achieve is legislation that guarantees citizens ' rights in relation to the care they should receive - benefits and safety - rather than just the right that they already have to mobility between Member States .
It is quality that will create union , otherwise we will be taking very small steps .
( CS ) Mr President , those of us who have been longer in the European Parliament will surely remember how this standard came into being .
The story is almost laughable .
In the beginning , there was Mrs Gebhardt 's report , which was supposed to enable the free movement of services around the EU .
We separated off part of the report and resolved that health services deserved a special standard .
When the Commission finally submitted the directive , the free movement of health services was then gradually removed , leaving us the part which describes the right of patients to move freely around the European Union when looking for health services and healthcare provision .
I want to emphasise by this that our European-ness is sometimes more about these banners and symbols than about implementing the practical freedoms on which the Union is supposed to be based .
The directive has provoked numerous concerns among individual Member States regarding over-exploitation and the wrecking of national budgets .
I would like to end by saying that this is not quite what we wanted , but it is the right move and surely a step in the right direction .
I would like to extend my best wishes to the rapporteurs and to thank them for their work .
( DE ) Mr President , I very much welcome the fact that this directive is finally coming into force .
I would like to remind Parliament that at one point , it seemed as if the whole legislative process would fail .
I believe that it is due to the skill of the rapporteur and the negotiating team and , of course , the Belgian Presidency , that we have a result that we can be very satisfied with .
I am particularly pleased that the right of Member States to put restrictions on treatment in another country has been more clearly defined .
This was not the case in the proposal put forward by the Member States .
I think that we now have a decision that will allow the process of rejecting a request for treatment to be traced and verified .
This is an important step forward .
Who are we helping , in particular ?
I believe that we are helping the 60 000 people who are on waiting lists for organ transplants .
We have , of course , already adopted the directive on organ transplants , but this is another measure which will reduce waiting times .
We are also helping the millions of people suffering from one of the 30 000 rare diseases .
They will be able to receive more targeted and better quality treatment if they travel to another country .
However , I do not think that this directive will result in the development of health tourism in Europe .
I think that the fears expressed by those on the left of this House are totally unfounded .
This is not an issue that we need to concern ourselves with .
( PT ) Mr President , this text is the result of a great deal of work and negotiation , so I should like to thank Mr Bowis , Mrs Grossetête and Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
It is only fair to acknowledge the progress achieved , because this new version provides more guarantees regarding safety and service quality .
Although the wording of Articles 7 and 8 has been improved , I believe that more could have been done towards ensuring greater equity .
The majority of patients , especially those from weaker socio-economic groups , do not want to be treated abroad because of the language barrier and lack of family support .
Higher income Europeans do not face these obstacles .
I therefore fear that , in countries with healthcare systems that are universal and mainly free , the new legislation could act as an incentive to reducing investment in national systems and could contribute to creating a healthcare market for the rich .
Nevertheless , I hope that the application of this directive will contribute to reducing healthcare inequalities .
Mr President , like others , I welcome this debate and this directive and I thank our rapporteur .
I am perhaps a little more cautious about it than some Members are .
I think it would be wrong for the news to go out from this House that , from now on , all is well with cross-border healthcare .
We still have much to debate and to put in place to make this work .
Can I just quote - and I hope I do it accurately - the Commissioner 's own words ?
He said it was ' clear that all Member States have a duty to invest at home , to provide their citizens with the healthcare they need ' .
I see him nodding in agreement , so I have got the quote correct .
It is good that we have that message to take back to Member States which are not doing this and to those which have long waiting lists .
My own country , Ireland , is included here .
The truth is that people would prefer to be treated close to home .
That is why we have endless protests - and very valid protests - in Ireland about the closure of local hospitals and local services .
That said , this directive may work if it forces Member States and their health providers to look at their services at home and to improve the provision of services to those who need them .
They are going to have to pay for them anyway if our citizens take up the rights that this directive will give them .
In conclusion , people already have a right to travel for cross-border healthcare under Regulation No 883 / 2004 but they do not know about it .
If they did , we would see many more cross-border patients moving to get their services .
So let us inform our citizens of what they are entitled to , and let us hope that we do not have to travel across borders but that , if we do , we are able to do so freely and will have the services we need .
( HU ) Mr President , I welcome the first debate of the Hungarian Presidency .
First , I would like to note that it was worthwhile to discuss this matter outside the context of the Services Directive , as the issue of cross-border healthcare has numerous unique characteristics .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , as well as John in the gallery .
It is , however , extremely important not to call into question the Member States ' obligation to provide primary care .
Member States are responsible for providing care to their own citizens .
It is very important to affirm that this directive is not a privilege for the wealthy , but a tool for providing better care to patients with rare diseases .
We were guided by this purpose in our work .
It is also a very important consideration that the directive will enable us to make better use of natural conditions .
I am referring , for example , to Hungary 's spas , which can cure certain diseases much more effectively and are immovable .
Obviously , it is the patients who must come to us .
It is very important to continue along this road , so that the healthy , the sick , the European citizen can feel that the European Union is about them and for them .
( MT ) Mr President , many of us pay little attention to our health whilst we are still in good health and do not require medical care .
However , when we find ourselves in a precarious medical condition , we automatically begin to understand how important it indeed is to us and how vital it is to have a proper health system , not just a good system , but an efficient and effective one too .
European Union citizens can benefit from medical treatment from around the different Member States when their condition is not curable in their own country .
We must keep in mind that this should be the last resort and that it should not be encouraged , as it is the most expensive option and , in addition , impractical .
We should only resort to it when there is no other course left to take .
However , when the latter turns out to be the case , we have to ensure that the bureaucracy involved is reduced to a minimum , and that we improve upon the quality of access and security .
Member States must also be furnished with the necessary tools to protect their health systems and to cope with the extra influx from other countries that they might have to deal with .
It would be ideal , therefore , were the Member States to be granted authorisation beforehand .
What clearly emerges within this context is that the current rules that are in place are not adequate - on the contrary , they are unclear and inconsistent .
However , as we saw in the organ donation case , we must endeavour to come up with solutions so that Europe can progress in this area and offer the best medical services to its citizens .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to acknowledge with enormous relief the fact that Parliament has finally reached political agreement on the right of patients to cross-border health services under conditions which , for years , have been safeguarded only by the European Court of Justice on the basis of legal proceedings .
I am pleased that today 's compromise formulates the same sort of payment conditions that some of us were advocating for the Services Directive seven years ago .
I would like to offer my sincere thanks to my colleagues , Mrs Grossetête and Mr Bowis , who I salute for the achievement of this acceptable agreement and also for drawing up important safeguards for the enforcement of this right .
I believe that the right to mobility will make treatment for serious conditions accessible to all Europeans , and will ultimately lead to shorter waiting times for operations throughout the EU .
One of my lifelong personal goals in the area of healthcare has thus been fulfilled .
I would like to add that we still face a range of issues , for example , resolving on-line healthcare services , the mobility of health workers and others .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Győri on the mandate she currently has , and I wish her and the Hungarian Presidency every success .
I would like to congratulate everyone who contributed to this draft report which we are debating today .
As you may have learnt , Romania belongs to the group of countries which have had reservations about a series of compromises which have been reached within the Council .
These reservations are not an indication of Romania 's opposition to cross-border healthcare .
They conveyed the Romanian Government 's concern about the financial stability of cross-border healthcare and the proportions it may assume because , as you are very well aware , some Member States have a very small national income .
On the other hand , investments offer a means of reducing this risk .
However , at the same time , I think that the reforms to Member States ' healthcare systems are of paramount importance .
In this instance , I believe that the European Commission ought to be involved more regarding these reforms to the healthcare systems .
( DE ) Mr President , patient mobility represents a huge step in the direction of a Europe for citizens and this directive is clearly structured .
It not only has a father , Mr Bowis , but also a mother , Mrs Grossetête .
I would like to thank them very much for all their efforts .
We have spent a long time discussing the right path to take and we now know that we are not yet on the fast track .
However , we have a firm , well-designed foundation on which to build .
The situation is a complex one .
We have 27 Member States all at different starting points , both in terms of the structure of their healthcare services and their insurance systems .
Prior authorisation for a hospital stay in another Member State and the recognition of the ethical and moral principles of each country 's healthcare legislation represent the right approach .
On the one hand , this enables support to be given to insurance companies and national responsibility to be encouraged and , on the other , it allows all citizens to have access to the services offered by other Member States .
This is a major step forward , particularly with regard to rare diseases .
Every Member State has a different level of facilities . However , all of them can now benefit from research findings and the structures already in place elsewhere .
In addition , specialists will have the opportunity to develop their skills further , because of the increased demand resulting from more people having access to services .
For the people in my region , which is close to the border with Luxembourg , Belgium and France , cross-border access to health services is a major benefit and will enrich their everyday lives .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rights being accorded by this directive - rights that had , as a matter of fact , already been recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union - enable all patients in the Union to benefit from healthcare .
This proposal clarifies and facilitates access to cross-border healthcare , along with the Member State of affiliation 's exercise of its right to reimbursement .
It is a step forward in the process of European integration , in the strengthening of solidarity , and in the Europe of the citizen .
We will have shorter waiting lists , improved quality of healthcare , competition and an incentive for scientific research .
Rare diseases are a priority , and diagnosis and treatment can now be carried out in the Member State most suited to that end .
This directive is for all Europeans who need healthcare .
The Portuguese Minister for Health is therefore quite wrong when she says that this option is for better-educated people with greater financial resources : that is what happens now , without the directive .
Portugal has excellent healthcare and excellent healthcare professionals , and cannot remain on the margins of this important project .
The country must take advantage of this directive to modernise even more and compete in terms of being able to provide services in this area to all Europeans in need of them .
My congratulations to the wonderful rapporteur who has done an excellent job : Mrs Grossetête .
We are now going to start the Catch-the-Eye procedure .
I have 17 people who have asked for the floor .
Given the importance and the significance of this measure , I intend to take everybody , but you must keep to one minute and the microphone will be switched off at that point .
Can I just say to the parents of this measure , to John Bowis in the strangers ' gallery and to Mrs Grossetête , the current rapporteur , and to all the shadow rapporteurs : patient power has spoken ; the European Parliament has listened .
Thank you all very much .
( HU ) Mr President , what I welcome in this directive is a clearer definition of patients ' rights , the end of endless waiting lists and the proposed solution to the issue of no professionals being available in one 's own country .
I am certain that we all understand and have empathy for the position of the healthcare systems of new Member States with modest financial capacities , as we also have to reckon with the risk of the emigration of a qualified workforce .
If we vote yes , we will be demanding another immense effort on the part of the healthcare systems of Member States with more humble means , but if we vote no , we will indirectly ensure that the application of patients ' rights in the very same countries will remain limited .
I am convinced that we will be able to find possibilities to balance out the operation of unequally equipped Member State healthcare systems .
My country , Hungary , for example , could offer competitive services in balneology , physiotherapy or dentistry .
Mr President , I am deeply disturbed that our amendment to require medical regulators in one country to tell their EU counterparts when a health professional is facing disciplinary or criminal proceedings failed at the committee stage and will not be put to the final vote on this new EU cross-border health law .
Let me tell you about the case of German doctor Daniel Ubani , who unlawfully killed my Cambridgeshire constituent , David Gray , by administering 10 times the recommended dose for a painkiller .
He was struck off in Britain yet he continues to practise in Germany today .
Then there is the case of Dr Marcos Ariel Hourmann , convicted for manslaughter for deliberately administering a lethal injection in Spain , yet working at the accident and emergency department of West Suffolk Hospital , also in my constituency , despite a clear request to Spain about his fitness to practise .
These examples show that there is a huge loophole in European law which allows health professionals recognised as unfit to practise in one of our countries the opportunity to work and to put patients at risk in another .
I would ask the Commissioner to explain why .
( HU ) Mr President , I kindly request that the representatives of the Hungarian Presidency , as well as the Council , use this half-year , this six-month period of the Hungarian Presidency , to include the unique problems of the new Member States , of post-communist countries such as Hungary , in these debates .
When , for example , we are now talking about introducing a quasi-standardised , Europe-wide cross-border healthcare system , we must not forget to address the issue that in Hungary , for example , qualified and well-trained nurses are working for salaries of around EUR 250 a month , and doctors for EUR 500 or 600 .
Does the European Union not find it extremely unethical , immoral and unacceptable to celebrate some sort of standardised European healthcare system without paying attention to salaries ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ET ) Mr President , we are taking an important step forward in the interest of patients .
Many here spoke about that today .
Yet what stood out for me was the fact that , once again , there was also an emphasis on the fear of encouraging medical tourism .
What came through in those speeches was a fear that patients from Member States with a lower standard of living or a lower national health budget would clog up doctors ' surgeries in the richest countries , meaning that patients from those countries would be squeezed out .
Let us think about this , though .
This fear is not necessary .
Patients will be reimbursed the cost in their home country , and the difference must be paid by the patient .
Patients will not have enough money to cover the difference if prices are double or triple the amount in their home country .
I am embarrassed to hear that we are still afraid of the myth of the so-called Polish plumber .
Mr President , the importance of healthcare and this directive cannot be overemphasised .
It can have fundamental consequences for Member States ' health systems .
The areas that are controversial and worrying have been dealt with , I am pleased to say , and the result is a strong , defining directive that will strengthen Member State positions in healthcare .
The challenge was to protect the integrity of healthcare systems while offering patients greater choice .
The need for Member States to retain control over the policy direction and budgetary requirements of their health services was met by the pre-authorisation clause and the fact that Member States would choose which services were carried out .
E-health was also dealt with in a very sensible fashion in that it is offered in order to provide flexibility , and Member States can pick it up if they wish and when they wish .
Overall , we have before us a piece of work that secures Member States ' autonomy in their health systems while offering patients best service .
I congratulate the rapporteur and John Bowis for a job well done .
( GA ) Mr President , you have generously given everyone a chance to speak .
Therefore , I will respect the arrangement and speak for just one minute .
This was a very interesting debate and , personally speaking , very instructive .
In particular , I am pleased that the European Union is giving priority to our patients , be they rich or poor .
And also , it will greatly help our patients that information will be available in one place , in every country .
This directive will also put pressure on all states to provide a high quality service because , in its absence , our citizens will want to travel to another country where that service is available .
Finally , not much has been said about e-health , but that is a very important resource as well , and we will hear more on the topic in future .
( HU ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner Dalli , I congratulate Mrs Grossetête on this excellent report .
I would like to highlight four of its elements .
First of all , the establishment of national contact points is extremely important for obtaining information - that is , obtaining information by patients .
It is vital to know exactly when conditions should be subject to prior authorisation .
This is very important in the case of rare diseases .
It is also crucial that , as a general rule , patients cannot be required to make payments in advance .
Finally , I would like to point out the issue of cross-border healthcare regions , which is of extreme significance to Hungary and Central Europe , as along the German-Austrian border , or along the Hungarian-Slovak or Hungarian-Romanian border , where linguistic boundaries do not overlap national borders , there are many underdeveloped , redundant and unexploited healthcare capacities , while language barriers are non-existent .
Once again , please accept my congratulations .
( RO ) Mr President , providing access to cross-border healthcare services is a basic prerequisite enabling patients to enjoy the best possible treatment available .
This can be accomplished by defining the clearest and most practical rules possible .
The improvement of patient rights , especially through the provision of information and cooperation between Member States , can be achieved by developing the e-health system and distributing information about cross-border healthcare .
The promotion campaigns supported by the cross-border cooperation programmes can provide patients with a level of information which will enable them to use the system , with the fewest possible abuses , in accordance with the approved regulations .
This is why we think that e-health and the efficient promotion of cross-border healthcare systems are basic elements required to implement the directive 's recommendations .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs on the creation of this important document .
Today , people face too much uncertainty as regards the issues of access to care in other European Union Member States , reimbursements for services provided and responsibility for clinical follow-up .
Prescriptions issued in one Member State are not always recognised in other countries .
This directive is essential for our people , because the current system is complicated and it is difficult to obtain appropriate information .
Furthermore , scientific progress is very uneven and therefore , this directive would provide patients with the opportunity to obtain appropriate treatment in another Member State , if it is not currently available to them .
This would allow patients to take real advantage of the benefits of the single market and would have a positive impact on more equitable reform of each Member State 's healthcare system in the future .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this measure is certainly an all-embracing measure , and the rapporteur and those who have helped to finalise it deserve our heartfelt congratulations .
Cross-border healthcare means breaking down borders and allowing patients freedom of choice , which is entirely in keeping with the freedom of movement typical of the European Union .
This health mobility is now recognised for both rare diseases and highly specialist diseases that require prompt responses .
The timely and appropriate nature of services make it possible to affirm a right : the right to health .
Healthcare provision is becoming electronic and will reduce treatment disparities between European Union citizens .
In the long term , this measure could even turn out to herald a form of European accreditation guaranteeing high technological and personal standards .
( CS ) Mr President , the aim of the compromise draft directive , following two years of discussion , is mainly to provide legal certainty for patients in cross-border healthcare situations .
This is surely a positive outcome .
The complexity of the discussions , however , has made clear not only the differences between health systems in the various Member States , but also the different financial terms under which healthcare is provided to European citizens .
The fact that this is a highly sensitive problem can also be seen from the current mass resignations of frustrated doctors at Czech hospitals .
The background to this includes the risks or uncertainties arising in relation to the impact of the directive , for example , in the sense of health tourists seeking high quality but cheaper healthcare .
Only time will tell whether this turns out to be a marginal issue or whether the unarguably positive impacts of the directive will prevail .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Grossetête , the rapporteur , and the father of this directive , John Bowis , for their tremendous work on this directive , the aim of which is safe and high quality cross-border healthcare .
I would like to emphasise clearly the need for this regulation , in view of the hitherto ambiguous arrangements for treating patients abroad , which has caused uncertainty for patients , particularly in the case of serious illnesses .
I am delighted that the regulation includes special measures for these patients in particular .
I support the line taken by the rapporteur , who emphasises that this legal arrangement is for the patients who need it , and not just for those who can afford to pay for it .
The regulation thus represents a significant step towards patient mobility in the EU .
The agreement with the Council represents a balance between the positions of the Member States and the European Parliament ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , hitherto , access to cross-border healthcare in Europe has been affected by various limitations relating to long waiting times , a complex system of reimbursements and also difficulties in identifying responsibility for clinical follow-up in relation to cross-border healthcare .
The directive that the European Parliament is about to vote on is an important step forward because it clarifies these administrative issues and improves cooperation between Member States , while strengthening healthcare quality and safety standards .
By setting up national contact points , patients will be able to find out about the availability of healthcare in another EU State , administrative procedures , complaints and appeals .
This opportunity is no longer based on an ability to pay but on the genuine right to a more informed choice .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and all those who contributed to this important document .
The road to the final agreement was very long .
It might at first seem that everyone accepted the document , but there are some sceptics here who fear perhaps uneven service costs or too many bureaucratic requirements and possible health tourism , but in my opinion , the directive really has balanced mechanisms for avoiding the possible negative impact of this document .
Nevertheless , the most important thing is to create conditions for patient mobility , to provide the opportunity to be a European Union citizen , i.e. the most important thing is to also be able to obtain services easily while moving freely throughout the European Union .
The things that deter people from exploiting this opportunity are language barriers and a lack of information .
Therefore , the planned contact points will give patients all the required information , more clarity , confidence and self-care .
Health is important to all of us and combining forces will ensure that we move forward in this direction .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are debating a directive which truly does resolve the problem of the use of health services in other Member States .
These services are already being used .
However , the directive harmonises and regulates the conditions of use of such services .
I agree with what my fellow Members said about the need for health services to be of a high standard and to be available to citizens close to where they live .
However , we often have to use health services in other Member States , especially for rare diseases and new treatments .
I also welcome the fact that special reference is made to health services at hot springs and spas .
Use of these services allows us to improve the prevention and treatment of numerous diseases at little cost and this may be very important to the ' health ' of our insurance funds .
I call on you , Commissioner , to give real support to this initiative to promote these services .
( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , this directive establishes rules for facilitating access to cross-border healthcare that is safe and high quality , and promotes cooperation between the Member States while fully respecting national jurisdictions .
It includes fundamental values of universality , of access to good quality healthcare , of equity and of solidarity .
There are clear advantages for patients , especially those suffering from rare and complex diseases , since they will be able to access centres of expertise in the area of the disease from which they suffer .
This directive is yet another example of Europe being put at the service of its citizens .
We all deserve congratulations , especially the Commission , the Council and our colleague Mrs Grossetête , on their excellent work and on bringing this directive to fruition ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Mr President , cross-border healthcare is a necessity nowadays .
This directive creates the preconditions to a Europe with no borders in the medical sector .
Patients suffering from serious chronic diseases can now obtain specialist care , they have greater mobility and more comprehensive information from contact points , and they have the facility to cover their costs without fuss .
The new Community directive creates new challenges , pressure to modernise the national health systems in the 27 Member States of the European Union and , unquestionably , the need for ongoing networking and cooperation between all the medical systems in the 27 Member States of the European Union , with the objective of exchanging best practices , promoting e-health and achieving permanent improvements in the standard of cross-border healthcare .
This is a challenge that we need to address ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , once again , let me congratulate Parliament on the major achievement of reaching a conclusion on this directive .
I am very pleased to see this directive being adopted .
I must say that I cannot agree with the inference that this initiative promotes health tourism or enables health insurance companies to reduce costs .
Rather , it is an assurance that citizens in need of healthcare can be in a better position to get it , freeing them from bureaucratic shackles that sometimes preclude them from doing so .
I believe the directive is a real breakthrough for patients and for reinforcing a Europe of health .
I must agree with Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mrs McGuinness and others that this should be an incentive for Member States to invest in their own healthcare systems because , as I have said in public many times referring to this directive , we do not want to make nomads out of our citizens .
We want our citizens to get the best treatment they can get at home .
With this directive , patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare are now enshrined in EU legislation , but our work does not stop here .
I refer here to Mrs Parvanova 's question about possible stand-alone proposals on interoperability .
I must say that interoperability is also key to making this initiative , this directive , operational and implementable , because I cannot see us implementing this directive in a really good way without a proper interoperable e-health system .
On the other hand , interoperability is also very important for increasing equality in healthcare and improving the sustainability of healthcare .
I now look forward to working together with the Member States to see this directive properly implemented and enforced throughout the EU .
Much remains to be done , both at European and national level , to ensure that cooperation between health systems in Europe becomes a reality .
You can count on me to pursue this challenge with all my determination and energy .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , Mr Bowis , thank you very much for this productive debate .
I believe that it illustrated very well the points that had been the most difficult to deal with for the participants of the debates during the past years , both in the Council and in this House , and I am also very pleased to note that the overwhelming majority of Members were in agreement .
Yes , this directive will create a clearer situation and a more transparent system to serve the European citizens .
As it will become evident at the programme presentation to be held tomorrow , the Hungarian Presidency intends to put people at the heart of its programme .
It has also become conspicuous that what we have created here is not perfect .
There is still room for further work , as Mr Dalli mentioned just now .
I found that the debate about the single market and the Services Directive , and how all this ties in with patients ' rights , was very interesting .
I believe that it was a very smart solution that we did not approach the issue from the side of services , as everyone remembers what an uproar the Services Directive caused when it was first adopted .
It was a correct step to create this directive through the issue of patients ' rights .
It will enable the free movement of patients and will still allow patients to have access to services of a better quality and at the right time .
I therefore believe that , though through a different approach , we did reach our goal .
What is very important is that this directive will reinforce the freedom of choice in addition to the principles of equal opportunities , the right to good quality care , equity and solidarity , which I have mentioned before .
Mr President , honourable Members , I am very happy to see this directive created during the Hungarian Presidency .
The credit , however , does not go to us but to our predecessors , Belgium and Spain , as well as to the Members of this House .
I am thankful that the excellent cooperation between the Council and Parliament could serve the European citizens to such an extent .
I would , of course , like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mrs Grossetête on the excellent work done by her and the shadow rapporteurs from the various groups on a very delicate and very complicated issue , which I believe we should publicise widely , as it is one of the issues that is genuinely going to reach all the citizens of the 27 Member States .
Congratulations , Mrs Grossetête .
Mr President , I completely share your viewpoint and , first of all , I would like to thank the many Members who have spoken throughout this debate in support of this directive .
Once again , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs from each political group - I can see Mrs Roth-Behrendt , but I am thinking of all my fellow Members and I cannot mention them all .
I want to thank them because they all played an active role in and made a major contribution to the efforts to reach this political agreement with the Council on 21 December , which will be successfully concluded tomorrow .
To those fellow Members who have expressed some reservations regarding medical tourism , among other things , I say ' No !
We are taking care of that ' .
The directive contains a safeguard clause for the Member States and enables them to be in control of planning their healthcare and infrastructures , precisely to prevent medical tourism .
To those who think that this directive is not ambitious enough , I say , ' You are right , I , too , would have liked it to have gone further ' .
However , we need to consider today that we are at the first stage of this directive , and I can see that Commissioner Dalli , who has helped us a great deal in this respect , agrees with me .
Together , we are going to ensure first and foremost that this directive is transposed under the best possible conditions .
In 30 months ' time , this directive will be applied , and we will all need to be vigilant in our Member States to ensure that it really does promote patients ' rights .
I will conclude by saying that tomorrow 's vote is essential .
I am expecting you to ensure that this directive is a great success , because that success will be a gift to patients , as finally we are going to recognise patients ' rights to high quality healthcare .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
During the debate in committee concerning the draft directive on cross-border patients ' rights , there were few who , similarly to my colleague , Mr Peter Liese , did not see the dangers but rather the opportunities in this law .
We Hungarians share his opinion .
Although the compromise now made , which can be considered a sound compromise between patients ' rights and Member States ' concerns , greatly differs from the previous draft report , the opportunities still remain .
We could say that this is a small step in the right direction .
What are these opportunities ?
While earlier , many envisioned the sudden influx of unrealistically large numbers of foreign patients and the collapse of national healthcare systems , my opinion is that instead , it represents a chance for us to make better use of the natural assets of our country in the future .
I am not only referring here to our medicinal waters , but also to our geographic position and the cost of qualified workforce .
Healthcare workers will finally have the opportunity to better exploit their professional skills and any surplus capacities they might have .
Patients who will , in other Member States , have unobstructed access to healthcare services not established in their home countries due to certain natural conditions , will also benefit from this .
Thus , both healthcare workers and patients will benefit , but the Member States can also rest assured , thanks to the numerous restraints incorporated in the directive .
I congratulate the rapporteur and all my fellow Members who contributed to this success .
Standardisation of healthcare in Europe will take into account the quality of services offered , which must be consistent for citizens of all 27 Member States , irrespective of wealth and the ability to pay , if we are to complete the internal market as far as healthcare is concerned .
I urge the President and my fellow MEPs to ensure that European intervention does not stop with the adoption of this initiative , but that it also calls for action at local level , first and foremost , for implementation of the measure within individual States .
Adoption of all cross-border measures required for the whole system to operate is no less important .
For example , a border region such as Friuli-Venezia Giulia needs an appropriate data collection mechanism to optimise cooperation both within national territory - especially now that fiscal federalism is fast approaching for Italy - and also with bordering territories , such as certain neighbouring regions of Slovenia , with which we have already been engaged in constructive dialogue over health service management for some time .
We also need to ensure appropriate training for staff , whose patients and whose skills need to become increasingly global in a scenario which is no longer purely European .
Following a long process , we have today adopted the text of the directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
That is a success for Parliament but , above all , it is a victory for users .
The new legislative framework will enable citizens of any Member State to receive healthcare in another Member State under the same conditions as they would enjoy in their own country .
Such mobility will enable patients to avoid national waiting lists completely legitimately , and to take advantage of the medical services on offer in other European countries .
It also clears the way for specialisation , particularly in rare pathologies , so that healthcare need no longer be provided locally but can be given in places that specialise in that particular treatment .
We are not aiming to promote medical tourism with this , but rather ensure Europeans ' full mobility within Europe under equal conditions , meaning that from now on , we can all choose to seek treatment wherever it might be fastest , most effective and of the highest quality , and be reimbursed for the costs by the Member State of affiliation , under the exact same terms as if the healthcare had been provided there .
The entry into force of the ' patients without borders ' directive is a great opportunity for all patients in the European Union but , most of all , for patients from countries which are less well developed , where the healthcare services leave much to be desired .
These patients will have better access to treatment in another country than they do now .
There is also the hope that the new measures will stimulate change in national healthcare systems .
This concerns , in particular , a reduction in the long waiting lists for people waiting for certain kinds of hospital treatment .
The risk of outflow of patients to hospitals in other countries will force administrative decisions to be made on the best use of hospital beds and procedures in the countries which have the longest queues .
The obligation to establish contact points in every EU Member State is important for patients .
This will give them more information on the options for treatment in another country , and also on the record of hospitals in other countries in the treatment of rare or very serious conditions .
After the new legislation comes into force , it will be important to carry out detailed monitoring of its effects , and its influence on improving the quality of services as well as accessibility for different patient groups in different regions of Europe .
In particular , it will be important to gather information on who is using these services - only better informed and affluent social groups , or all who need treatment .
The free movement of labour and the development of tourism necessitate a solution to the problems of cross-border healthcare .
The rules of access to services and reimbursement must be clear and well-known to Member State citizens .
The aim is to enable citizens to have access , without prior authorisation and in any Member State , to those non-hospital and hospital treatments for which they would also be eligible in their own Member State , and have the costs reimbursed to them to a specified extent under their own systems .
The risk of possible abuse - I refer here to ' medical tourism ' - must not constitute a barrier in this case , but naturally , we must do everything within our power to reduce it to a minimum .
I must stress that the proposal concerns the mobility of patients within the European Union and not the ' free movement of services ' .
It must be noted that a well-established system can also generate added value by exploiting unused capacities and avoiding logistical losses .
In some cases , prompt cross-border medical assistance can save lives .
An additional important aspect is that cross-border healthcare also has great significance in cases where the appropriate level of treatment for a certain disease is not available in one Member State but is available in another .
I believe that the proposal is balanced and represents a compromise between the Member States ' reservations and the European Parliament 's ambitions .
At present , there is too much uncertainty surrounding the issues of access to healthcare , reimbursements and responsibility for clinical follow-up in relation to cross-border healthcare .
This directive allows all patients - not only the best informed or richest - to enjoy a series of healthcare rights which have already been recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
Member States retain full responsibility for organising and managing social security systems .
The proposal concerns patients and their mobility within the EU , not the free movement of service providers .
The directive stipulates cooperation between Member States , especially with regard to recognising medical recommendations ( treatments , prescriptions , etc . ) made in another Member State , e-health and HTAs ( high technology assessments ) .
The reference network created by the national contact points will facilitate the public 's access to this information .
Indeed , the Romanian authorities must ensure that their citizens have access to information .
Adopting this report will help guarantee a good balance between the rights of patients in the EU to have access to the best medical treatment and safeguarding the financial sustainability of the national social security system .
Compared to the Commission 's initial proposal , which facilitated patient mobility with a market-oriented perspective on health , I welcome the progress reflected in this agreement .
It was essential in order to safeguard our social protection systems that we re-establish a prior authorisation system for hospital or cost-intensive treatment .
Similarly , the reference to Article 168 of the Treaty was necessary in order to ensure that the prerogatives of the Member States in terms of organising their public health systems were respected .
Finally , commendable progress has been made in terms of cooperation and patient information .
There are , however , still major deficiencies : the lack of consideration given to the mobility of professionals , medical demography and the ageing population .
Other legislative proposals should remedy this - in particular , the proposal regarding professional qualifications - and in those proposals , it will be important to reaffirm that health is a sector with specific characteristics and not a commodity governed solely by the laws of the market , but rather the most precious asset that citizens have .
Annex - Position of the Commission
Amendments :
Directly acceptable : amendment 107 ( Text as a whole , Block No 1 , compromise amendment ) .
The Commission is in favour of the adoption of the compromise text by the colegislators .
European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias - Asthma inhalers ( debate )
The next item is what I must say is a strange joint debate on the following :
the report by Mrs Matias , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias , and
the oral question by Mrs Mazzoni , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on asthma inhalers - B7-0666 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , I should like to start by giving what seems to me a clear example of the urgency of this initiative .
We began work in Parliament exactly six months ago : six months have passed between starting work on the report and the time of voting , during which more than 700 000 people have developed Alzheimer 's or some other form of dementia .
This figure on its own shows how important and urgent it is to take action in this area .
That is why the Commission Communication is timely .
All people suffering from Alzheimer 's and other dementias in Europe must be treated the same .
There are more than 7 million people with Alzheimer 's and almost 10 million suffering from dementias as a whole .
If we were talking about numbers , we would be talking about the scale of a medium-sized country .
We cannot discriminate against a disease in the same way that we cannot discriminate against a country .
We must treat them all equally .
It is for this very reason that it is urgently necessary to take action in several areas .
In the area of research , we know that the number of people suffering this disease doubles every 20 years .
We know that if the age range considered is over 65 , the number doubles every four years , which is exactly why we need to tackle the causes and discover the causes , because we have no other way to take action against a problem if we do not have a good knowledge of it .
To achieve this , we need more research , more cooperation and more epidemiological data .
We need to know more about how to take action in terms of prevention and of controlling risk factors .
We need early diagnosis , we need specialised care and we need to train carers .
We need to give support to families and to not stigmatise sufferers : we need to give them rights and to give them dignity .
We need all countries to have national action plans so that we can then cooperate at European level .
We need to combat inequalities between the Member States and within the Member States .
We cannot accept that there should be first- and second-class patients : they must all be equal , regardless of sex , age , place of residence or any other criterion .
That is why , Mr President , it is very , very important for our health services to have the maximum coverage possible .
We cannot avoid talking about these urgent needs just because we are in crisis and are always talking about the disease 's costs .
The social and economic costs of failing to treat this problem are far larger , far greater than those of facing up to it .
That is why we have to face up to this problem and invest : invest in people ; invest , as I said , in preventing and giving support to the families and carers who are so often forgotten .
We know that , for every person suffering from Alzheimer 's , three people are needed to care for them .
A person suffering from Alzheimer 's cannot go one hour unaccompanied .
This must serve as a lesson to us : we cannot continue without the Member States linking up in their response to this problem ; without cooperation and , moreover , cooperation on the basis of solidarity .
That is why I would like to say the following : on the subject of cooperation , we all know that none of this work can be done in isolation and here in Parliament , too , it has been undertaken in cooperation with all the shadow rapporteurs from all the parliamentary groups ; with the support of the three women who helped me in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , in my parliamentary group , and in my delegation .
That is why I should like to thank all these women , and perhaps it is no accident that it was only women who worked on this report : this is because women are the most affected , dealing both with reports about Alzheimer 's and with sufferers of Alzheimer 's , including men .
I therefore also want to draw attention to the types of discrimination obscured by the lack of treatment or response to these issues .
I will finish by saying that I should like to question Commissioner Dalli directly , so as to ask him which of the proposals included in this report the Commission is prepared to accept , and when it will be prepared to accept and take action against an emergency of the scale that we are currently experiencing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have to say that I , too , am puzzled about why this question has been combined with the previous report , but the important thing , to my mind , is that this House is today focusing on the issue contained in the question I tabled on behalf of the Committee on Petitions .
This question refers to a case in which a small European business has been denied justice because of the inertia that the Commission has unfortunately demonstrated from 1997 until now .
This finding is supported by the Committee on Legal Affairs , which has been asked to issue an opinion by the committee which I chair .
The issue concerns a medical device - specifically an asthma inhaler - which was patented in 1990 and lawfully placed on the market .
This product is regulated by Directive 93 / 42 / EEC , which stipulates that manufacturers must certify that they have complied with requirements and which empowers the national authorities to verify that this self-certification is valid , through monitoring and sample checks .
The product , which was successfully distributed on the market for six years - thus , until 1996 - and for which not a single specific complaint or comment was recorded in over 15 years , was submitted for an inspection by the government of Upper Bavaria , which asked the commission of Magdeburg to review the authorisation granted to the company .
In December of that year , the commission and the Minister for Health in Saxony-Anhalt carried out this inspection and concluded the procedure by stating that the product fully complied with the legislative requirements in force .
At the end of the procedure , they also questioned the legitimacy of the request made by the government of Upper Bavaria and invited it to initiate the safeguard clause procedure pursuant to the aforesaid directive if it continued to have doubts .
The following year , there was a series of undocumented activities about which we were only indirectly informed , and then , suddenly , in 1997 , without any communication with the manufacturer , the Federal Minister for Health ordered the product to be withdrawn from the market .
The Ministry initiated the procedure - the procedure pursuant to Article 8 of the aforesaid directive - at the end of 1997 , but it drew a blank , because no information was provided and the process of consulting the manufacturer was not initiated .
Amid the general silence , in mid-2003 , the manufacturer , thinking that this silence meant that the German authorities ' unexplained comments had clearly been refuted , placed the product back on the market .
Unfortunately , in 2005 - and again without any communication - the German authorities ordered the product to be withdrawn from the market once more .
To be clear , despite repeated requests , there has been no explanation to this day for why the product was withdrawn .
Hence , there has been no communication , no investigation and no opportunity for the manufacturer to legitimately challenge the other party 's findings .
This has had a serious economic impact on the manufacturer , because he has been waiting for a response for more than 15 years and cannot place his product on the market .
I would also add that , during the six years in which the product was distributed - and there are documents on this , including ones provided by the Commission - it was found that significant savings were made in public health expenditure due to the low cost of the product , and that the product had a positive impact on asthma sufferers .
In 2008 , having seen all his attempts to get somewhere with the other authorities fail , Mr Klein , the manufacturer , turned to the Committee on Petitions .
The committee is initiating the procedure during this legislative term .
Moreover , in view of the length of time the matter referred to in the petition has been going on , it is also launching an informal consultation process with the Commissioner to request that a response be provided within a shorter timeframe , because the petitioner is requesting confirmation that his product complies with European legislation or , failing that , at least to have a ruling that he can challenge before the Court and which will therefore allow him to have justice .
None of this has happened , and during the debate within the Committee on Petitions , the European Commission unfortunately avoided answering our questions once again .
Hence , the committee has taken the unanimous decision to come to Parliament and ask the Commission to provide clear answers in this House , because this affair undeniably raises serious doubts with regard to a violation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This is not only because of the Commission 's inertia ; it is also and , above all , because of the petitioner Mr Klein 's inability to take legal action .
The affair raises obvious doubts with regard to the violation of market rules and the protection afforded to small businesses , which is why we are insisting that answers be provided , here , to the points raised in our question .
Mrs Mazzoni , I would like to thank you , above all , for having shared my confusion as to how the two subjects overlapped .
This does not , of course , imply any contempt on my part for an important question , which , moreover , you are putting in your capacity as Chair of the Committee on Petitions , of which I am part , and I am therefore extremely interested in what it does .
It will be very difficult for both the Commissioner and the speakers to combine two subjects that are so different in nature , and it is therefore worth questioning whether it is reasonable to plan the debate as it has been planned on the agenda .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , first allow me to pay tribute to Parliament , in particular , to the rapporteur , Mrs Matias , for your commitment to addressing Alzheimer 's and other dementias .
The Commission fully shares your concern .
Dementia means great suffering for millions of Europeans and their families .
With a population ageing fast , now is the time for Europe to act .
This is why the Commission put forward a Communication on Alzheimer 's and other dementias in 2009 with action to improve prevention and diagnosis , research and best practice exchange .
I am delighted that Parliament is supporting ongoing work in this context and presenting a comprehensive set of recommendations .
This report and its recommendations are very timely at a moment when the Commission is about to launch a joint action with the Member States on Alzheimer 's in April , the so-called ALCOVE ( ALzheimer COoperative Valuation in Europe ) .
I am persuaded that this joint action will deliver on many of the recommendations that you are adopting here today .
The joint action will focus on prevention - an area which Parliament underlines in this report - and also on improving knowledge and data and sharing good practices .
It will also address another area where Parliament is calling for action : the rights of people living with dementia .
I agree with you that we need fully coordinated research to understand better how to prevent or delay the onset of dementia .
This is why the Commission has launched a joint programming initiative on combating neurodegenerative diseases , in particular , Alzheimer 's .
For the first time , 23 countries are working together to tackle Alzheimer 's .
There are good practices across Europe on diagnosis and treatment for Alzheimer 's and the Commission is fostering exchange of knowledge and good practice .
As recommended by Parliament , I can also confirm that the Innovation Union initiative under the Europe 2020 strategy will take as its first pilot area for the new European innovation partnership the topic of active and healthy ageing .
Action to support people suffering from dementia could be developed in this context .
A good example could be the ongoing Parliament initiative on carers .
We hope to be able to support further innovative actions in this area which may also address the issues of Alzheimer 's and other dementias .
Finally , the Commission looks favourably at a number of other recommendations , including declaring 2014 as European Year of the Brain .
Let me assure you that the Commission is committed to doing its share to address dementia .
Let me now address the second topic in this debate : the petition filed by Mr Klein , the inventor and producer of the inhaler ' Effecto ' .
The placing on the market of the device in question was originally refused in Germany in 1997 .
This decision was not pursued further , either by the Commission , the German authorities , or the manufacturer .
The then distributor indicated at the time that it would conduct further studies before placing the product on the market again .
The device was placed back on the market in 2002 under a new name .
When the product was again prohibited by the German authorities in 2005 , the Commission carefully analysed the case and concluded the procedure by formal letter to the German authorities and the manufacturer in July 2007 .
The Commission analysis was that the prohibition by the German authorities was justified because the clinical data provided by the manufacturer was insufficient to demonstrate the safety of the device .
According to the Medical Device Directive , safety has to be demonstrated by the manufacturer in order for him to be allowed to use the CE marking .
This meant that the applicable legal provision was Article 18 of the directive which addresses cases where a product is placed on the market with improperly affixed CE marking .
In this case , there is no formal Commission decision .
Since , in the Commission 's view , the case is not one to which the safeguard clause procedure applies , it has no reason to request notification of the 2005 prohibition adopted by the German authorities .
The obstacle which the petitioner faces in placing the product on the market is the decision of the German authorities ( the 2005 prohibition ) and not a decision of the Commission .
The petitioner had clear legal avenues which he could pursue at national level and , indeed , he has made use of these opportunities .
His claims , however , were rejected by the German courts .
I would like to stress that the Commission has , since 2007 , invited the petitioner to bring the device into compliance by providing the missing clinical data and has facilitated contacts between him and the German authorities to that end .
To the Commission 's knowledge , no action has been taken by the petitioner so far .
Mr President , I am going to talk about Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Matias , on the fine job she has done .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for this dossier , I also want to thank all my fellow Members who made their contributions .
The attention enjoyed by this dossier indicates what an important subject it is and , at the same time , the severity of this phenomenon .
The number of people suffering from dementia is up to 9.9 million , with Alzheimer 's patients accounting for the majority .
By 2020 , we expect this number to increase dramatically at a time when the disease is still underdiagnosed in the European Union .
Inequalities exist between Member States with regard to prevention , access to treatment and care .
Action is fragmented and responses are unequal in terms of research into and fighting against this disease .
The report marks an important step in the fight against this disease in the European Union and is essential for introducing a new form of cooperation between Member States , enabling coordinated measures to be taken to combat certain problems affecting the whole of Europe .
The report supports solidarity between states and the exchange of good practices to avoid duplication of effort and wasting resources .
I would like to stress the importance of preventive diagnosis and early intervention at the initial stages of the disease .
I believe that this is key to making progress in the fight against this illness .
Furthermore , I would also like to recall the importance of adopting a multidisciplinary approach to research in this area .
Compartmentalisation between disciplines and the tenuous link between primary and clinical research , public health and social research influence how scientific discoveries are transferred into medical practice and the provision of care .
The fact that all these are carried out at national level increases fragmentation .
This is why we must focus on the multidisciplinary approach and on transferring discoveries and knowledge at EU level .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , nearly 10 million Europeans suffer today from dementia , with Alzheimer 's the most common form .
One of those statistics was my own mother who passed away last year .
I therefore strongly welcome this European initiative on dementia .
We should be very concerned that only half of cases are estimated to have been diagnosed .
We should be very concerned that twice as many women as men suffer from dementia , and we should be very concerned that with an ageing European population , the number of sufferers will double in the next 20 years .
Given that a five-year delay in the onset of Alzheimer 's means 50 % less prevalence rates , I welcome the focus on prevention and early detection by the Commission .
I welcome the focus on better research in Europe , especially as we know that 85 % of research today is without EU coordination .
I also welcome the focus on the sharing of best practices and the rights of sufferers and their families .
I , and my fellow Social Democrat MEPs , focused on the social aspects of dementia in our amendments and we urge the following :
We call for a strong focus on the specific needs of women , who account for twice the number of sufferers and a disproportionate number of carers , in the areas of medical and social research , health , employment and social policies .
We renew our call on the Commission to legislate for mental-health-at-work policies , as part of their health and safety at work responsibility to incorporate persons with mental disorders into the labour market in the best way possible .
We recommend an examination of the use of living wills across European borders , which are so badly needed .
Finally we also highlight the importance , in all awareness and education campaigns , of the ability to recognise the symptoms of dementia .
To conclude , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Maria Matias , and thank her and my fellow shadow rapporteurs for their work on this report .
Mr President , the fight against Alzheimer 's disease has become a European priority in recent years and not before time !
Let me add that I welcome all the initiatives that have just been announced by Commissioner Dalli .
This form of cerebral ageing is experiencing explosive growth in Europe and worldwide : more than 7 million people are affected , with this figure rising to 10 million if one considers other types of neurodegenerative illnesses .
We can , and should , welcome the current EU funding of 32 research projects , but we must do better , much better , especially in terms of the coordination of research into Alzheimer 's in the Eighth Research Framework Programme as early as 2014 .
This is clearly specified in point 21 of our resolution .
It is also vital to focus on a multidisciplinary approach embracing diagnosis , prevention , treatment and support for the recipients of care and for their families ; this is covered in points 2 and 20 , which are very important .
In this regard , moreover , a recent study , which has just been published in France , reveals the considerable socio-economic costs resulting from this disease : more than EUR 10 million a month for the medical care and supervision of patients alone .
And that does not include the enormous dedication of the patients ' loved ones and families , who devote more than six hours a day to the care and management of the patient .
Helping these patients also means getting the diagnosis right .
The scientific world tells us that international criteria must now be changed because , through the strict application of often obsolete criteria , too many patients who have other forms of dementia are often included .
At European level , which is covered by point 64 of our resolution , it is crucial that Parliament finally responds to the appeal from researchers .
More volunteers are needed for the clinical studies if we hope to find a cure one day , which we must .
The upcoming revision of the Clinical Trials Directive is therefore a golden opportunity to provide a concrete response and to give hope to the families affected .
Mr President , whoever arranged for these debates to be combined has hardly done Parliament a service - still less the subjects concerned .
All over Europe , the costs of medicines and health insurance are rising , and everybody is trying to find ways of bringing them down .
Medical progress is making medicines more and more expensive .
The case we are dealing with here is different .
There are 30 million asthmatics in Europe and we have a small manufacturer that has developed a device that makes inhalation - which can be a life-saver for asthmatics and is extremely important in their treatment - better , faster , more efficient and , above all , cheaper .
This manufacturer has been denied access to the market for 14 years .
The manufacturer turned to the Commission back in 1996 and the Committee on Petitions has been dealing with the matter since 2006 .
Commissioner Dalli , it is the Commission 's job to help enforce the law and to be on the citizens ' side .
In this case , that is not being done ; instead , the Commission is refusing to make a clear decision - a decision that would help the petitioner .
I would like to address you quite personally , Commissioner Dalli , for you will recall that we invited you along to meet with the Committee on Petitions and discuss the matter .
You told us that you did not have time for that , but that you could find time for a personal conversation .
We came to you and spoke to you personally .
You personally promised me that you would take care of the matter and find a solution very quickly .
To date , I have heard nothing .
I wrote you another letter , but I have received no reply .
You have also tried to prevent the next debate .
That is not the way the Commission should act .
I would like to state very clearly that the European Parliament expects the Commission to be on the side of the law and of the citizen - and we will be voting together on this resolution tomorrow .
We expect you to guarantee that such small manufacturers are protected from those who wish to deny them access to the market .
There is a lot of money at stake here , but more particularly , it is also about people 's health .
We are aware of the problems .
We cannot understand your actions , Commissioner Dalli .
We know all your arguments .
I have looked through mountains of files , but I have yet to find a clear argument to substantiate your position .
We are talking about a medical product .
A full 30 000 are in use - people have inhaled millions of times , with excellent results .
We have letters from insurance companies asking us to allow access to the market so that costs can be saved here .
I expect the Commission to finally do its job and reach a positive decision on this matter .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Häfner if he would agree that the Commissioner 's comments on the matter of BronchoAir that we heard earlier have been thoroughly evasive and unhelpful to the company in particular and to asthma suffers in general ?
( DE ) Mr President , if you will allow me to give a brief but personal answer , it is my impression that the Commissioner has not yet availed himself of the opportunity to personally acquaint himself with the matter and form his own new impression .
However , this is the perfect opportunity , Commissioner Dalli , for you to take a fresh look at the matter and reach a new conclusion after all the years of procrastination - and I would suggest that you use different members of your staff to those that have been responsible for the protracted proceedings thus far .
I would be happy to discuss this with you or , even better , I would like to see you get together with the petitioner and come up with a solution .
I agree with my fellow Member entirely .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , 750 000 people in the UK suffer from dementia ; over 50 % of these will have Alzheimer 's .
The effects are common but everyone 's experience is different .
There is no cure for this condition which often holds hostage both patient and carer regardless of age .
But what can be done in the EU ?
Legislation is clearly secondary in what primarily needs local support .
However , firstly by bringing this topic to this Chamber , we can bring it to the forefront , open discussion and increase public awareness .
Leading from this , Member States can decide on its prioritisation and sharing of best practice .
Secondly , awareness can lead to a greater understanding of the symptoms and , consequently , early diagnosis .
There are drugs on the market that can assist here and , if taken at the correct time , can slow down the process .
The important point is this : sufferers are helped , families have information and support and , ultimately , the patients are helped to retain their dignity through this difficult illness .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , apparently , a small German company , BronchoAir of Munich , has produced an inhaler which can actually improve the life of asthma sufferers who rely on such devices to breathe .
This product has been shut out of the market for over 14 years , and the Commissioner 's account of why this has been was very different from that of the Chair of the Committee on Petitions who opened the debate .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has stated , and I quote : ' the company has been the victim of a flagrant denial of justice ' on the part of the Commission .
Why does the Commission favour the big pharmaceutical companies and their lobbyists ?
In this case , the UK Independence Party , which I have the honour to represent , strongly supports the immediate setting up of an inquiry into the Commission 's handling of this matter .
Mr President , as has already been stated in this Chamber today , in the United Kingdom , almost three-quarters of a million people currently suffer from some form of dementia .
Sixteen thousand of those live in my constituency in Northern Ireland .
Alzheimer 's is a cruel disease .
It strips sufferers of their personality , it takes away their independence and robs them eventually of their relationship with family and friends .
It is a devastating disease which places huge burdens on families and carers , who are often isolated and in poor health because of the burdens they face .
As has already been mentioned in this House , many of those who care are women .
In the United Kingdom , by 2050 , the number of those with dementia is estimated to soar to approximately 1.7 million .
The estimated cost of health and social care by 2018 will be GBP 27 billion .
These are staggering figures , which make research absolutely vital and the careful targeting of resources in medical and social care an absolute imperative .
I also believe that we should recognise the contribution of the voluntary and community sector in this .
Commissioner , you have made much of healthy and active ageing and I am proud to highlight the work of the Mullen Mews scheme in Belfast , which has driven off international competition to win awards for its social inclusion and improvement of the lives of those who live with dementia and their families and carers .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Dalli , I agree that it is exasperating that we are having to keep switching between two topics .
I would have liked to have seen these matters being dealt with one after the other at least .
I am returning to Mr Klein 's petition .
I am pleased that we have the opportunity to talk about it , because the Committee on Petitions has been dealing with this petition for some considerable time .
What has happened in that time ?
Here was an innovative manufacturer which developed an inhaler for asthmatics .
It was good for patients because it was easier to use .
It was good for the insurance companies because it was cheaper .
The manufacturer quite rightly won an award for it .
Then came a sudden blow : the inhaler was banned by the German authorities , as a result of which the European Commission began a safeguard clause procedure .
Without going into all the details once more , I am convinced that the initial 1996 ban on the inhaler was not legitimately imposed .
The Commission would have been required to conclude the safeguard clause procedure with findings , in order to allow the party concerned to appeal .
As a result , Mr Klein - and I am quoting the position of our own Committee on Legal Affairs here - has been the victim of a flagrant denial of justice .
Commissioner , I am not in the business of apportioning blame .
What is important here is to find a solution as soon as possible to deal with the problem once and for all .
I am simply asking you to respect the unanimous vote of our Committee on Petitions .
I am hoping and relying on your cooperation and assistance - not just in the interests of the petitioner , but also in the interests of patients throughout the European Union .
( RO ) Mr President , there is still a great deal of uncertainty and much that we do not know nowadays about Alzheimer 's disease .
Unfortunately , the situation continues to deteriorate now that Europe 's population is ageing .
We obviously need to carry out research and more studies into the causes of and treatments for dementia .
However , as in the case of non-transmissible diseases , there is evidence indicating that a number of simple measures in terms of lifestyle choice can prevent many disorders .
This is why I have asked in the amendments which have been tabled for much more importance to be attached to carrying out research into the impact nutrition has on the occurrence of Alzheimer 's disease .
Many of us will certainly know at least one person affected by this disease or another form of dementia .
We know that , in actual fact , the personal cost is much higher than the social or financial cost .
We are all concerned about the very widespread , devastating effects of dementia on such a large number of people .
As a result , we have an extremely comprehensive report which contains all the key issues .
What we want is a positive response not only from the Commission , but from Member States as well .

Mr President , I , too , regret that we are joining one debate to another one : it is like having a joint debate on shipping and fishing because both of them happen in the marine environment .
However , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Marisa Matias , and it is indeed of the utmost importance that the European Union should address , in a concrete manner , the challenge of Alzheimer 's disease as one of its health priorities .
The current medical and social burden of this disease represents a serious threat to the sustainability of our healthcare and social systems .
Several other chronic diseases will significantly increase in the coming years and it is crucial that we should also address them in a comprehensive way with an appropriate preparedness plan .
I sincerely hope that the Commission will take the lead in building on the European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease , and will support Member States in addressing the public health challenges of our ageing population .
I particularly welcome the focus on a multidisciplinary approach .
Finally , I would like to stress the need to focus on research , and on targeted investment in this field , with one priority in mind : not to serve business interests but to deliver concrete public health outcomes for patients and citizens .
With regard to the oral questions , I think we are witnessing here a method of lobbying aimed at increasing pressure on the German authorities and contesting EU safety requirements and regulations .
It does not matter whether the companies concerned are big or small : the only question of importance for us is the safety of patients .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my sincerest thanks go to the rapporteur , Mrs Matias , for her excellent work on the Alzheimer 's report .
Alzheimer 's disease and dementias are a very big issue for society .
The human and financial cost are enormous .
It is estimated that it costs more than EUR 100 billion a year to treat Alzheimer 's disease .
That is more than what the Commission estimates it would cost if we tightened up our target to cut greenhouse gas emissions to 30 % .
The number of Alzheimer 's patients is thought to double every 20 years .
I wish to stress the importance of early diagnosis and making prevention a priority .
In particular , I hope that there will be more research into how chemicals that hinder the development of the nervous system might contribute to the incidence of Alzheimer 's and the risk of other diseases that cause deterioration of the nervous system .
In any case , the precautionary principle dictates that there should be a reduction in the use of these chemicals as pesticides in our gardens and in fields .
( CS ) Mr President , I would also like to talk about Alzheimer 's disease .
We know that this report does not have a specific legislative impact , nor is it too contentious .
I hope that it will not divide this sitting .
However , we know that this is a very serious health condition with very serious financial consequences , and it is therefore also a very serious social problem .
It is very closely related to the ageing of Europe 's population , and its increase in Europe is beginning to resemble a kind of neurological epidemic .
What can we do about this ?
We can emphasise prevention , which saves resources and improves health , we can improve the dietary habits of Europeans , we can unify our scientific base in Europe and coordinate the work of individual Member States , we can support voluntary organisations and organisations of family members , and we can help to establish specialised centres in Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is so much to say on Alzheimer 's disease .
Let me focus on two aspects .
The first is the issue of home support for patients who are seriously ill .
We know that , for medical reasons , it is important for patients not to suffer any upheaval in their environment , which may aggravate the disease and its symptoms and make things much more difficult .
One of our priorities must be to enable patients to stay as long as possible in their usual environment .
For this to happen , families and those family members who help the patients must , in turn , be helped .
In other words , the families must not be left to fend for themselves .
This is my first point .
My second point concerns research .
Why ?
Because , ultimately , for Alzheimer 's disease , the hope is to find a drug and , to find this drug , effective research is needed .
I have heard people say that more resources are needed for research .
That is doubtless true !
Most of all , however , before we talk about resources , we need to talk about the use of these resources .
Research has so far been too fragmented and spread too thinly .
No priority has been defined .
People do not work together and do not talk to each other .
In the future , the cellular biologist must talk with the physiologist , with the radiologist , with the neurologist .
We must get people to work together better .
I therefore call on the Commission to throw all its weight behind the joint research programme , which was launched during the French Presidency .
Finally , I should like to conclude by saying to patients and their families that things are moving forward .
They must have faith , they are not alone .
They are no longer alone !
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for their good work on this report .
Whilst this report on Alzheimer 's is very important , we know that the power for implementing policy lies mainly with the Member States .
But the ageing population is one of the most pressing challenges for the future and we know that dementia is one of the main causes of disability and dependence among the elderly .
Currently , the main responsibility of care tends to lie with the spouse or child of the dementia patient , which can be extremely hard work and emotionally gruelling .
This is why our amendments that call on the Commission to consider the opportunities for creating jobs from a better care sector in the EU 2020 strategy are so important .
It is also important that we focus not only on providing research funding into new drugs to treat diseases , but also look at simple preventive measures that everybody can take such as a change in diet and lifestyle .
Nutrition is increasingly being shown to be an important factor in the development of Alzheimer 's and other dementias and we need to dedicate some of our resources into investigating this further .
The cost of dementias in the EU was EUR 130 billion in 2005 and it affected 19 million people - that is , sufferers and carers .
So it makes sense , both morally and economically , to ensure that we put more funds into work into this terrible disease .
( DE ) Mr President , the Communication and the report are very good , and I would therefore like to express my thanks to Commissioner Dalli and Mrs Matias .
Alzheimer 's is a plague of our times , and our biggest problem is that we simply know too little about Alzheimer 's .
That is why we need research , research , and more research .
We need to pool our strengths and I therefore welcome the Commission 's initiative to create an innovation partnership on the subject of healthy ageing ; Alzheimer 's fits in with this perfectly .
Many years ago , the US Government designated the fight against cancer as a lighthouse project .
They have not conquered cancer , but a great many medicines and a great many therapies have emerged as a result .
That is the kind of thing that we need here , and I therefore welcome the fact that we are to concentrate on Alzheimer 's .
We need to know how to take preventive action .
What can we do in the future to combat Alzheimer 's ?
That is why we cannot continue to adopt the watering can principle in European research policy .
We need to concentrate on specific areas .
Alzheimer 's could be one of the major themes that we get to grips with .
( NL ) Mr President , as Vice-President of the European Alzheimer 's Alliance in the European Parliament , I warmly welcome the report by Mrs Matias .
It contains the most important issues that need to be addressed as a matter of priority .
I would like to touch on two things in this short time .
First of all , the importance of prevention and early diagnosis .
Campaigns raising awareness of the first symptoms are essential , so that patients and their carers are able to benefit at the earliest possible stage from any treatment and support that is already available .
However , in addition , the importance of joint programming of research resources cannot be overstated .
Many of you have already mentioned that 85 % of public investment in research is nowadays made without any European coordination and this inevitably leads to fragmentation and duplication .
Therefore , a common strategic research agenda could ensure a more efficient use of resources and a greater understanding of the causes , treatment options and the social impact of diseases such as Alzheimer 's .
( SK ) Mr President , the Commission Communication concerning the European Initiative for Alzheimer 's Disease and other Dementias improves the current piecemeal measures and existing differences as far as access to treatment is concerned , and leads us to better health and social conditions for the ever increasing number of such patients , the proportion of whom is also increasing in relation to Europe 's ageing population .
The directive also addresses health workers in this area , and provides specialised training , which I warmly welcome , and support for family members .
We already have problems , with up to 1.4 million new cases of some form of dementia every year , and we must take energetic action over timely diagnosis , prevention and other related issues , such as patient dignity .
Here , too , there are affected people , especially family members , who face a lot of social stigmas .
Society should also give assistance and financial help to those who look after dementia patients at home .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , who have done an excellent job .
It has to be acknowledged that with the ageing of Europe 's population , Alzheimer 's and other forms of dementia are spreading at a dangerous rate .
Often , the symptoms of these diseases are incorrectly diagnosed or detected too late and patients do not receive adequate treatment .
The invitation to declare dementias one of the priority areas of healthcare is right .
Only by disseminating information as broadly as possible and increasing society 's awareness of the disease , its symptoms and early methods of diagnosis , will we be able to deal with the rising wave of dementia .
Unfortunately , in the majority of the new European Union Member States , including Lithuania , care for dementia patients is particularly unsatisfactory .
The greatest burden usually falls on patients ' relatives and family members .
The Member States should give credit to their work by regarding , as far as possible , time spent caring for relatives as a period of employment , and providing social guarantees .
Mr President , I just want to make the point that we are talking about Alzheimer 's disease and old people , yet I have experience in my constituency with the case of a 48-year-old man who had to be looked after by his elderly widowed father because the young man had Alzheimer 's .
I will not abuse the opportunity to speak but I thank you for it , and I want to say that I support innovation in relation to ageing .
This is mainly an ageing-related issue , but not simply an ageing-related issue .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my comments concern the petition .
I have been looking into this case since spring 2007 .
In autumn 2007 , I addressed a question to the Commission .
The answer was more than unsatisfactory .
I have had many discussions with the German Ministry of Health and with other authorities .
Everything was always very vague and unformed .
From your answer , Commissioner Dalli - from what you read out - I take it that you have no inclination whatsoever to look into this case in more detail .
It did not happen during your period of office , but there is such a thing as collective responsibility , and I would ask you - also on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Petitions - to make available to us all the documentation on which your decision was based .
Moreover , looking at the device , I would like to know - although I can imagine the answer - why certain companies have no interest in a different product coming onto the market .
Installing this plastic part in the inhaler is relatively cheap , but the margins lie in overall sales .
Looking at the lobbying engaged in by the pharmaceuticals industry , and looking carefully at the financial interests that certain parties have in keeping small companies out of the market , the answers are sometimes all too apparent .
I urge you to make your position clear here and now as to whether you will make the documentation available to us and whether you are prepared to have a proper discussion with us in the Committee on Petitions and the Committee on Legal Affairs , rather than simply pushing the matter aside .
Our citizens have a right to be treated properly - and that includes those that may not be particularly wealthy or large .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union has an ageing population and the percentage of people suffering from age-related diseases is rising .
Statistics show that one person out of every five above the age of 80 suffers from Alzheimer 's disease .
Not everyone is aware of the fact that this is an incurable disease , but with appropriate preventive measures and early diagnosis , its effects can be delayed .
According to the World Alzheimer Report 2009 , 28 % of the global population suffering from dementia lives in Europe , second only to Asia in this regard .
In Poland , the country which I represent , about 250 000 people suffer from Alzheimer 's , and specialists estimate that by 2040 , this figure will have trebled .
As you can appreciate , these statistics are disturbing .
Dementia not only brings social and economic consequences , but also affects patients as well as their families .
This is why I am happy that we have discussed this important problem today .
Only cooperation , highly specialised research and a widespread campaign of information , will enable rapid diagnosis and better prevention .
( LT ) Mr President , I agree with the specific action proposed in the initiative on Alzheimer 's disease , that it is essential to promote early diagnosis and quality of life , to support cooperation between the Member States through sharing best practices and clinical studies , and to respect the rights of people living with this difficult disease .
As the European Union does not currently have at its disposal sufficiently precise statistics concerning Alzheimer 's disease , studies should be carried out on the basis of common , strictly defined indicators .
Furthermore , it is necessary to invest in scientific research and efficient approaches to care systems .
Particular attention must be paid to healthcare professionals , providers , and training and support for families coping with Alzheimer 's disease on a daily basis .
I would like to stress that in combating this difficult disease , it is vital to pay much attention to prevention and to target efforts at obtaining the earliest possible diagnosis .
Therefore , there is a need to draw up a preventive strategy on Alzheimer 's disease , linked to encouraging healthier lifestyles , informing people about this disease and exchanging medical practices .
( GA ) Mr President , I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to talk about Alzheimer 's disease .
Alzheimer 's is a disease that is the most common cause of dementia , affecting 44 000 people in Ireland and nearly ten million people across Europe .
It is a progressive disease , which means that over time , more parts of the brain will become damaged and , as this occurs , the symptoms become worse .
Unfortunately , due to the ageing population in Europe , more and more people are likely to be affected by this disease in the future .
Therefore , better coordination between EU Member States , in terms of research into the causes of dementia and best practice in terms of a care system , is essential .
The burden of care is often placed on the shoulders of close family members and in Ireland , 50 000 people care for people with dementia on a daily basis .
In conclusion , I would like to pay special tribute to those carers and to the Alzheimer 's society of Ireland who provide incredible support to people affected by dementia .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , neurodegenerative diseases , and Alzheimer 's disease in particular , are an EU health priority .
The disease in question has serious consequences for sufferers , and not just in health terms .
The costs incurred for direct and informal care are , in fact , high .
Indeed , Alzheimer 's disease affects not only the sufferers , but all those who care for them , too .
Therefore , we need a European response to the problem , a coordinated response by all the Member States , a synergy of concerted measures that concern , in particular , the fields of science and research and that are responsible for strengthening prevention and diagnosis so as to improve the treatment - including innovative treatment - available , as well as the dissemination of information among the Member States on the results achieved nationally , thereby raising public awareness of the disease .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , I again thank Parliament and the Members who have taken the floor for their engagement with the important cause of Alzheimer 's and other forms of dementia .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's report and its recommendations .
Let me take this opportunity to stress that the Commission is fully committed to doing its share to address Alzheimer 's and other forms of dementia .
These conditions are , unfortunately , part of the ageing process for many European citizens .
I believe it is our collective responsibility to work together to minimise their burden and to invest in innovation to prevent , diagnose , treat and manage these conditions .
I look forward to supporting Member States in their efforts to work closely with Parliament in addressing Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia .
On the ' Effecto ' Klein petition , I must state first of all - referring to Mrs Mazzoni 's statement that the Commission 's job is to stand by the citizens - that I can assure you my job is to stand by the patient .
It is very important for me , as Commissioner responsible for health , not to compromise on patient safety , not to take any shortcuts and short-circuit the processes and procedures that we have in place to ensure that any device to be used in any medical way is properly tested and its safety assured .
The issue here is not how to deliver a medicine with a piece of plastic , as has been said .
The issue is that we need clinical evidence that the product is safe and to do this , the petitioner , in this case Mr Klein , was requested to conduct clinical studies on 24 patients .
That is the extent of the clinical tests that were requested .
Why is there a resistance to providing these clinical tests ?
What is causing this resistance ?
This is something that I am asking myself .
We need to know , for example , is this product universal in application , is it to be used with one specific medicine , is it to be used with different types of medicines ?
If it is , do these medicines require different dosages ?
Is there an adjustment system in the device to adjust the dosage ?
As a layman , if I had to use a device like this , these are the questions that I would ask myself .
This is the kind of thing the authorities have been asking themselves .
They have been asking for proof that this device would be safe in the hands of patients at large .
There is , as I said , a proper safety assurance procedure , and I will be not short-circuiting that .
It has been said that I promised to look into the case .
I promised to look into the case , and I did look into the case .
I have had a lot of details about the case .
Naturally , these are details that I had to learn from others who have been here in the Commission since 1987 .
When Mr Klein asked for a meeting with me or my cabinet , I immediately agreed .
My ' chef de cabinet ' informed him that we were prepared to have a meeting to explain it .
He sent an e-mail back setting a lot of conditions , amongst which he stated that as a basis for this meeting , the EU Commission should completely take over the expenses .
This included the flights and overnight stays in Brussels for him and his staff , and I could not accommodate this .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressing my gratitude for all the words that have been said about the report that Parliament is tabling on Alzheimer 's and other dementias .
We all know that the situation that we are experiencing is very tragic and that it is also very underdiagnosed , which has already been mentioned here .
I just want to mention one issue that cut across all the speeches that were made , but which was probably not emphasised enough , which is the issue of the dignity of the patients and their rights , but not just those of the patients : also those of their family members , of those caring for them , whether these be formal or informal carers , and of the professionals associated with this type of disease .
I am happy , really happy , with what you said , Commissioner , about sharing the same concerns as the European Parliament , and that the European Commission views all the recommendations tabled by Parliament in the report positively and will do everything in its power to implement them .
We know that every day that passes is later than the last in this area , given the urgency of what we have before us .
Therefore , we also know that Parliament is going to make an announcement on this subject tomorrow .
We will await the result of the vote , Commissioner , but we know that the European public is expecting a great deal more of us than solidarity and moral reassurance .
Europeans expect specific and suitable measures , Commissioner , and I really hope that you and the Commission - which has initiative that this House unfortunately lacks - will make this issue as much of a priority as you say you will , and that you transform it into a legislative initiative , so that the rights of Europeans and their families are respected and all of them are treated with the equality and dignity that they deserve .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Wednesday , 19 January 2011 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
It is estimated that 9.9 million people in Europe suffer from a neurodegenerative disease , such as Alzheimer 's disease .
With Europe 's population ageing , Eurostat estimates that twice as many people will be suffering from a neurodegenerative disease in 2050 as were in 1995 .
Moreover , since the burden of care falls on family members , it is estimated that the disease affects three members of a patient 's family .
In this regard , it must be ensured that action is taken at EU level to help Member States to give appropriate assistance to patients and their families .
I totally agree that EU health policy should prioritise dementia .
Proper recognition must be given to patient and carer organisations , and those same organisations must be involved in information campaigns and in the preparation of research programmes .
The EU gives a considerable amount of money - EUR 159 million - to 34 neurodegenerative disease research programmes , but since there will be a huge increase in these diseases , research projects under the Eighth Framework Programme must be broadened to include research on behavioural , cognitive and non-drug therapies .
The data on the prevalence of Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia is available in European Union countries and was collected by Alzheimer Europe .
Alzheimer 's disease was , and is , the main cause of dementia in all countries .
It accounts for 74.5 % of dementia cases in North America , 61.4 % in Europe and 46.5 % in Asia .
However , there are cases of Alzheimer 's disease in the European Union which are undiagnosed .
According to the recent epidemiological data available , only half of the people suffering from this disease have been identified at the moment .
In this context , I think that Member States must develop long-term policies and action plans for speeding up access to research funding in the field of dementia and Alzheimer 's , including research into prevention , at a level commensurate with these illnesses ' economic impact on society .
They must also anticipate and prevent social and demographic trends and focus on the support provided to the families of the patients being cared for by them , thereby affording social protection to vulnerable people suffering from dementia .
The resolution tabled renews our commitment to the fight against a serious disease that still affects one in five people over the age of 85 .
I am of the opinion that an effective , coordinated Europe-wide action is needed to make further progress in research and the collection of epidemiological data on this disease .
Proper coordination between Member States can contribute to the sharing of best practices in patient treatment and help make citizens more aware of the importance of prevention and early intervention .
Investment and cooperation are essential in this field not only to reduce the social costs of these diseases but also , and above all , to ensure that those affected can be given the hope of leading an increasingly dignified life .
In this vein , I should like to point out that dementias do not , of course , only affect sufferers ; they also affect the people around them , such as family members and healthcare workers .
The European strategy should therefore aim at ensuring more effective and practical support for those who have to face the daily task of helping these people , closing the gaps that exist in professional training and launching campaigns to raise awareness of the realities of living with Alzheimer 's .
in writing . - To date , the EU still does not have an adequate response to Alzheimer 's , neither has it concluded a single policy on its prevention .
Moreover , it is worrying that countries like Malta still do not offer any refund for medication needed by patients suffering from the disease .
Notwithstanding that the Commission cannot interfere with the organisation of national health insurance schemes , the Commission should step up its efforts to put pressure on Member States to guarantee that any person suffering from Alzheimer 's is getting the necessary treatment .
I call on the Commission to truly make the fight against dementia a European priority and conclude the below-mentioned proposals within a reasonable timeframe : ( 1 ) promote cardiovascular health and invest in a healthier workforce ; ( 2 ) promote initiatives that ensure social and intellectual engagement of the elderly ; ( 3 ) encourage Member States to implement systematic routine screening which allows for early diagnosis of the disease , as well as providing easy access to medication and treatment once the disease has set in ; ( 4 ) ensure that regular epidemiological studies at a European level are carried out ; ( 5 ) prompt Member States to make better use of Assistive Technology ( AT ) .
in writing . - I welcome this report as an important step forward in the battle against dementia .
At present , one in 20 people over the age of 65 and one in five over 80 suffer from dementia .
It is estimated that more than 8 million Europeans aged between 30 and 99 suffer from neurodegenerative diseases , and scientists anticipate that this number could double every 20 years .
Alzheimer 's disease represents 50 % of these cases .
Nearly ten million Europeans suffer today from dementia , with Alzheimer 's the most common form .
There are 44 000 people in Ireland with dementia .
There are over 50 000 carers for dementia suffers and an estimated 100 000 people are directly affected by dementia .
Given that a five-year delay on the onset of Alzheimer 's means 50 % less prevalence rates , I welcome the focus on prevention and early detection by the European Commission .
I welcome the focus on better research in Europe , especially as we know 85 % of research today is without EU coordination .
For any European strategy in this area to work , it is crucial that the various countries give priority to drawing up national action plans .
A European strategy must also seek to safeguard the existence of services that guarantee maximum possible coverage and equal conditions and treatment for all patients .
Diseases causing memory loss are a common problem in Europe .
Approximately 10 million Europeans suffer from them at the present time .
The majority of them have Alzheimer 's disease .
Many factors influence people 's ability to remember things and learn something new .
They include stress , depression , sorrow , heavy drinking , a poor nutritional state and medications .
More attention needs to be paid to the prevention of these diseases from the time when people reach adolescence .
Exercise , mental activity , healthy food options and avoidance of intoxicants will protect people from developing diseases that cause memory loss .
By dealing with the risk factors associated with these diseases , we will , at the same time , be dealing with those associated with cardio-cerebrovascular conditions .
In future , the importance of information and NGOs in the fight against memory loss diseases needs to be emphasised .
Organisations do very valuable work .
They should be given more support to enable those who suffer from these diseases to receive help more satisfactorily .
Furthermore , more attention must be paid in the future to treatment centres and their quality .
Unfortunately , those that exist do not now meet the demand .
In Finland , for example , there is a lack of peer support and suitable centres offering day care and longterm care .
Finally , I would like bring to everyone 's attention the importance of support for professional staff specialised in the treatment of memory loss diseases , their proper training , and the development of their skills and competence . Thank you .
I would like to thank Mrs Matias for her commendable owninitiative report on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias .
Every one in five Europeans will contract a disease that causes memory loss .
These diseases continually put more pressure on healthcare systems that struggle to cope with an ageing population , but also on sufferers and their relatives when faced with a situation that is new to them .
There is no consensus on the pathogenesis of these diseases , but early intervention in their progress is considered vital .
This report will help make memory loss diseases a priority among the EU 's health objectives .
The result of the vote will send the right message , which is that research into these diseases and their treatment will require cooperation at panEuropean level .
Although it is older people who mainly suffer , with improvements in diagnosis , the early symptoms of these diseases will be detected more and more frequently among the working population .
In order to tighten cooperation in Europe , we also need national memory programmes , which have already started in some Member States .
National memory programmes play a significant role in the spread of knowledge and best practices and in reducing the number of actions that overlap with one another .
10 million people in Europe suffer from dementia ; half of them are Alzheimer 's patients .
These figures will continue to rise as a result of increasing life expectancy .
The own-initiative report is moving in the right direction with its call for a more efficient approach to the treatment of dementia , and especially of Alzheimer 's .
Particular attention should be paid here to prevention .
Early diagnosis , free screenings for risk groups and , above all , making the population better informed have a key part to play in this , since Alzheimer 's is generally identified at too late a stage in the EU .
The continued spread of dementia calls for a European strategy that , as far as possible , offers comprehensive structures which provide patients with equal access to information and treatment options .
It should not be forgotten that support for relatives and carers is also a part of this .
Furthermore , broad epidemiological and clinical studies as well as better research into dementia and Alzheimer 's are important factors in the fight against dementias .
Dementia and Alzheimer 's disease in particular are not only serious medical problems , but also a hugely sensitive ethical and social problem , the severity of which will continue to increase in relation to the ageing of Europe 's population .
In the document submitted , attention is quite rightly focused on various aspects of this condition , and especially on support for early diagnosis , research and improvements in actual patient care .
However , no less important in my view is the area of support for the families of dementia sufferers , and an emphasis on non-discriminatory access to high quality health and social care is fundamental .
The role of local authorities , whether municipal or regional , is of key importance here , as are the voluntary organisations , which can respond operationally to the growing need for these services .
The European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias is also very important for starting a serious and open social debate on this condition in the broadest sense of the word .
I therefore warmly welcome and support this initiative .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0001 / 2011 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Utilisation of European funds
According to a recent article in the Financial Times , the European Union has only spent 10 % of the EUR 347 billion allocated for the period up to 2013 to promote the development of poor regions .
That article also states that funding earmarked for SMEs has come to be used by multinational companies ( Coca-Cola , IBM , Nokia Siemens ) while other large companies ( Twining , Valeo ) are using EU funds to transfer their operations to countries where labour is cheaper , thereby violating rules explicitly prohibiting that practice .
What is the Commission 's view of the information contained in that article , and what steps is it considering taking to prevent such situations arising in the future ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the Financial Times 's scrutiny as it represents an important contribution to opening and broadening public debate about the efficiency and effectiveness of cohesion policy .
The Commission is aware of the habitually slower take-up at the beginning of a programming period .
However , the most recent data show that the Commission made more cohesion policy payments in the fourth quarter of 2010 than ever before .
The vast majority of the payments made were interim payments , i.e. reimbursements of expenditure already made and certified in the Member States .
Thus , it is certain that , as has been seen in previous programming periods , cohesion policy spending is accelerating .
Absorption rates , in terms of EU payments to Member States , are now at 21 % for the Cohesion Fund , 22 % for the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) and 23 % for the European Social Fund ( ESF ) .
As regards support provided to multinational and large companies , the Commission would emphasise that a primary objective of cohesion policy is growth and the creation of new jobs for particular regions and Member States .
Any support for productive investment has to be seen in that context .
Promoting job creation and economic growth can be achieved in many ways , from setting up small enterprises to supporting larger companies .
Cohesion policy intervention supports productive investment that is primarily targeted at small and medium-sized enterprises , as specified by the ERDF and ESF regulations .
The Commission also stressed the role of small and medium-sized enterprises during negotiation of the current programming documents .
The vast majority of productive investment and investment in the development of endogenous potential is targeted at SMEs .
However , there may be cases where , in line with the regulations , cofinancing is granted to larger companies subject to compliance with the objectives of the funds and programmes concerned .
In total , cohesion policy has allocated some EUR 55 billion to business support between 2007 and 2013 , a large share of which supports innovation in SMEs .
The Commission would like to point out that multinationals are not beneficiaries of the support extended by the ESF .
Workers receive the cofinanced training .
The ESF supports people .
It is about providing training and retraining and improving skills to prepare people and help them find a job .
A worker who has been employed in a given enterprise may well then find himself or herself engaged in another company .
Therefore , what matters is the skill capital that workers manage to build to sustain their inclusion in the labour market , not the name or type of enterprises providing the training .
The Commission considers that , from a policy perspective , firms should not receive European funding for investments which would lead to the loss of employment by the same company in another region of the European Union , because the net effect of the ESF investment might be zero or even negative .
In cases where a company which has received cohesion policy support closes down , or ceases to support a project , within five years - or three years in the case of SMEs - this funding needs to be paid back .
My final point - but it is a crucial one - is that while there are clearly areas for improvement , this cannot and should not overshadow the major positive impact that cohesion policy is having .
I would like to assure you that the Commission is not shying away from the problems .
Indeed , in the past , we have proposed changes , some of which were taken up , and we will continue to drive improvement of cohesion policy .
Cohesion policy brings clear benefits to the poorer regions of the European Union , but it also clearly benefits the rest of Europe .
( RO ) I wish to thank the Commissioner as well for the quality of the information provided .
However , I would like to make a further comment .
In a debate like this , when we are dealing with such a topic , I believe that we should focus rather on the future measures intended to ensure that we avoid similar situations and , if you permit me to say so , it may even be more important for us to ask ourselves the question whether such figures , once they have come to public attention , are not somehow likely to reduce citizens ' trust in the work of the EU institutions .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would particularly like to thank you for the clarification , since that provides a basis for a sensible discussion as well as a clear commitment to our small and medium-sized enterprises .
After all , they provide two-thirds of Europe 's jobs and pay 80 % of taxes .
My question is therefore whether you believe that in future , we can strengthen the research framework conditions and the research infrastructure somewhat more .
( LT ) Mr President , I have the following question .
Money from the Structural Funds and , in particular , money from the European Social Fund is very important .
It is aimed at enhancing workers ' qualifications and preserving jobs so that these are filled by qualified people .
However , do you believe that equal conditions exist for wealthy international corporations , because they have to make a contribution of their own in order to obtain money from the Structural Funds or the European Social Fund , and small and medium-sized enterprises , which also want to train their people and want to have qualified employees ?
Do you not envisage some sort of proposals here , given that large corporations and small and medium-sized enterprises do not enjoy equal conditions ?
Mr President , thank you for your questions .
Where research infrastructure is concerned , small and medium-sized enterprises already receive considerable resources from the European Regional Development Fund , particularly in the area of encouraging innovation - where they receive innovation subsidies into the high tens of billions of euro .
In the period 2000-2006 , more than 30 000 enterprises in total concentrated on this area in a focused manner .
We are giving consideration to the fact that substantial importance should also be attached to the research infrastructure , particularly in the future - not just in the area of the economy , but also in the area of basic research .
It is possible that even in the current period we will subsidise a research infrastructure project that is also included in the ESFRI - the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures - Road map with such funds for the first time , because investigations into this project have revealed that it has a very sustained impact in a region beyond that of the project itself in that jobs will be created , not just research jobs , but also jobs in enterprises that supply these , since even basic research infrastructure needs services and supplies .
In other words , it could be a real hub in a particular area in a region - in this case , a region of Hungary .
That should also send out a signal for the coming programming period , perhaps to universities , which , in the final event , also have concrete effects .
Already today , nearly a third of university research activities are in the area of applied research , which , in the end , benefits the economy and creates lasting jobs .
If I may turn to the honourable lady 's question , within the framework of the European Social Fund , it is generally employed or temporarily unemployed workers who receive assistance with training , in order to put them in a position in which their prospects on the jobs market are improved .
This may be within the enterprise in which they are employed or , if they are not employed , it may be in order to improve their skills or simply to make them better qualified generally for other possible types of employment .
I can give you an example - because perhaps that is what you were hinting at and because it has come in for a lot of criticism - and that is that McDonald 's workers , for example , have been offered further training .
A clear distinction must be made here : these were further training measures for McDonald 's workers in order to make them better qualified on the jobs market and in the world of work .
As you know - it has , after all , been somewhat criticised - jobs at McDonald 's , often nicknamed ' McJobs ' , are generally part-time jobs that may require no great qualifications ; jobs that are often done by students .
It is a matter of upskilling these people .
Where in-house further qualification is concerned , such as in this project , McDonald 's - to take an example - bore all the costs itself .
In other words , we are trying and endeavouring to ensure that the further training that workers receive concentrates on their own personal qualifications .
In view of this , I believe that it should make no difference where these people are employed ; rather , our objective must be to improve further the quality of each person 's skills in order to make people more fit for an increasingly mobile labour market , thereby avoiding unemployment wherever possible .
Subject : European Progress Microfinance Facility
Implementation of the European Progress Microfinance Facility ( EPMF ) seems to be slower than expected , a situation which could endanger its purpose and which is manifestly at odds with the speed of its adoption in March 2010 .
How does the Commission intend to speed up the process and make sure that the EPMF reaches the most vulnerable people while also reflecting the right geographical balance ?
What does the Commission plan to do in order to get the Member States to finance mentoring and training programmes , and also to ensure that interest payments are subsidised from European Social Fund resources , as agreed ?
How will the Commission ensure that information about the EPMF reaches the target audiences ?
Member of the Commission . - Dear colleagues , I am pleased to report that both parts of the European Progress Microfinance Facility - the guarantees part and the cash products part - are now entirely operational .
Only three months after the entry into force of the decision , the Commission finalised the mandate for the European Investment Fund to launch the guarantee operations for microfinance providers .
Last November , the Commission established a specialised investment vehicle .
As a result , the first micro-loans will be provided starting from this month .
I am also pleased to report that the Commission has been successful in securing additional funding for micro-entrepreneurs in Europe .
The European Investment Bank will match the European Union 's contribution of EUR 100 million , and further contributors are expected .
As a result , the overall volume of loans under the Progress Microfinance Facility will amount , as planned , to around EUR 500 million .
This money will benefit unemployed people , people facing social exclusion or vulnerable persons who face difficulties in accessing the conventional credit market .
Ensuring outreach to these target groups and promoting geographical balance are key elements of the mandate given by the Commission to the European Investment Fund .
Operations approved so far , or under preparation , suggest that both objectives will be met .
As from early 2011 , micro-loans will be provided through a start-up microfinancing institution in Belgium which focuses on disadvantaged urban communities , and through a foundation in the Netherlands which targets individuals with no access to conventional finance .
The EIF has announced that the operations being prepared will also be balanced in terms of geographical coverage .
About 40 % are expected to involve intermediaries investing in Europe and about 60 % in Central and Eastern Europe .
It is well known that microfinance is most effective if business starters and micro-enterprises are accompanied through business support services .
As such , the Commission will undertake measures to support European Social Fund managing authorities and intermediate bodies to step up the promotion of self-employment and micro-enterprises .
For the current ESF programming period , the Member States have earmarked more than EUR 2.7 billion to promote entrepreneurship .
Entrepreneurs can also be supported through interest rebates .
However , whether or not interest rebates are subsidised through the ESF is a decision to be taken by the individual Member States .
At present , only one Member State , namely Lithuania , has indicated that it makes use of this possibility .
Lastly , the Commission will promote information about the Progress Microfinance Facility .
The microfinance providers who are closest to the target beneficiaries will provide information on the availability of micro-loans .
The Commission will make use of existing networks of public employment services , ESF managing authorities and NGOs , to provide information on the progress of the Microfinance Facility .
Last but not least , the Youth on the Move campaign will pay special attention to opportunities for young people from different backgrounds to start up their own businesses and receive micro-loans .
( HU ) Mr President , I was pleased to hear the Commissioner 's report and would like to clarify one part .
When we received the report from the Commission and the European Investment Fund a few weeks ago , it talked about a total sum in the region of only EUR 200 million .
One of my questions was exactly this , that the original promise or plan envisaged EUR 500 million .
I am interested where these additional funds came from .
I believe this is very important , as this is a high priority programme for the mitigation of the effects of the crisis , which is partly why we hurried with its adoption .
The other important question was whether Member States support interest payment subsidies and training and mentoring elements from the Social Fund .
This also featured in the original plan , and then the Commission seemed to neglect this issue .
Supplying information , ensuring that information reaches people , is very important .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for this information .
I fully agree with you that the instrument which we have discussed today is a very important one .
However , it is worth mentioning that we should also answer the question as to which states are using the Microfinance Facility .
I was concerned that you stated in your reply that we should ensure different levels of distribution by state and geographical area .
Have any states used the instrument as yet ?
( RO ) Mr President , young people are admittedly hit hardest by the economic and financial crisis , but we must not forget either people over the age of 45 who are unemployed .
I would like to ask you the following question , because you mentioned that 60 % of the European Progress Microfinance Facility will go towards Central and Eastern Europe : have you identified the barriers which have prevented the countries in this region of Europe from making sufficient use of this instrument up until now ?
Thank you very much for your interest and your comments .
The subject of microfinance is , in fact , one covered by a number of directorates general , with Mr Andor taking a certain lead as regards substance .
However , it is also something that we are concerned with within the area of regional policy .
Where interest rates are concerned , there are some Member States that have set a cap - as a condition , so to speak - which is at around 8 to 9.5 per cent .
What must also be taken into account here , however , is that naturally - and this has always been a matter for discussion , including during the preparations for all this - the overheads are relatively high in relation to the actual loans , and therefore , costs are incurred which need to be covered .
A sensible middle way has to be found , and I think we have succeeded in this .
Moving on to the second question , I can tell you that the Jasmine instrument - which is intended to assist with the appropriate preparations for microfinance and to pave the way for intermediaries to be set up and trained - is currently being used to make ready 15 institutions in 15 different countries , 11 of them in Central and Eastern Europe and four in Western Europe .
I cannot tell you all the countries off the top of my head , but essentially , they are mostly the new accession countries , and we expect that in the coming years , a further 20 intermediaries will be prepared accordingly by the Jasmine programme .
Regarding the last question , I must ask you to bear with me since I cannot give an off-the-cuff answer .
We will forward an answer in writing , stating in detail the reasons for restricting access .
I would certainly assume , however , that there are often communication problems here and that there are also often obstacles because many of the potential borrowers are people who can no longer obtain loans from a ' conventional ' bank and there is therefore often also a certain amount of anxiety or reticence when it comes to approaching such facilities .
If this is the case and it becomes ingrained and established , however , then it will be necessary to carry out information activities in this area as appropriate .
Subject : Additional support measures for SMEs under tourism policy
Tourism , like any other sector of the economy , is increasingly feeling the effects of world competition .
In order for the European Union to remain competitive in this sector , the EU has set itself the objective in the Lisbon Treaty of promoting the competitiveness of tourism and creating an environment favourable to business development .
For this purpose , the following objectives have been adopted : promoting innovation in tourism , improving the overall quality of tourism services and perfecting the professional skills of personnel .
However , businesses in the tourism sector - many of which are SMEs - are not always able to attain these objectives through their own unaided efforts .
This is due to several factors , such as limited financial resources , the lack of qualified workers and inability to respond quickly to change : hence the need for additional funding .
Does not the Commission consider that it would be desirable to devise a coherent strategy and a detailed action plan comprising specific support measures for SMEs and financing arrangements which could help to overcome the difficulties encountered by the sector ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European tourism industry , like many other economic sectors , has to face the ever greater challenge of globalisation .
This is a challenge that the Commission has already emphasised and addressed on many occasions , in particular , with the communication ' An industrial policy for the globalisation era ' .
Furthermore , on 30 June last year , the Commission adopted a specific communication on tourism , which proposes - in line with the Treaty of Lisbon and the new Europe 2020 strategy - a consolidated political framework to strengthen competitiveness in the sector , with the aim of making European tourism a truly competitive , modern , sustainable and responsible industry .
The creation of an environment that is conducive to the development of micro , small and medium-sized enterprises in the tourism sector is the principle on which this consolidated framework is based .
To achieve this objective , we proposed three specific measures aimed , firstly , at stimulating competitiveness in the European tourism sector ; secondly , at promoting the development of sustainable , responsible and high quality tourism ; and thirdly , at consolidating the image and profile of Europe as a collection of sustainable and high quality tourist destinations and , of course , maximising the potential of EU financial policies and instruments for developing tourism .
The initiatives promoted should provide the sector with the instruments necessary to adapt to the challenges faced by its operators , and to work towards its sustainable development in terms of competitiveness .
Of course , specific measures will be taken to promote innovation in the tourism sector , reinforce the quality of tourism services and improve the professional skills of tourism workers , because we must no longer regard tourism as a sector consisting exclusively of family businesses ; we must also consider how we can make it more modern and more competitive .
I will give a few examples regarding training and professional skills : an ' ICT and tourism ' platform will be launched to facilitate the adaptation of the tourism sector and its businesses to developments in the new information technologies market and improve their competitiveness .
All of these proposals and ideas are contained in the Commission communication , which has been approved by the Council and which we are debating in Parliament - the rapporteur is present in the Chamber .
The industry 's operators will be encouraged to make better use of the Union 's various programmes , such as Leonardo , the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , Erasmus for young entrepreneurs , the European Social Fund and other programmes .
Furthermore , a strategy to promote the diversification of tourist services and the creation of a virtual electronic observatory for European tourism will likewise help to create a favourable environment for the sector 's operators .
In addition , I must point out that small and medium-sized enterprises can benefit from other cross-cutting initiatives to access funding .
I would mention JEREMIE , the joint initiative of the Commission , the European Investment Fund and the European Investment Bank , which is aimed at improving access to funding for micro , small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular , through the channels of risk capital , loans , securities , micro-credit and other forms of repayable aid .
Lastly , I would point out that small and medium-sized enterprises in the tourism sector are fully covered by the measures proposed in the framework of the Small Business Act , which is intended to promote the business environment of those very same enterprises .
Parliament will receive the updated text in a few weeks ' time .
Hence , the Small Business Act will also become an instrument for safeguarding small and medium-sized enterprises , which offer huge potential in terms of the development of a sector that I hope to be able to strengthen over the next year , because I am absolutely convinced that a European policy , as laid down in the Treaty , can bring added value to the excellent work that is already being done by Europe 's regions and the Member States .
I therefore feel able to reassure the honourable Member who tabled the question that the Commission and I are committed to ensuring that all small and medium-sized enterprises in the sector are supported and assisted in their efforts to access EU economic instruments , as part of a political strategy aimed at making tourism one of our key economic and industrial policy sectors .
( LT ) Mr President , probably all of us here today in Parliament hope that the forecast you gave on the development of tourism in the future will indeed become a reality , and this area will not only be developed , but will be favourable for investment .
As you know , tourism is , to date , still unevenly developed in the European Union , and there are objective and subjective reasons for this .
I have a question .
In the Baltic Sea strategy , the attractiveness and accessibility of the Baltic region is listed as one of the main objectives .
What exactly has been achieved in this area over the year ?

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank Mr Balčytis for this question , which places at the heart of our debate issues that Parliament will have an opportunity to address again in the coming months , with the parliamentary report for which I am responsible .
First and foremost , we must give Vice-President Tajani credit for having given a very strong boost to the new European tourism policy laid down by the Treaty of Lisbon , with the communication adopted last June and the associated implementation plan presented a few weeks ago .
These two acts are focused specifically on small and medium-sized enterprises and on competitiveness in the sector , with particular reference to innovation and training-related issues .
With regard to funding , we must act on two fronts : firstly , we must raise awareness of the funds that already exist and ensure that greater use is made of them and , secondly , Parliament must campaign strongly for - I am finishing here , Mr President - the inclusion of specific budget headings for tourism policies in the financial perspective 2014-2020 .
( RO ) There are some countries which use , for instance , the regional Competitiveness and Innovation Programme or the Operational Programme to develop tourism and , in the case of the United Kingdom or Greece , the Operational Programme for Regional Development .
I would like to ask you whether you intend to create a European framework to increase SMEs ' participation in accessing European funds for developing tourism .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank Mr Balčytis since he has given me an opportunity to speak on an issue that , of all the issues for which I am responsible as European Commissioner , is particularly close to my heart , and as the first European Commissioner for Tourism , I believe that tourism policy , together with industrial policy and space policy , is a priority .

To give a concrete answer , however , the central issue , aside from the policy initiatives that I have tried to implement since becoming Commissioner , is the one that Mr Fidanza raised in his speech : since the EU was not responsible for tourism policy prior to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the current financial perspective does not include the funds necessary for the EU to contribute to a strong tourism effort .
We have interesting programmes such as Calypso , which , in Spain , have been enhanced by what are , in my view , some very positive regional initiatives .
However , while I clearly understood the point made by Mr Fidanza in the report that Parliament is due to submit , there will be support , because the funds earmarked for tourism policy will be increased in the next financial perspective .
They may be increased in the eighth framework programme , or through the introduction of ad hoc budget lines .
The important thing , however , is that Parliament brings the problem to light , because it is difficult to give concrete answers if the economic instruments are not in place .
Nevertheless , that does not mean that we will not act with great determination .
As you know , countless initiatives have been taken , the Belgian Presidency organised a major event in Malta , and the Hungarian Presidency has already announced that it will organise a major event specifically devoted to tourism - this was the topic of our first meeting , which was held in Budapest a few days ago .

I am glad that Mr Balčytis raised the issue of tourism in the Baltic region : tourism is not an issue that exclusively concerns the economies of Mediterranean countries - Spain , France , Italy , Greece and Malta .
It is an extremely important resource for the whole of the European Union , including the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , which have their own sights and their own potential to be developed .
On the subject of the Baltic States , I believe that one of the issues - which , incidentally , is addressed in the text that was approved on 30 June last year - is the relationship with the new emerging classes , with the new middle class in Russia .
Millions upon millions of Russians plan to carry out tourist activities and , hence , wish to travel outside their country .
We have a problem with regard to visas .
The same problem exists with regard to China , I believe .
The European Commission and the tourism ministers are determined to try to resolve this problem regarding potential visitors from both Russia and China .
We want to speed matters up and make it easier for them to be admitted into our countries .
Moreover , the Baltic States , being closer to Russia , can reap the potential economic benefits of hosting tourists from the emerging middle class , too .
This is at the very heart of our work to promote tourism policies , and I am also encouraged by the fact that many ministers from the various Member States , including the United Kingdom - I met the UK 's new tourism minister a few weeks ago in London - and France , are firmly committed to supporting EU tourism policy .
It is important to identify a number of gateways , because Europe must represent added value .
I am delighted that Commissioner Vassiliou has sought to include in the text on sport that was adopted today the point that major sporting events , such as the forthcoming London Olympics , are a great opportunity for the whole of the European Union .
In short , we must ensure that every country in the EU can act as a gateway for tourists to enter and visit that country , but then to go and visit other European countries once they have finished .
This is the additional action the European Commission can take , and Parliament 's support is crucial as far as I am concerned .
May I thank you now for your future efforts , including in the debate on tourism policy , but also in all the debates concerning the forthcoming budget activities .
Part two
Subject : Programmes and initiatives to modernise higher education
Studies have been carried out in some Member States in order to determine how higher education institutions have adapted to the new labour market requirements and what prospects graduates have of finding work once they have completed their degree course .
The research has shown - regrettably - that many universities are preparing specialists for a market that is already saturated .
College syllabuses do not always allow for the needs of the labour market , and those who suffer most as a result are , therefore , new graduates .
The Commission 's work programme for 2011 refers to the modernisation of higher education and states that proposals might be put forward on the systems to be applied in order to assess , and bring transparency to , the activities of higher education institutions .
That being the case , what specific programmes and model initiatives will the Commission adopt with a view to modernising higher education in Europe ?
Will it draw up a special strategy to modernise higher education so as to ensure that young graduates will be able to find a job as quickly as possible ?
How much is it willing to invest in the future in programmes and initiatives of this kind for young people ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , education is one of the major factors that determines employability .
The risk of being unemployed is 40 % lower for higher education graduates than for people with only secondary education .
However , youth unemployment and under-employment are unacceptably high today .
Too many graduates struggle to make the transition to the labour market and secure quality employment that corresponds to their educational background .
Of course , the efforts to improve employability begin well before higher education .
The Commission works with Member States to identify the skills or key competences that young people need to learn at school .
Today , young people need a wider range of skills than ever before in order to flourish in a globalised economy .
Many will work in jobs that do not yet exist .
Many will need advanced linguistic , intercultural and entrepreneurial skills .
Technology will continue to change the world in ways we cannot imagine , so the ability to continue to learn and to innovate will become crucial factors for employability .
Guidance is also critical .
Young people are confronted with an increased number of educational choices .
They need to be able to take informed decisions .
This requires better information about education and training paths , including a clear picture of job opportunities .
We need to develop quality career guidance services and vocational orientation with the strong involvement of labour market institutions .
Turning to higher education , the Commission recently launched , as you know , Youth on the Move - a Europe 2020 flagship initiative which sets out to make education and training more relevant to young people 's needs .
We are now starting to implement the various parts of this strategy .
Later this year , the Commission plans to present a new Communication on the modernisation of higher education .
We will take stock of progress in making higher education more relevant to the needs of the knowledge-based society , including the question of employability .
We will identify the key challenges for the future and set out our response .
As part of these efforts , the Commission will reinforce the European platform for dialogue between universities and business , with a view to increasing the employability of students and to developing the role of education in the knowledge triangle .
In a more global and mobile world , transparency regarding the performance of higher education institutions can stimulate both competition and cooperation , and be an incentive for further improvements and modernisation .
However , existing international rankings can give an incomplete picture of the performance of universities .
This year , the Commission will present the results of a feasibility study to develop an alternative multi-dimensional ranking system which reflects the diversity of higher education institutions .
Europe needs to be better at anticipating the skill needs of tomorrow .
This is why the Commission has launched the Agenda for New Skills and Jobs , which goes hand in hand with our Youth on the Move initiative .
The Agenda for New Skills and Jobs looks at how to help our young people to become more employable .
Above all , we need to give people the right mix of skills so that they can adapt to our fast-changing society .
Our new EU Skills Panorama , which will be operational in 2012 , will help to forecast not only the skills that employers need today , but also those required in the future .
In the spring of this year , the Commission intends to propose new European benchmarks on learning mobility and on the role of education in preparing people to be employable in the knowledge-based labour market .
Finally , EU programmes to support education , training and youth , including mobility programmes such as Erasmus , can help young people to improve their chances in the labour market by gaining valuable international experience and by developing their intellectual understanding .
( LT ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your really comprehensive response .
However , I would like to pose an additional question .
The European Union must guarantee all citizens the right to quality higher education .
However , in the Member States , there are many differences between higher education systems , the costs of higher education and the provision of loans to pay for studies .
High interest on loans taken out to pay for studies and unfavourable loan repayment conditions often deter young people from pursuing higher education in their own country and encourage a brain drain to other countries .
Does the European Commission intend to publish guidance on preferred conditions for the provision of student loans ?
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to ask just one question , although we could discuss various matters at this juncture .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , whether any work is being done on increasing funds for student exchange programmes in Europe .
I have the impression that the funding pool which we have for Erasmus and other programmes has remained the same for several years .
Currently , these awards are certainly very low .
( EL ) Commissioner , it is true that this particular issue comes within the scope of subsidiarity .
However , the Member States are financed by the European Union with funds to modernise syllabuses in the Member States .
For example , under the previous , the third , Community Support Framework , numerous Member States took up Community funds for that purpose .
I have a very specific question : does the Commission have data on the efficacy of the funds which were given and which will be given to the Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all , on the question of the disparities between higher education institutes : exactly !
That is why we want to have transparency in the records of universities .
That is why we are now completing the feasibility study on the basis of which we shall dare to look into the ranking of universities , the mapping of universities and the standards of universities in order to give students more informed choices .
The aim is for them to know exactly where to study , what to study and what is the standard of the university that they want to enter .
Regarding fees , I think I agree with you that high fees need fair loans , but as I am sure you know , this is the responsibility of the Member States .
We know that one thing that economists agree on is that investment in education is something which will produce long-term results , growth and jobs , so I always urge governments not to cut university investment or education investment in general .
Moreover , I agree with the honourable Member who raised the question of the insufficiency of mobility grants like Erasmus .
That is why we are again completing a feasibility study - a study by the London School of Economics , which I hope will be ready in a couple of months - on the basis of which we shall explore , with the European Investment Bank , the possibility of creating a European student loan for mobility .
This , I am sure , will give all students , whether they are poor or rich , the possibility of taking advantage of these excellent mobility grants .
With regard to Mr Papanikolaou 's question , he is talking about the structural development funds on the basis of which governments can build their education infrastructure .
Unfortunately , the Structural Funds are not my responsibility , but I will find out from Commissioner Hahn whether there are any reports by Member States as to the outcome of these grants and if so , I will certainly let you know .
Subject : Performance of pupils in EU Member States
On the whole , the recently published results of the international survey of the performance of 15-year-old school pupils ( PISA Survey 2009 ) show that the EU 's competitiveness is seriously threatened , because in the field of reading competence ( Levels 5-6 ) , only two EU countries are ranked in the top 10 . In the field of mathematics , only three EU countries figure in the top 10 , and none are in the top five .
In 2020 , both these young people and their younger fellow pupils will either be active on the labour market or be in the process of entering it , and it is therefore necessary to take immediate effective measures in the Member States if we wish to significantly improve the quality of pupils ' education .
Will the Commission make a thorough assessment of the above survey and submit specific recommendations to the Member States for procedures of proven effectiveness ?
Are there plans for compiling a programme to disseminate such tried and tested procedures or to establish a forum to debate the challenges which need to be faced ?
Should discussions be held with the Member States to determine what measures need to be taken in order to improve their results ?
Member of the Commission . - As you are aware , it is for each Member State to decide how to organise its educational system .
This is in accordance with Article 165 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Nevertheless , the Commission works with Member States to foster mutual learning and exchanges of good practice .
As we stated in the Europe 2020 strategy , it is vital for Europe 's future as a knowledge-based and inclusive society that education systems are reformed and modernised to match the best in the world .
The OECD 's PISA survey is an important resource for these exchanges .
The latest PISA survey , published in December 2010 , shows a mixed picture for EU Member States .
There are signs of considerable improvement in some systems but , overall , there is much progress still to be made .
These results will provide an important input to future exchanges between the Commission and the Member States .
The European benchmark , adopted by the Council in May 2009 , aims at an adequate level of basic skills in reading , mathematics and science by calling for the share of low achievers aged 15 to be reduced to below 15 % by the year 2020 .
Now I would like to read something from the PISA report , which is very relevant .
The share of low achieving pupils in reading , which had increased from 21 % in 2000 to 24 % in 2006 , improved to 20 % in 2009 .
Nevertheless , the OECD 2010 benchmark of reducing the 2000 share by 20 % to reach 17 % was not reached .
The share of low achieving pupils in maths and science has been declining since 2006 .
There was more progress in science than in maths and the share of low achievers is today lower in science than in maths .
If 2006 is used as a strong starting point , the EU is well on track as regards progress towards the 2020 low achiever benchmark .
On average , over the three disciplines in the 25 EU countries for which data is available , 22.5 % were low achievers in 2006 and , by 2009 , their share had declined to 19.6 % .
So we see that , on average , in the European Union we have made progress .
The Commission will , of course , analyse the PISA results and publish its conclusions in its next annual progress report on benchmarks in 2011 .
In November 2010 , the Council invited the Commission and Member States to focus their joint work on the following areas : curriculum design , motivation for reading , literacy , maths , science and technology , the impact of new technologies on basic skills and their use in helping learners to acquire autonomy and maintain motivation , gender differences in performance and attitudes , the link between pupils ' background and their mastery of basic skills and , finally , issues around teachers and teacher trainers as well as around schools ' ethos and characteristics .
In its conclusion , the Council also invited the Commission to establish a high-level group on literacy and a thematic working group on maths , science and technology .
I intend to launch the high-level group on literacy on 1 February .
It will suggest policy measures based on best practices and research , which will help Member States to improve the consistency and effectiveness of the provision of basic skills within their lifelong learning strategies , and the group will conclude its work and publish its report in mid-2012 .
Moreover , the thematic working group on maths , science and technology has already been established .
It comprises national policy makers and experts on the basis of mutual learning and the exchange of good practices .
The thematic working group will identify and disseminate policy measures to improve the situation of low achievers in basic skills at national level .
I should also underline that the Comenius actions of the lifelong learning programme focuses , among other priorities , on increasing motivation in science and mathematics and on improving literacy skills .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to ask , perhaps research has been done in some countries , which might explain pupils ' low results and achievements ?
Are these financial issues or structural issues ?
What are your thoughts on primary education ?
Research was carried out among pupils in upper years , but what about even younger people who intend to continue their studies ?
Member of the Commission . - I can provide you with all the detailed data that we have on various Member States .
We have not analysed it , it is not our job to see why certain Member States did worse than others , but during our work , we exchanged good practices .
I am very pleased to say that some countries that have followed good practices have shown very good progress since 2006 in most of these indicators .
Regarding elementary school , unfortunately , we do not have studies similar to the PISA one .
No such study exists .
Subject : Fragmented digital markets and consequences for the educational system and investments in geographically isolated regions
According to the Commission Communication on a Digital Agenda for Europe , Europe is still a patchwork of national online markets , and Europeans are prevented from enjoying the benefits of a digital single market by solvable problems such as the lack of investment in networks .
As a result , the education provided in many remote - in particular , mountainous and island - regions lags behind technologically and investments in specific geographical locations are also affected .
Will the Commission say :
Since ICT accounts for 5 % of European GDP , having a market value of € 660 billion annually , while making a much greater contribution to increasing total productivity ( 20 % directly from the ICT sector and 30 % from ICT investments ) , how does it intend to address the fragmentation of digital markets ?
Are any targeted Community actions being developed to address the problem of low national investments in networks , especially for geographically isolated regions ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission 's communication on Europe 2020 and its communication on the digital agenda for Europe set the objective of bringing basic broadband to all Europeans by 2013 and seek to ensure that by 2020 , all Europeans have access to much higher Internet speeds of above 30 megabytes per second and that 50 % or more of European households have subscribed to Internet connection above 100 megabytes per second .
Mr President , the Commission is aware that without strong public intervention , there is a risk of sub-optimal roll-out with fast proven networks concentrated in high-density zones and with remote and rural areas lagging behind .
That would also have negative consequences on educational systems and integration of information and communication technology in education .
The latest EU-wide data shows that only 67 % of schools have broadband access and that there were large disparities between Member States and between densely and thinly populated areas , 73.7 % and 60.6 % respectively .
To avoid the risk of a sub-optimal roll-out , the Commission has adopted a broadband package outlining a common framework within both national and regional policies , which should be developed to meet the targets .
Those policies should , in particular , lower the cost of broadband deployment in the entire EU territory by ensuring proper planning and coordination and reducing administrative burdens .
The Commission has already acted to increase investment in remote areas and regions within the framework of the EU Cohesion Policy with the programming of about EUR 2.3 billion in the period 2007-2013 .
The Commission 's communication on a European economic recovery plan also enabled the programming of EUR 360 million in broadband measures for rural areas through the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development .
In its programme package , the Commission announced that it will reinforce and rationalise the funding of high-speed broadband through EU instruments by 2014 and explore how to attract capital for broadband investment through credit enhancement backed by the European Investment Bank and the EU funds .
An EC-EIB proposal on the issue is expected in 2011 .
Another pillar from the digital agenda is dedicated to digital skills .
Here we propose , for instance , to consider digital literacy and competences as a priority for the European Social Fund regulation in the next programming period and to identify digital competences as a supplement to Europass to ensure their transparency .
Education , as you are aware , is crucial to the development of digital competences in our society and we agree that without appropriate investment , some regions may lag behind .
The latest EU-wide data - I am talking about 2006 - shows that only 67 % of schools had broadband access and that there were large disparities between EU Member States and between densely and thinly populated areas .
We are about to launch a new survey on schools and the results will be available at the end of this year .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your very detailed reply .
I should like to add the following supplementary question : the EU 2020 strategy says that our objective is a digital single market for households and firms , which means equal opportunities in terms of access , but it also means equal opportunities in terms of development .
You personally have said , on occasion , in hearings before the competent committees , such as the Committee on Culture and Education , that approximately 500 000 new jobs will be needed in these sectors over the next five years .
I have a specific question : are we taking all the measures needed to ensure that these new jobs are distributed fairly , without excluding geographically remote areas ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the answer is yes .
That was very good .
Thank you very much indeed !
Subject : 116 000 Missing children hotline
The Commission has recently made a final call to EU Member States to activate the European missing children hotline 116 000 as soon as possible .
This telephone number would provide the necessary aid , assistance and support for children in their time of need .
At the moment , the 116 000 hotline is fully operational only in 12 Member States .
Does the Commission consider that the fact that the service is not operating in a full and proper manner throughout the EU could put children at risk ?
Will people be informed if this service is not available in their country or in the country they are visiting ?
Must every Member State implement this service correctly and in its entirety ?
Is it not true that the failure to provide an adequate service throughout all Member States as regards this number may put children at risk ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission shares the honourable Member 's view that the implementation of the 116 000 hotline for missing children requires further efforts in many Member States .
In that respect , the revised telecom rules - and , in particular , I refer to Article 27a of the Universal Service Directive - require Member States to make every effort to ensure that citizens have access to the service operating a hotline to report cases of missing children .
In that respect , the Commission is carefully monitoring and assisting Member States in the transposition of that new provision into national law , which has to be completed by 25 May 2011 .
On 17 November last year , the Commission adopted the Communication entitled ' Dial 116 000 : The European hotline for missing children ' .
The objectives of the Communication are to renew the Commission 's call on the Member States to implement the missing children hotline as a matter of priority and to ensure that the same high quality of service is offered throughout the Union to provide practical support to the Member States .
The Communication highlights existing best practice developed by the Member States to address the main problems linked to the operating cost and telecom cost of the 116 000 hotline .
The Commission proposes using this best practice to work out a set of common minimum standards that would guarantee a high quality service throughout the EU so that parents and children can count on the same assistance no matter where they are .
This extensive work goes beyond electronic communications issues for which I am responsible and is coordinated by my colleague , Mrs Reding .
Commissioner , in the past , you have identified cost and lack of information as barriers to the implementation of this hotline in some Member States .
What measures do you intend to put in place to address these barriers and , furthermore , do you foresee this service being fully implemented across all Member States ?
Finally , what options are available to Member States that have problems financing this hotline to ensure it becomes operational throughout the European Union ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Of course we are trying to do our utmost .
The line taken by the honourable Member makes sense .
I was indeed , earlier on , taking the line that cost is one of the issues .
The hotline itself is the least part of the problem .
The problem is to follow up .
The issue that we should focus on is not just the hotline itself , but the follow-up .
We are carefully monitoring and assisting the Member States as regards implementation , and we are aware that it is up to them to take the initiative as regards national law .
We are also aware that , in the current financial crisis , it is even more difficult for Member States to find possibilities of financing the follow-up .
Some of those organisations have been the beneficiaries of EU funding for certain projects .
The EU funding available is not intended to cover the full running costs of the services ' operations , but aims just to help develop the 116 000 services by means of concrete projects .
Of course , we need to be creative .
Those who are involved in such projects , and national governments , should also be creative in drawing on budgetary resources , corporate social responsibility and private donations to find the means , at the end of day , of doing what we should all like to be done .
Subject : Mainline railway through the Alps
How does the Commission view the current situation with regard to the construction of the Brenner base tunnel and the necessary approaches on either side , as well as the extension of the Munich-Mühldorf-Freilassing-Salzburg railway ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the question of traffic across the Alps is an extremely serious one , but the situation does not look too bad at this stage .
Despite a difficult financial context , advances are being made on the Brenner Base Tunnel and its northern and southern access routes .
This project is of the highest priority , and the Commission decided to allocate to it a budget of almost EUR 1 billion .
First , on the Brenner Base Tunnel itself , the meeting of the Austrian-Italian Intergovernmental Commission on 19 November 2010 , in the presence of EU coordinator Pat Cox , led to decisive progress .
Austria and Italy confirmed an agreement on the total cost of the Brenner Base Tunnel project at EUR 8 billion .
Austria approved an optimised working plan which will allow preparatory works on the main tunnel to start by 2011 .
The Italian Government authorised the launch of the works with a commitment that guarantees coverage of the costs over the entire construction period .
Secondly , good progress can be reported on access route approaches on either side .
Italy has authorised the launch of works on the southern access route , starting with the first section , Fortezza-Ponte Gardena .
Good progress has also been made by Austria on the northern access route .
Austria has a section in the Lower Inn Valley which will be completed by 2013 or even sooner .
Finally , regarding the cross-border connections between Austria and Germany , the initial goal for completing the works by 2012 at the latest will not be achieved .
On the German side , works will not start before 2012 and will take an estimated three years .
However , in November 2010 , Germany published its national investment assessment , which includes provision for positive development on the northern access route between Munich and the Austrian border .
The one-track section will be upgraded and the whole section will be electrified .
The next step will be a memorandum of understanding between Germany and Austria on this section and the infrastructure management planning process will have to start .
( DE ) Thank you for your kind answer , Commissioner .
However , you have not answered the second part of the question in which I mentioned Munich-Mühldorf-Freilassing , which is part of the main line from Paris to Budapest and which is particularly important in view of the Bavarian chemical triangle and for relief of the Brenner access route .
If the Brenner Base Tunnel is completed , then the Rosenheim section will be overloaded and it will then be important to develop Munich-Mühldorf-Freilassing-Salzburg , which is also a highest priority project for the Commission .
I must ask you whether you consider it possible that additional funding can be made available for this in the next financial perspective , because this is , after all , a cross-border matter .
( EL ) Commissioner , what is happening in the Alps is all well and good , but in Greece , because of the Memorandum , the Greek Government is making cutbacks and cuts to services , thereby isolating Greece from the European and Balkan railway network , citing , together with the Commission , the large debts of the Hellenic Railways .
My question , therefore , is this : what is your opinion of these developments , by which I mean the cuts to railway services ?
Secondly , does the Hellenic Railways debt include the money for cofinancing infrastructure works together with the European Union ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - About Greece , I am not able to answer because I do not know the details .
I have not received any information about these troubles .
About the Munich-Mühldorf-Freilassing-Salzburg priority project number 17 , it is ongoing .
The initial work started in 2007 .
Some of the work is finished .
On 19 April 2010 , the work on the new double-track bridge crossing of the river in Mühldorf started and will be finished .
It is fully funded by the German recovery plan .
It costs EUR 11.7 million , so it is developing and we do not consider this as a major trouble at this moment .
Subject : Texting while driving - road safety
A driver is 23 times more likely to be in an accident if texting .
Texting while driving is deemed to be responsible for thousands of road deaths annually , while the number of personal injuries rise at an alarming rate year on year .
While the Commission recognises the need to increase road safety and ensure proper enforcement of road safety rules , no EU-wide legislation exists which bans the practice of texting , e-mailing and web browsing while driving a motorised vehicle above a pre-agreed speed limit .
Given that the technology already exists to prevent the practice of texting , e-mailing and web browsing while driving , does the Commission intend to introduce EU-wide legislation in order to eliminate the extremely dangerous practice of texting , e-mailing and web browsing while driving ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission shares the view of the honourable Member that texting while driving , like all extraneous activities , is extremely dangerous .
In 2009 , the Commission issued a report on the use of mobile phones when driving .
This report is published on the Europa road safety website .
However , we have no statistics on the number of accidents caused by this practice .
All Member States have legislation which , at least implicitly , prohibits texting , e-mailing and web browsing while driving .
While not specifically referring to the use of mobile phones , legal provisions in domestic legislation state that drivers must be fully concentrated on driving .
Against this background , the Commission does not intend to introduce an additional layer of EU-wide legislation in order to ban the practices of texting , e-mailing and web browsing while driving a motorised vehicle .
We hope that Member States will deal with this issue adequately .
( GA ) Mr President , I am disappointed with the reply I received from Commissioner Kallas .
It is extremely important to have cooperation between the different Member States .
We must do everything to reduce the number of deaths and serious injuries on the roads .
One of the new phenomena on European roads is people texting while driving .
All the Member States have different rules .
We must have more cooperation ; I am disappointed that the Commissioner cannot promise us more in relation to that .
I would like to compliment my colleague , Mr Higgins , on raising this very important issue .
I , too , share his concern at the lack of enthusiasm shown by the Commissioner to ensure that best practice is observed throughout the European Union .
I would ask him why the Commission would not at least try and encourage Member States to have the same rules and regulations right across the European Union , and ensure that they are enforced in the interests of safety and the preservation of life ?
( ES ) Mr President , I am just taking the floor to inform you , ladies and gentlemen , that I am the rapporteur for the issue of cross-border penalties , in which the Council has been given the facility to open up the list of offences - which was , in fact , in the Commission 's initial proposal - and in which the problem of the use of mobile phones appeared .
Unfortunately , neither the United Kingdom nor Ireland are participating in the change of legal basis provided by the Council agreement , as they have an opt-out .
This is one of the problems that we have , and which we in Parliament could perhaps improve .
I hope that , in the debate with the Council , these countries will make their interests clear , although we do not know anything about them .
It appears that the United Kingdom is now intending to opt in .
Vice-President of the Commission . - A broad safety action plan and implementation of that action plan have been extremely high priorities for the Commission , and there really has been tremendous progress : we have substantially reduced the number of accidents in Europe .
I can tell you that , in my own country , the annual death toll at the beginning of the 1990s was 400 , whereas last year it was 78 - and that is , of course , with a tenfold increase in the number of vehicles on the roads .
It is a substantial change .
This is important , and thank you very much Ms Ayala Sender for reminding us about the cross-border enforcement of traffic violations , which is an extremely important step towards improving road safety .
That decision was adopted by the Council in December and we will now implement it .
I do not believe that increasing the number of legislative acts at European level is a panacea : that whatever problem we have , we must have European legislation .
However , while everybody criticises the fact that we have too much EU legislation , in my view , this is an issue about which Member States are as worried as the European public in general , and if cross-border enforcement of traffic violations can create a European space for road safety , that is very important .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 15 and resumed at 21 : 00 )

Situation in Haiti one year after the earthquake : humanitarian aid and reconstruction ( debate )
Before beginning our work , I must inform you that , sadly , an Italian soldier has been killed and another soldier seriously wounded in a gunfight that took place today in Afghanistan .
We offer our condolences to the family of the victim , Luca Sanna .
The next item is the Commission statement on the situation in Haiti one year after the earthquake : humanitarian aid and reconstruction .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , may I also join you in expressing sympathy to those affected and their families .
A year ago , we witnessed in Haiti one of the worst natural catastrophes in recent history , but this also triggered one of the best displays of solidarity , with people whose resilience in the face of disaster and disorder is a lesson of courage to us all .
One year after the disaster , we would like to pay tribute to those who died , but also to those who have survived .
We promised them our help , and we stand by our promises .
The EU is a critical part of the global solidarity effort for Haiti .
We have mobilised all the means available to provide both humanitarian assistance and , as Commissioner Piebalgs will outline later , development aid to rebuild the country .
After the earthquake , the EU pledged more than EUR 320 million in pure humanitarian aid , of which the Commission provided EUR 130 million for last year , 2010 .

These funds allowed us to touch the lives of more than four million Haitians through food assistance , sanitation and shelter .
Close to 1.5 million people have been provided with a place to stay : a basis from which to re-start their life .
Our assistance targeted not only Port-au-Prince but also other affected cities - Léogâne and Jacmel - and we followed , with aid , the 500 000 Haitians who left Port-au-Prince to live with relatives in rural areas , bringing food , water and medical care , clearing the roads and supporting cash-for-work programmes .
Our current humanitarian assistance is focusing on cholera , using EUR 22 million to cover the most essential needs in terms of healthcare , access to proper water supplies and sanitation , information campaigns , epidemiological surveillance and logistics .
We have funded treatment for 158 000 people so far but , more significantly , we have provided clean water for half a million and access to safer sanitation for 900 000 people , we have raised awareness among one million Haitians about what cholera is , how to avoid getting sick and how to treat cholera , and we have distributed 1.3 million soaps and chlorine tablets to affected communities .
We had hoped that one year after the earthquake , the situation would be better , but it is not .
For this reason , we are budgeting for this year , 2011 , EUR 33 million .
We stand ready to provide more if more help is necessary .
For 2011 , our priorities will be housing , sanitation and healthcare .
We will continue to tackle poor sanitation because it is obviously a risk in terms of cholera spreading and affecting communities .
We will also continue to assist with healthcare , but the healthcare system of Haiti is a shambles .
It is not there to help people .
In this process , we have relied on humanitarian aid workers and I want to express my gratitude to those who have been risking their lives to help the Haitian people .
We are also supporting Commissioner Piebalgs in linking relief to rehabilitation and development .
For instance , some of the 9th EDF ' B ' envelope funds will be allocated for housing programmes in close coordination with our humanitarian support .
I want to stress here that we have been looking at the situation in Haiti comprehensively with a view not only to helping people in immediate need but also to building the foundation for longer-term recovery .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , we are also delivering on the reconstruction front .
The EU as a whole - that is , the Union and the Member States - has already committed EUR 600 million out of its EUR 1.2 billion pledge in New York , and has already disbursed EUR 330 million .


As part of the overall EU commitment , the Union 's pledge was initially announced at EUR 460 million , and we consider it necessary to increase that to EUR 522 million .
Out of this pledge , we have already committed EUR 327 million .
Ongoing programmes were adjusted , by extending their duration and / or by increasing the financial envelopes , to respond better to revised priorities .
New programmes were put in place to address additional needs .
Disbursements strictly linked to the pledge amounted to EUR 74 million in 2010 .
I believe that , given the situation in Haiti , this is quite a good result .
One has to realise that the situation there , which was already very difficult before the earthquake , became immensely challenging in its aftermath and even more complicated later - due to Hurricane Tomas , the cholera epidemic and political instability .
Aid workers and technical experts were often working in quite difficult conditions .
Other factors which we need to bear in mind include , firstly , the fact that medium-term to long-term reconstruction assistance is implemented over three to five years and disbursements are spread over the programme 's duration : 2010 was mainly dedicated to committing funds and launching project preparations , including all necessary technical studies and tenders .
More concrete activities will be starting in 2011 and we believe that disbursements against the pledge will double to EUR 150 million during this year .
EU development aid so far has focused , first of all , on providing necessary functions for the government to help deliver the basic services of the state , such as the running of the education system , the healthcare system and the police , and the ability to provide staff in the public sector .
The second priority has been immediate reinforcement and reconstruction of strategic infrastructure and roads ; and the third priority has been strengthening Haitian disaster preparedness and civil protection mechanisms and structures .
We have set ourselves the goal of rebuilding a stronger Haiti , following the earthquake , on more solid foundations .
It is very clear that we need a strong Haitian Government and we need to focus on priorities .
So we very much follow the priorities identified for us by the Haitian Government .
They would really like to strengthen governance - with a particular focus that includes budget support , and taking into account the limited level of government revenue - and to invest substantially in infrastructure , particularly in roads .
Where can we learn lessons in order to improve the situation ?
Well , we could coordinate the aid better and strengthen cooperation between the Commission and the Member States .
We are now finalising the joint programme in a process that involves the EU Member States .
We also have good experience of working with all our partners in the Interim Haiti Reconstruction Commission , and this definitely helps to speed up the process .
I believe , however , that we must pursue our strong wish to achieve stability in terms of both aid and the democratic functioning of Haiti , because that is clearly a precondition if the efforts of the EU and the entire international community are to be successful .
Honourable Members , we are trying to do our best , but it is clear that we can work better .
We have learned from our experiences : the EU is definitely living up to its pledge and to our commitment .
So I believe that , while the situation as sometimes portrayed in the media is quite accurate from one perspective , we are advancing .
I believe that in 2011 , we will see significant changes on the ground - provided that political stability is established in Haiti , because instability is definitely hampering our efforts - and we will focus those efforts on rebuilding Haiti .
Madam President , Commissioners , one year after the earthquake , Haiti is still in a state of emergency and reconstruction efforts are struggling to get off the ground .
This is attributable to the structural deficiencies of the Haitian State , to the Haitian authorities ' lack of political will and decision making capability , and to a lack of support from the international community .
Unless the Haitian authorities take some major decisions , such as compulsory purchase , the thousands of tons of rubble blocking the reconstruction process will not be cleared .
I must commend the efforts made and the work carried out by the humanitarian organisations .
Progress has been achieved and millions of lives have been saved .
Humanitarian agencies , however , cannot continue to compensate for the weaknesses of the Haitian State .
The European Union , therefore , must do its utmost to give strong support to a fair and transparent electoral process in order to ensure the stability and political will required for reconstruction .
It is imperative to assist the future Haitian authorities , throughout the reconstruction process , in the organisation of their institutions with a view to establishing a new equilibrium at all levels and a fully functioning democracy .
Furthermore , it is essential for the European Commission , as a member of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and , in view of its financial contribution , to intervene with a view to speeding up the implementation of the latter 's mandate and to making provision for its operation .
Following the earthquake , the international community decided to reconstruct Haiti differently , without repeating the errors of the past .
It is time to tackle the deep-rooted causes of poverty in Haiti once and for all .
Madam President , one year on from the tragedy which devastated Haiti , as you have said , the assessment of the reconstruction process falls far short not only of the population 's expectations , but also of the commitments made by the international community .
In addition , the efforts to rebuild the state seem , judging by the setbacks in recent months , to have reached deadlock .
This country , which has been devastated by an earthquake and hit by a cholera epidemic whose origins have been attributed to the UN Blue Helmets , has also been plunged into a serious political crisis .
I believe that there are three areas in the Haiti crisis where we need to take action in the period ahead .
Otherwise , the efforts made so far risk being compromised .
The results of the investigation into the causes of the cholera epidemic need to be announced as soon as possible to appease the rage of the population against the UN 's presence .
Secondly , every effort must be made to avoid extending the interim period , which will be triggered at the end of President Préval 's term of office on 7 February .
New elections under close international supervision are the only viable , democratic solution .
Last but not least , I believe that this current assessment must mark a turning point in the reconstruction efforts , which have been undermined by inefficiency , delays and conflicting interests among countries in the region .
Let us not forget that of the USD 10 billion promised at the Donors ' Conference in New York in March 2010 , only USD 1.2 billion has been paid so far , with the European Union 's contribution accounting for a significant proportion of this .
On top of our concerns about resolving the problems of the million Haitians surviving in emergency camps where poverty , despair and sexual violence are assuming alarming proportions , we must add the long-term prospect of sustainable investments in Haiti and concrete support for building a viable state structure .
Madam President , the quality of the speeches from our two Commissioners was such that I shall confine myself to two comments .
Firstly , one year after the earthquake , Haiti is still mostly in ruins .
In view of the scale of the catastrophe , we knew that the country would face considerable difficulties .
We also knew that , in addition to the many civilian victims , the earthquake had affected the very heart of the State , so significant was the damage caused by this natural catastrophe .
When we add to that the structural difficulties and , in particular , the shortcomings in terms of governance , the challenges faced by those working on the ground are obvious .
Who is primarily responsible for this situation ?
Even if there are extenuating circumstances , the main player is the Haitian State itself , without which nothing can be done .
The alternative would be to take over control of the country , and no one wants that .
Secondly , we can complement action by the Haitian State and indeed , we have to do so .
In any case , the European Union has spared no efforts in this respect .
The European Union has not only made statements , but it has also acted upon them .
What we expect of the European Union in future is that , of course , it continues to give its unfailing support but , above all , it is important to contribute towards enabling Haiti to free itself from this dependency , despite its acknowledged weakness .
I recognise that that cannot happen in a few months .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the real issue is how do we rebuild a state that has failed ?
Haiti is a failing state .
Can we really speak of reconstruction , given the fact that Haiti was never a democracy to begin with ?
That is the task that we see before us .
Despite all the efforts the Commission has made , we simply have no answer to that question yet .
The outbreak of cholera , the vote-rigging in the November elections and the intimidation of people are , of course , of no help to us in reconstructing this country , as it were .
The fact that women and girls were already in a terrible position before the earthquake has led to our continuing reluctance to accept that women and girls in reception camps are being subjected to sexual violence .
On top of that comes the fact that Baby Doc is back in Haiti and that he might be wanting to trade on the misery which the citizens are currently in , because - rumour has it - his money has finally run out .
We cannot allow this to happen in Haiti .
Our response over the past year since the disaster has been to enable the Haitians to try to rebuild , but what they really lack is organisational capacity .
That is why they are still stuck with emergency aid and we have to move towards development cooperation .
There is a link missing somewhere .
Now , while this is not something that can just happen overnight , it is one place where we should be directing our efforts , because this country will not be able to put buildings up without being a democracy or , at least , having a proper leadership .
I therefore wish Commissioners Georgieva and Piebalgs all the best in this endeavour . I wish you all the best !
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , it is good to have this debate again ; we had one recently .
It shows our concern for the people of Haiti - we are obviously more concerned about the people of Haiti than the government of Haiti is concerned about the people of Haiti .
We talk about the responsibility to protect .
We talk about responsibility to protect against mass murderers and genocidal dictators - but what about the responsibility to protect against inefficient and corrupt governments who do not care about their own people ?
There are a million people homeless in Haiti ; 230 000 have died ; 300 000 are injured .
But only 5 % of the rubble has been cleared , only 15 % of houses have been reconstructed in some fashion or other .
If the government of Haiti does not care about its own people , then we have to use the concept of responsibility to protect .
Until and unless we do that , it is quite absurd for us to ask our two excellent Commissioners to go on popping up and down in Parliament trying to tell us what they can and cannot do , when the local capacity to do anything is so fraught and fragile .
When an earthquake happens , the first thing you need to do is to clear the rubble .
In order to clear the rubble , you need heavy lifting machinery , cranes , helicopters , bulldozers and the capacity to drive them .
If there is nobody capable of driving this machinery , then you have to bring people in from somewhere else who know how to drive them and get them to be driven .
But the left wing would oppose any Member State army or air force or navy coming and helping to do that .
You cannot expect people from Oxfam and Save the Children and other such organisations to be driving tractors and lifting heavy rubble .
We have to depoliticise our argument and be practical about helping these people .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , scarcely a year ago , Haiti and its people were victims of a terrible catastrophe .
Everywhere , there was devastation and death .
Let us pay tribute to the courage of the Haitian people and the worldwide surge of popular solidarity towards the victims .
I say popular solidarity because , in Europe , as elsewhere , it is very often those who have little who give the most .
I would like here also to formally thank the Cuban State and people for their help in providing effective support , without any ulterior motive and with results that speak for themselves .
To date , the Cuban medical brigade has treated more than 50 000 cholera cases , enabled 76 health centres and hospitals to be rebuilt and operated on many Haitians .
Cuba 's aid is considered by many experts to be particularly effective .
So true is this , that a country like Norway wanted to ask Cuba to intervene on its behalf .
The European Union and the United States would do well to draw inspiration from the Cuban example rather than to feel complacent behind media performances that ill disguise their perception of aid as charity when , in fact , above all , it serves their own economic and political interests at the expense of sustainable reconstruction of the Haitian State and its economy .
Given their historic responsibility for Haiti 's misfortunes , it is obscene for France and the United States to pretend to know what is best .
Let us remember that it took the very worst of catastrophes for the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) to decide at last to cancel Haiti 's debt .
At the moment , what is happening in Haiti demonstrates limitations in the current operation of the United Nations ( UN ) .
In Haiti , humanitarian interference demonstrates its inability to implement sustainable solutions for people .
What is worse is that , in the medium and long term , it constitutes a hindrance to the reconstruction of a democratic State and of an economy that ultimately responds to the Haitian people 's human need for development .
The international community has promised USD 11.5 billion for the country 's reconstruction .
It remains to be seen what is meant by reconstruction .
How much of this aid has actually arrived in the field ?
Who will decide on the projects ?
Are we going to see , as happened in Kosovo , people who have been made redundant watching big multinational companies reconstructing their country because they are the only ones able to win the international tenders ?
The European Union must not be part of a paternalistic or neocolonialist vision but instead must contribute to the rise of a democratic renaissance in the Haitian Republic that is the work of the people themselves .
The Haitian people were the first in the world to free themselves from French colonialism .
In addition to the ravages of the war , that cost them more than EUR 20 billion in today 's money in ' compensation ' to the slaveholding European colonists .
Because of the crimes against humanity , which slavery and colonialism represent , the European Union and France , in particular , now owe a moral , political and economic debt to Haiti .
We must honour this debt of honour .
Madam President , one year after the terrible earthquake in Haiti , the reconstruction of this country is painfully slow .
Yet , progress has been made , step by step .
The people of Haiti badly need our help , especially now that the cholera epidemic is taking its toll .
We should focus on food security .
Local agriculture has been hard hit , as a result of which the country has become too dependent on food imports .
It is important that a great deal of energy and money are invested in redeveloping agriculture and local infrastructure .
In that respect , micro-loans are of the utmost importance , as they stimulate economic development from the bottom up .
Does the Commission share this view ?
Meanwhile , the political situation in Haiti remains alarming , following the first round of presidential elections .
The evaluation report issued by the Organization of American States last week makes that clear .
How does the Commission assess the current political situation in Haiti and the impact it has had on the reconstruction of the country ?
Finally , Madam President , last week , an impressive book about Haiti by a Dutch journalist was published and one image has stuck in my memory ever since : some people in Haiti clearing the debris after the earthquake wore T-shirts with the slogan ' Haiti pap peri ' ( Haiti is NOT dying ) .
That should inspire us to ensure that the Haitians do , indeed , survive and that , thanks to our support , they are given good prospects for the future .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Union has not forgotten Haiti .
We are still the largest source of humanitarian aid .
However , it is depressing that the country is still mired in domestic and political chaos .
The provision of humanitarian aid to Haiti was carried out in two classic stages .
The first stage was to provide emergency aid and was supposed to target those who were most in need .
The second stage was to focus on the economic , social and political reconstruction of the country .
However , due to the outbreak of cholera , the hurricane , the unstable social and political situation , and even interreligious tensions and strife , the stage of providing humanitarian aid is taking longer than we originally expected .
As a result , we cannot progress to the second stage as rapidly or as comprehensively as we would have liked .
The crisis in Haiti is ongoing .
Our involvement is still needed .
We cannot abandon our responsibilities .
As Mr Piebalgs reminded us , the European Commission has provided half the resources which were promised at the Donors ' Conference in New York .
In this regard , our plans are progressing well .
The aim of the resolution which this Parliament will adopt tomorrow is to mobilise Member States and the Commission to implement the declarations we have made .
Let us remember that hundreds of thousands of people are still living in temporary camps , and over 3.5 thousand people have died of cholera .
From the very beginning , we have maintained that those responsible for reconstruction should be the people of Haiti themselves .
The Haitian plan for the reconstruction of the country is based on decentralisation and an emphasis on local agriculture and food security .
We respect these priorities of the people of Haiti .
There is one other recommendation .
We should increase our humanitarian efforts and I know that the Commissioner is already working on this .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioners , Haiti really is a case unto itself .
We all need to understand that .
This is not a humanitarian crisis where we pay some money and then the government decides how to implement the projects .
Haiti is a country in complete collapse .
The only thing we can expect is that , given the situation it is in , this country will have more corruption and will find it more and more difficult to deal with the crisis and take the necessary measures .
It is a country in which our intervention needs to be more forceful , more stable ; we shall often need to have a more active role than in any other case .
Mr Deva referred to the debris that has not yet been cleared so that the damage can be restored .
The debris needs to be cleared from the streets .
This needs to be our top priority .
At the rate we are going , we will need another five years .
This work needs to be finished without delay .
There is so much work that needs to be done in this country that normally , if all this is done properly , there should be no unemployment .
We really must intervene proactively in the question of the debris , in the question of the water supply and in the question of the food supply , so that this country can stand on its own feet , so that the citizens of this country , who are forced on a daily basis to consider how they are to survive , can also think about the future .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it really is true that Haiti is a case apart , that it is different , because anniversaries of disasters are always commemorated in order to remember the victims , to learn from one 's mistakes and do better next time , but it is different in Haiti because there is nothing to remember - nothing has happened yet .
Instead of saying one year after the earthquake , we should actually be saying one year of earthquakes , because there was the seismic earthquake , then the earthquake with regard to the shambolic aid distribution , then the health earthquake with the cholera outbreak , then the political earthquake with the non-transparent elections that were held at probably the worst possible time , and now the earthquake that is , in some respects , historical too , with the return of the former dictator in the guise of a dubious multi-millionaire tourist .
The Commission is doing good work - very good work , in fact .
I visited Haiti last June with the Committee on Development and I saw the excellent work being done , for which we thank the Commission .
However , there needs to be greater political protection and an enhanced role for the international community , which must set targets and deadlines and must directly oversee part of the reconstruction .
This must be balanced with the increased involvement of the population and local NGOs , which are often frozen out instead .
A lesser role for the national politicians and national government institutions of Haiti , then , and a greater role for the so far fragile partnership between its citizens and the international community .
( FR ) Madam President , having participated in the observation mission to Haiti last September , I was able to realise the emergencies to be dealt with .
Now we have to look beyond these emergencies to finally reach the development stage .
We do not have to reconstruct but rather to construct a country whose foundations and governance have never been strong .
One thing is clear , as my fellow Members have said : there are 20 million tonnes of rubble to clear and only 5 % , a minute part , has been cleared in a year .
At this rate , it will take more than six years to clear the ruins in Port-au-Prince .
It is therefore a political project in itself and the Commission has to contribute to it .
Another priority is governance and I am pleased that the European Union is making a major contribution to budgetary support for the country .
We have to increase this financial effort because it is the only means of restoring competences to the Haitian country and people .
Its current dependency on non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) is seen at the level of basic public services such as health and education .
We must not , however , subcontract all public services to NGOs .
Above all , we have to increase our support to organise elections quickly and complete these elections , which , I hope , should enable a corrupt political elite to be replaced .
At present , an oligarchy of allegedly 20 families prevents any economic development because it controls trade but , at the same time , does nothing to develop the country 's production capacity .
Finally , we have to give Haiti the resources to emerge from the dependency that was already undermining it even before the earthquake .
Therefore , I call upon European institutions to establish consistent priorities and to give massive support to setting up public services with strong commitment from the future Haitian Government .
Madam President , I had , I suppose , the honour , along with Ms Rivasi , to lead a delegation from the ACP to Haiti in September .
I said at the time that nothing prepared me for what I found when we were there .
I want to say a number of things tonight .
One is that we have got to move immediately from humanitarian aid to reconstruction .
This is where the problem has not moved forward .
I have heard some very fine things said here tonight , but these are not going to be possible on the ground unless there is more help .
We must put more pressure on those who promised their support to deliver that support , and we must put pressure on the Clinton-led reconstruction , and the United Nations , to move faster .
That has got to come very clearly .
I listened to the Commissioner and he is quite right .
We do need political stability .
I hope and I pray that we get that political stability , but I am not so sure that we will .
I found when we were there - and I want to say this and put it on the record - that the Haitian people are a very proud people .
They are a wonderful people .
We watched them , Michèle Rivasi and I , coming out of their tents at 6 o 'clock in the morning shining like a shilling and with their children washed .
Wonderful people smiling and you wondered why they were able to smile .
I would also like to put on record a tribute to the many people there from our NGOs who are risking their lives , and to our Commission staff to whom I paid tribute when we were there .
We found them to be excellent , and we should not forget that these people risk their lives on a daily basis to help the people of Haiti .
We must not forget the people of Haiti .
We must work for the people of Haiti and we must help the people of Haiti .
If we return to this Chamber ten more times to achieve that , then we should do that and keep doing it .
( RO ) Madam President , on 12 January 2010 , the state of Haiti was literally swept away , as has also been mentioned by many fellow Members .
At present , one year after this awful earthquake , the country is still awaiting reconstruction .
In the meantime , its troubles have been added to by the cholera epidemic and elections , all of which has complicated the situation .
In actual fact , Port-au-Prince is a vast refugee camp at the moment .
The Haitian population is only surviving thanks to the humanitarian organisations ' efforts .
Indeed , we must be grateful to these organisations .
As the UN Special Representative for this country stated , Haiti has become a republic of NGOs .
However , how long can this situation last ?
We can see that the health situation is disastrous , the reconstruction of the education system is an absolute must , not to mention the process of getting rid of the traces of the disaster .
All this creates the need to rebuild the Haitian state .
Apart from the earthquake , the absence of institutions and good governance is a huge problem at the moment .
Therefore , efforts must be focused on restoring the capacity of the state and on building democracy in Haiti .
The need must be spelt out in very strong terms for a credible , transparent electoral process with the prospect of the second round of the elections in February .
The final point I would like to make is that Haiti must be rebuilt , if you permit me to say so , differently .
By ' differently ' , I mean that reconstruction must be of better quality than before to prevent the recurrence of similar disasters .
By ' differently ' , I also mean that our efforts to rebuild the country must involve , I would say , the local communities .
I believe that the main stakeholders , the Haitian people , must be consulted during this reconstruction process .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I did not want to begin my speech without saluting the non-governmental organisations that are on the ground .
I think that the work they are doing is commendable and they represent the best of our values , the best of humanity 's values .
A year has passed since the earthquake in Haiti , and the time has probably come to increase effectiveness .
We have many problems on the table that need to be tackled urgently and without delay .
There is no question whatsoever about this .
The first problem is probably building an acceptable sanitation system .
I believe that this is the number one priority that is currently threatening life in Haiti .
Once we have solved this problem , we will have to tackle the problem of housing , urgently resolving the issue of land titles .
Moreover , we need a legitimate , democratically elected government that is capable of negotiating .
I know that the situation is not easy , but we need that legitimate discussion in order to speed up the improvement of the situation in Haiti .
There is another significant problem that has already been mentioned by several of my fellow Members : rubble , which is a major political problem in itself .
We should also not stop looking to the future in order to begin establishing a long-term education strategy .
What happened in Haiti would probably not have happened if there had been a public education system and if children were looked after as they should have been .
We need to bring an end , not only to poverty , but also to dependence .
( PL ) Madam President , a year ago , there was a terrible disaster in Haiti , a huge earthquake which caused the deaths of 200 000 people and resulted in 1 300 000 people losing their homes .
An operation to provide aid and to help in reconstruction has been going on for a year .
This is , without doubt , a huge and very complex humanitarian operation .
However , the island does not only require material and financial aid , but also the reconstruction of its administrative agencies and political stability , without which it cannot develop .
In addition , the recent cholera epidemic which has already killed over 3 500 people is still putting thousands of people at risk .
Haiti 's experience shows that even generous amounts of money will not help if they are not targeted correctly .
The case of Haiti should give us food for thought , and it clearly indicates the need to create an efficient system of international aid for any possible natural disasters in the future .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , when I think of Haiti , I think of the citizens of that country , but I also think of the European citizens who have provided an incredible amount of support to the people of Haiti .
I also think of the humanitarian organisations who have done an incredible amount of work .
President , that is the upside of the story .
We have to learn lessons and , as far as I am concerned , there are three lessons we need to learn here .
First of all , coordination .
Coordination in the humanitarian aid stage was not a great success , and today we have received a report on that issue .
We need to be better at reconstruction .
That also makes me think of the effectiveness of aid , because that is also related to coordination .
What additional and more effective action can be taken there ?
My second point is about corruption .
If we want the citizens of Europe to provide support , then they will not want that support to be used inappropriately .
We do not want to see that , either as representatives of the authorities or as ordinary citizens .
What can we do , through better coordination , to ensure that corruption does not take hold over these systems ?
My third point , Madam President , is the political aspect .
Without political stability and a very decisive public administration , that sustainable construction will be unable to progress at all .
We have had the first round of elections , which remain a matter of dispute .
I would like to ask you this : what progress are we making , in terms of the coordination with the Organization of American States and other actors , in ensuring that the forthcoming elections go well ?
As Europeans , we have expressed our commitment to help Haiti in the short term and I think we have to continue to show solidarity .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the earthquake has mired Haiti in one of the most serious of humanitarian crises : thousands of dead and wounded , millions of homeless and extremely high levels of damage .
The international community promised a great deal but has delivered very little and it is hard to understand why the reconstruction process is so slow , in spite of the goodwill of the European Union and the work of non-governmental organisations .
The situation has become worse because of the cholera outbreak and the political instability following elections that led to enormous violence , of which women and children were the main victims .
The European Union must continue to help with the reconstruction and to improve the humanitarian situation of vulnerable groups within the Haitian population , but must also contribute to reinforcing capacities for disaster prevention in the long term .
I should therefore like to welcome the recent proposals tabled by the Commission regarding the creation of a European disaster response that includes establishing a voluntary pool of Member States ' emergency organisations and developing contingency plans , as well as the merging of humanitarian aid crisis centres with civil protection to form a European emergency response centre , responsible for monitoring dangerous situations , issuing early warnings and coordinating EU disaster response .
( PL ) Madam President , soon it will be a year since our previous debate on the coordination of humanitarian aid and the reconstruction of Haiti .
Today , therefore , we are conducting what constitutes a review and there is one obvious conclusion : it is a year since the tragedy and the number of victims is still growing .
Two equally important issues should be stressed at this point , which are more important than the construction of new houses and new roads .
Firstly , this Parliament must make a loud and clear appeal for an immediate end to the epidemic of sexual assaults .
As our sources show , 250 women and girls had been raped only a few days after the earthquake , and the situation is still getting worse .
Violence of this nature is on the increase .
It is about time we discussed this shameful subject , addressed this inhumane phenomenon , and began to effectively counteract sexual assault in Haiti .
Secondly , the cholera epidemic , which has already been mentioned here .
The number of those infected has decreased , but this is , of course , dependent on the time of year .
There is a link with a strange but disturbing trend where patients are pretending to have cholera .
It is difficult for us to believe this , as we will be going back to our comfortable beds tonight , but for these people , a night in hospital is a much better prospect than one in their own homes , which are nothing more than crude shelters .
And we should also bear in mind that the cholera epidemic is sure to increase with a change in the season .
This is why we must take notice , and why we should improve these circumstances in particular .

Madam President , they say that God helps those who help themselves , but the European Union actually goes further , because the European Union helps those who do not help themselves , particularly in relation to Haiti where the government - as Mr Deva and others have pointed out - is corrupt and does not seem to be concerned about its own people .
Nevertheless , it is important that we continue the good work in cooperation with the UN and the NGOs etc .
I know that one of our most successful Irish businessmen , Denis O 'Brien , is playing a leading role in that regard .
However , all that will be a drop in the ocean compared to what could be achieved if we had a properly functioning government .
So the message has to go out loud and clear to the Haitian Government that it either needs to ' catch itself on ' or - hopefully - to be removed by a more competent government , and then we would see real progress .
( SK ) Madam President , although it has been possible to gradually mitigate and eliminate the consequences of the destructive earthquake , the inhabitants are still facing serious problems .
There is a shortage of drinking water , food and other basic materials .
There are the everyday problems and difficulties .
There is also the situation of an unstable government with a lack of democratic values , and a cholera epidemic , increasing crime , looting , kidnapping and the raping of women and children .
We must therefore take steps towards limiting these appalling acts .
The European institutions must continue their efforts to mitigate the consequences of the disaster .
In 2011 , aid must be focused on complex challenges , particularly housing reconstruction , supplying basic needs within communities and stabilising the situation in the temporary camps .
At the same time , it is necessary to try and fulfil long-term objectives , such as developing public institutions , local authorities , schools , hospitals and so on .
( PT ) I would reiterate my group 's solidarity with the inhabitants of Haiti : victims of the earthquake of a year ago and , recently , of cholera .
More aid is urgently needed ; more aid to the populations hit by the tragedy of a year ago and the recent outbreaks of disease .
It is unacceptable that some aid has still failed to arrived .
The aid already approved must be followed up , specifically by the European Union .
Moreover , the EU should pay the exemplary acts of solidarity by some countries in the region the attention they are due .
I would stress the case of Cuba , whose government sent doctors and specialised personnel who have already treated more than 50 000 people for cholera .
However , I would also highlight the support of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America in terms of financing as well as of energy , agriculture and food .
It would be positive if the European Union were to take this into account and play a more active role .
All the measures required to accelerate Haiti 's rapid reconstruction and improve its population 's living conditions need to be taken urgently , but we insist on respect for the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity that the bravery and nobility of the Haitian people merit .
( RO ) Madam President , one year after the devastating earthquake in Haiti , there is still no evidence of specific results from the reconstruction process .
The deadlock is due , in particular , to the fact that the Haitian state does not have the capacity to provide basic public services using its own resources .
There is a lack of political will and the Haitian authorities are failing to implement the decisions aimed at rebuilding the country .
This is hampering significantly the operation of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission , the main body tasked with the efficient management of the resources released by the international community .
This situation will continue unless political stability is successfully established in the country , the capacity of the state is restored and an effective government is appointed .
This is why I believe that the EU must make every effort possible to support a legitimate , transparent electoral process .
Ensuring that the second round of voting , scheduled for February , is conducted properly is the only way of ending the political crisis .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to make sure I am understood correctly .
I have no serious reservations concerning the current provision of aid to Haiti by the European Union .
The European Union is certainly providing Haiti with huge material aid and I am surprised that many other countries are not doing this on the same scale as the European Union .
I wanted to remind you that there were reservations raised concerning the actions of the European Union directly after the catastrophe .
The European Union acted too slowly , and the humanitarian aid was obviously badly coordinated .
I would like to ask what specific conclusions the European Commission reached from the slow provision of aid at the time .
I think this is a very important issue , as the timeframe for receiving aid could be the difference between life and death for some .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Haiti shows very clearly that real disasters are man-made .
The international community , and the European Union in particular , are all too ready to help .
It is not money that is the problem , however , but the unstable political circumstances .
At present , no nation is really prepared to put money into a corrupt political system .
My request to the Commission is therefore as follows : of course , we must continue to assist Haiti , but , in particular , we also need to invest in the political infrastructure .
Until there is a working system of government and a working administration , we will have to use the existing aid organisations because , quite simply , there is no real alternative .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I sincerely thank Members of Parliament for all their comments this evening .
In closing , I would like to make five points .
Firstly , I agree very much with all speakers who emphasised the governance failure as the most significant factor underlying the problems Haiti faces today .
That was my first impression after the earthquake and it still stands today : that bad as the earthquake was , it is not Haiti 's biggest problem .
Its biggest problem is the many decades of bad governance that have practically left no social structures and government structures in place to help the Haitian people , and that creates a big deficit of trust of the Haitian people in their government .
I remember very vividly how , when I was there , universally all the Haitians I talked to had one message for me consistently , which was ' Do not give money to the government ' .
Now , on the humanitarian side , we do not give money ; we provide direct assistance .
But it does give us pause for thought on the question of how long it will take to rebuild Haiti : it will take a very long time because it will not happen without this institutional infrastructure in place .
This being said , my second point is that there is actually a positive side to Haitian society which has helped the Haitian people survive : their own resilience and the resilience of their communities .
I met people who lived together : they lost their houses together , they moved to camps together and they have organised in the camps a support system for each other , with some taking responsibility to oversee the kids and to improvise some schooling for them ; others taking responsibility to find work ; others , actually the women , taking on responsibility for cooking for everybody .
That resilience is what gives us some hope today for the future of Haiti .
This leads on to my third point , which is that our support programmes for Haiti have to take into account what the country has and does not have .
For that reason , we have , on the humanitarian side , emphasised cash for work , voucher programmes , innovations like getting seeds and tools at the Community level so that people can actually increase their reliance on themselves .
Fourthly , I am grateful for the points that were made on what lessons we have learnt from Haiti .
I would not agree that we were slow to respond : help from the European Union was flowing within 24 hours .
But I would agree that coordination left room for improvement and that our ability to organise ourselves before a disaster strikes is absolutely essential .
In this sense , I am grateful for the point that was made that , based on lessons from Haiti , we have indeed moved in the direction of creating a European Response Capacity and stronger coordination through the European Disaster Response Centre .
Let me then move to a last point , looking forward on the humanitarian side .
What is it that we are very worried about ?
It is actually the question of protection , especially for women , and of increasing our support for dealing with the tragedy of primarily women-led households stuck in the camps .
I can assure you that this year , as well as with the funding next year , we will put the emphasis on making sure that this question of protection is addressed and that the EU is there for people .
Let me , in closing , just thank everyone once again for their comments and especially those of you who have recognised the sacrifice of the humanitarian workers for the benefit of the people of Haiti .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first , I would like to thank Members of this House for their solidarity and support .
I will start with the political dimension .
The situation is certainly not easy in Haiti , but the High Representative is following it very closely and giving all the necessary diplomatic support to ensure that there is stability .
The second round of presidential elections will help rebuild credibility if there is no violence around it , so we are also making all the necessary diplomatic efforts ; but diplomatic efforts sometimes give immediate results and sometimes need time to produce results .
Some of you mentioned Baby Doc 's visit .
We can say that whilst anybody can move freely , this was definitely not the best sign of the whole political process .
But we should not be somehow misled by this .
I think there is a healthy political core in Haiti and we should believe in it .
Our hope is that the people who are elected in the legislative elections and the president will have the necessary capacities to lead the reconstruction of the country .
The second point I would like to emphasise is that development cooperation is about hard choices .
One choice is do something with high visibility that does not entail a structural change .
It would be no problem to finance thousands of doctors from the EU or to build a new university in the name of the EU ; it would be visible and everybody would say fine .
But what about the insecurity in the streets ?
We finance security in quite difficult conditions through the government .
So , if security is provided partially , it is financed by the European Union .
Is it visible ?
Not very much so , because there is no EU label , but I believe it is definite that we have provided for the stability of the country .
Another point is where to invest money .
Again , rebuilding the houses would be the easiest political choice , but what help is that if the country is not reconnected , if there is no infrastructure ?
And infrastructure requires massive investment .
Roughly speaking , one kilometre of road costs USD 1 million and in Haiti even more , because there must be maintenance , and also we need to help the local communities through which the road passes .
So the costs are very substantial .
Haiti will not have such funds to invest .
Strangely enough , in Haiti , we are the only ones involved in the road infrastructure .
Normally , many other countries participate in road infrastructure , but in Haiti , we are alone in giving grants for this .
It is a difficult choice , but I believe it will help the country to have structural change .
A last point which was not raised very much today is the speed of commitment and disbursement of funds .
The funds should not be misused and it takes time for budget support .
It is not just that the government gives us an account and we just transfer the money .
No .
We check the account , we know where the disbursements go , so it is quite a procedure .
You cannot just immediately send EUR 1.2 billion to an account and expect that everything will be sorted out .
We also have a responsibility to our taxpayers .
The same considerations apply with the roads : we need to launch a tender , we need to be transparent about this and that takes a bit of time .
But I believe this time is rightly taken , because it needs only one case of a misuse of funds for the support for Haiti 's reconstruction to be damaged in the eyes of European citizens .
I can assure you that we will take all the necessary steps in this regard , too .
Again , I thank you for your support .
It was a very helpful and encouraging debate and I believe that we will try to deliver on the issues that you have mentioned today .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 19 January 2011 .
Waste crisis in Campania ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission by Margrete Auken and Eva Lichtenberger , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the waste crisis in Campania - B7-0667 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Bairbre de Brún and Willy Meyer , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the waste crisis in Campania - B7-0801 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Judith A. Merkies and Victor Boştinaru , on behalf of the S & D Group , on the waste crisis in Campania , Italy - B7-0805 / 2010 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission by Mara Bizzotto and Lorenzo Fontana , on behalf of the EFD Group , on the waste disposal crisis in Naples and the Campania Region and use of EU funding - B7-0806 / 2010 ) .
Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioner Potočnik very much for the fact that there at last seems to be a bit of consistency on the Commission 's part .
I would like to call for evidence of this to be seen , too .
I have high expectations of the response that we are to receive today because , if nothing definite happens now and Italy does not receive a severe fine for this , where necessary , we will come across this problem in many other places .
It is not only Italy that has major problems with regard to waste .
If everyone has the impression that nothing will happen if they only use landfill sites , we will have a very major disaster on our hands .
I am therefore looking forward to the response .
I would like to use the remainder of my speaking time to address Italy .
I am well aware that Italy 's government is not directly represented here , but it is nevertheless important for Italy itself to begin to acknowledge that this problem must now be resolved .
It is a remarkable country and it is on the brink of drowning in waste . Many conflicts are arising and recently , the situation has only got worse .
Italy must not now experience a situation in which yet more burdens are placed on the people in the form of fines .
Instead , it must ensure that a plan is put in place that is credible and thus use the many active citizens as part of the solution instead of always making them targets for criminalisation , etc .
We cannot solve the waste problem if we do not have the citizens behind us , and there are many citizens who are only too willing to do a great deal of good work in Italy .
Use the military and the police - not to suppress the people , not to keep local authorities out - but to get hold of the real culprits .
Of course , one party that benefits from this is large-scale industry in northern Italy , which makes a nice fat profit from the fact that it can simply dispose of its waste inexpensively instead of paying what it costs .
Others that benefit include the gangsters in the Mafia , who also make large profits .
Therefore , this must stop now , and I hope that Italy will start to take this matter very seriously .
Madam President , when a delegation from the Committee on Budgetary Control visited Italy last autumn , we met with the President of the Campania region .
When we asked him why the disastrous waste situation in Campania had not yet been resolved , he said that it was a political problem .
That reply explains a great deal .
Of course , he could have said anything - that it was a technical problem , a logistical problem or a financial one .
No , the problem was political .
The problem is that there is a lack of political will .
It is because of this lack of political will that Italy has failed to meet its obligations under the Waste Directive .
It is also because of this lack of political will that , in October , it could be observed that none of the improvements that the European Court of Justice had demanded had been implemented .
Again , it is due to this lack of political will that , by the end of the year , the EU still had not received a waste sorting plan .
In contrast , we have seen that the authorities have had the political will to keep these scandals secret by means of security stamps .
Therefore , our group takes a clear position on this matter .
We support all - and there are many - of the good Italian men and women who are fighting for openness on this matter and for those responsible for this situation getting this far to be brought to account .
However , we also believe that before this happens , we must completely reject any idea that European taxpayers should pay as much as a single euro more for the waste debacle in Italy .
We must not throw good money after bad .
Madam President , Commissioner , last year , we visited Campania and Naples , together with the Committee on Petitions , in order to witness the waste crisis situation for ourselves , a situation which many petitioners had described as very grave .
We , too , found the situation on the ground to be very grave .
We saw a waste tip in a national park on top of Mount Vesuvius .
We saw many illegal dumping sites and burning piles of rubbish .
I even recovered industrial waste from a mountain which had been designated as a household waste tip and we also saw an out-of-order incinerator , or at least what appeared to be one .
One thing is clear : things are not working there at the moment and I agree with the previous speakers that there appears to be a great deal of political wrangling over who exactly is responsible for this situation .
Actually , we have called on the politicians and citizens there to put aside all their political differences and to join hands , in order to resolve the situation .
However , since then , I have not seen any sign of a solution , nor have I seen any plan being drawn up here - at least not in public - and I hope that you will be able to clarify for us whether a plan actually exists .
The people of Campania told us the following very clearly last year : ' We have appealed to everyone for help and knocked on all manner of doors , here in our province and the region , across Italy and amongst the Italian Government , and everywhere , we came away empty-handed .
The European Union is our last hope and , at a time when no one else was listening to us , the European Union came to hear what we had to say ' .
They have pinned their hopes on you and us , in the hope that we will ultimately be able to help find a solution in their region , one way or another .
Of course , they need to resolve the situation on the ground themselves .
Although , unfortunately , we cannot go there to clean up the rubbish with our own hands , we have a key role to play in this .
Could you clarify whether there is a plan , if so , whether it is a quality plan , and if not , what you are planning to do about it ?
What are the deadlines ?
When does it have to be implemented by and how long are you prepared to wait ?
When are you ultimately going to push for sanctions to be imposed by the European Court of Justice and what is happening with the structural funds which are currently still frozen ?
This is not just a waste crisis ; these things could also lead to situations which are hazardous to human health .
Where does the European Commission stand on this ?
This may not be your domain , but perhaps you could tell us , anyway , whether you have begun tackling this or not .
Obviously , the mafia , too , clearly has a hand in this .
It has to be said , though , that it is neither for the European Commission nor us to do anything directly about this ; the only thing we can ultimately do is monitor the implementation of our directives in the European Union .
In what way could we provide further support , perhaps by sharing best practice ?
How can Member States help each other here ?
Do you not agree that , in this case , waste should be seen , not so much as a problem , but as an opportunity ?
Campania could make a huge leap overnight towards becoming a recycling community .
I am of the opinion that we should actually advocate a total ban , at European level , on the dumping of waste and a ban on waste tips .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , everyone is now well aware of the situation that Campania and particularly the city of Naples have been living through for years , and the European Union has had to deal with this issue many times .
In the face of this now paradoxical third-world situation , I would like to know from the Commission what consequences Italy will face from the point of view of European law and what financial penalties may be imposed on it if the waste crisis in Campania is not definitively resolved soon .
I would also like to know whether the Commission can provide detailed information about the European funding that the Campania region has received up to now for the creation of the integrated waste collection and disposal system .
You see , Commissioner , usually , when we talk about crises , we talk about tragic , extreme situations , but they are still resolved within a reasonable timeframe .
When a so-called ' crisis ' lasts more than 15 years , something is clearly going wrong .
In recent years , the Italian Government has tried everything possible to resolve the long-standing issue of the waste collection and disposal system .
However , the fact that the streets of Naples are today swamped by tonnes and tonnes of rubbish is clearly the fault , first and foremost , of the local authorities in Campania and of their total incompetence or reluctance to work to find a solution .
It is clear - crystal clear in fact - that the conditions affecting Naples and Campania are due to the evasion of responsibility that has characterised the municipality , the province and the region for many years where waste management is concerned .
Central government cannot be blamed for the fact that separate collection , the first crucial element of an effective waste management plan , has not been imposed .
Central government clearly cannot be blamed for the fact that it had to send the army a few weeks ago - but also on other previous occasions - to replace hundreds of refuse collectors who suddenly fell ill at the same time .
The fact that the crisis has hit Naples while the situation is very different in the rest of Italy , for example , in my region , Veneto , where separate collection has been taking place for years without any problems and with a very high recycling rate , means that the responsibility for the crisis lies with Campanian policy making , with local government officials and , above all , with the serious collusion with the underworld , which has always sought and made huge profits from the waste business thanks to the Camorra 's infiltrating local policy making and local government .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank all Members of Parliament who drew my attention and the attention of my services to this important question .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has taken an active role in monitoring the waste management situation in Campania , as shown , for example , by the report adopted by the Committee on Petitions following the visit to Campania which it carried out in April last year .
Parliament has truly an important role here and has assumed it fully .
Immediately after the European Court ruling , on 4 March 2010 , the Commission wrote to the Italian authorities asking what measures they had planned or taken in order to comply with it .
After that , the Commission has had several contacts and meetings with the Italian authorities , most recently during the mission to Naples carried out on 22 and 23 November 2010 by a delegation from the Environment Directorate-General .
Our view is that the Italian authorities still have a long way to go in order to execute the ruling .
In particular , they need , firstly , to expand and upgrade waste management facilities throughout the whole of Campania and , secondly , to develop an effective management plan for urban waste in Campania , taking into account , amongst other things , the EU waste management hierarchy .
The Commission is not satisfied with the measures that the Italian authorities have communicated since the Court 's ruling because they do not include a detailed calendar indicating milestones for the construction works of the foreseen installations .
We think that the waste management plan for Campania must be fully compliant with EU environmental law and must give priority to waste reduction , re-use and recycling ; ensure implementation of separate collection in the whole region ; provide Campania with the necessary composting capacity ; and establish measures for the safe disposal in a reasonable timeframe of more than seven million tonnes of baled waste stored in several cities in Campania , which also means that the Italian authorities will have to carry out an analysis of the baled waste , the so-called ' ecoball ' , before deciding which is the safest way to dispose of them .
If there is no adequate and effective waste management plan , the Commission will return to the Court and propose the imposition of fines .
Therefore , we must closely assess the draft waste management plan that the Campania authorities have just submitted to the Commission - and ' just ' really means ' just ' - and monitor carefully that they actually adopt and implement the plan .
The decision on whether and when to open Article 260 proceedings against Italy will depend mainly on the content of the waste management plan and the timing of the measures used to immediately address the problem in a convincing way .
With regard to the existing landfills , the Commission has started an investigation and asked the Italian authorities to report on the functioning of the Terziano and Cicciano landfills .
The Italian reply is still pending and once it is received , the Commission will assess it .
At this stage , the Commission does not have evidence of a breach of European Union environmental law .
The fact that the landfill is situated in a nature protected area is not , in itself , a breach of EU legislation , provided , of course , that other rules are applied and that the competent national authorities carry out an appropriate environment assessment and implement the necessary mitigation and also compensation measures .
As concerns the cofinancing of waste management measures in Campania , in the 1994-1999 programming period , EUR 88.1 million were devoted to waste management projects , almost 49 % cofinanced by the ERDF .
However , only 90 % of the total allocation was used because of difficulties also linked to the waste management crisis and the institution by the Italian authorities of the extraordinary management in 1994 .
In the 2002-2006 programming period , a total financing allocation of EUR 140 million , 50 % cofinanced again by the ERDF , was concentrated on waste management projects .
However , following the waste management crisis , the Commission decided to take specific measures in order to ensure that ERDF funds allocated to Campania were used properly .
Firstly , as from 1 January 2005 , expenditure management was considered ineligible for cofinancing .
Secondly , after the official notification to Italy of the opening of the infringement procedure for waste management on 29 June 2007 , the Commission informed the Italian authorities that no further cofinancing would be acceptable for waste management .
The 2007-2013 regional operational programme in Campania foresees a total investment of EUR 270 million , again 50 % cofinanced by the ERDF , for the management of waste .
However , the disbursement of EC financing for projects in the waste sector is subject , in particular , to the condition that the Italian authorities adopt a regional waste management plan , to be validated , of course , by the Commission .
Tomorrow , we will publish in the Commission the report on the implementation of a thematic strategy on prevention and recycling of waste .
This report shows significant differences between Member States in terms of waste management performance .
It clearly demonstrates that with an appropriate waste management strategy , landfilling can be reduced close to zero and that incineration could be dramatically reduced by increasing waste composting and recycling .
In addition to transforming waste into resources , this creates jobs and economic activity while reducing the environmental impact of waste management .
So I really hope that this crisis will eventually be transformed into an opportunity by the competent authorities through the launch of serious separate collection and recycling schemes in Campania .
In brief , the Commission is hoping that the waste management plan for Campania is convincing .
Until we are certain of an effective plan setting up a system with the necessary infrastructure and have robust guarantees that projects will be implemented effectively , Commission funding of relevant waste management projects in Campania is interrupted .
I will address some of your questions which you have already raised in my closing remarks .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Commissioner for having sought to point out that the Committee on Petitions has given an active role to this Parliament , so as to demonstrate that those who speak here , and the political groups that they represent , have every interest in dealing with this situation responsibly , in making all the procedures transparent and in involving the public in a dialogue that gives everyone a sense of responsibility .
As has already been said , the regional executive which , I would remind you , was formed only in May 2010 , has developed a close dialogue with the European Commission in recent months , beginning a process that we can certainly regard as a departure from that of previous years .
There have been no miracles , however ; responsibility has simply been assumed for a drastic situation that has been consolidated over 15 years of ineffective or non-existent action .
I would remind you that Italy was sentenced by the Court of Justice in March 2010 , but for actions discovered and dealt with in 2007 .
Since then , the situation has changed .
The Alderman for the region has already travelled to Brussels three times and has already completed a good proportion of the schedule of works that was outlined in a hearing held before the Committee on Petitions in July .
I shall quickly run through the list : he has approved the special waste plan ; he has finalised the urban solid waste plan ; and , on 31 December , he presented yet another plan with the corrections requested by the Commission , which will be approved by 30 April , as already announced .


The plan has already been partially implemented : the waste to energy plant in Acerra is up and running ; the tender procedures for the Salerno plant have been completed ; the contract for the Naples East plant has been announced ; and 182 waste separation and recycling areas , 7 recovery facilities , 9 composting facilities , 4 multi-material separation facilities , 1 waste electrical and electronic equipment processing facility , 2 aerobic management facilities , 34 approved platforms and 5 landfills are now fully operational , and I am pleased that they will be overseen by the Commission .
An agreement has been concluded with the five provinces to ensure the disposal of their accumulated waste , and agreements have also been concluded with five regions to provide for the temporary relocation of their waste , until the plan has been definitively implemented .
The extraordinary management process is now over , and some funds have been harnessed from the regional budget .
As Mrs Bucella said in her recent hearing before the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the deadline for complying with the judgment usually varies from 12 to 24 months , so we are well on schedule .
However , the Commission can use its discretion to assess whether the deadline should be extended so that it is realistically in line with the progress of the works .
I believe that the answers to all of the questions asked have already been provided in this time and , as the Commissioner said , there are no grounds for imposing further financial penalties .
The Commission is rightly being vigilant , and I hope that this debate will not be used to further work against the institutions and the political parties .
If this is a serious debate aimed at helping the Campania region and trying to find a solution to a long-standing problem , then surely the resolution that we expect to vote on in February can be a common resolution .
If not , it will be yet another waste of time and will cause even more damage .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot but be concerned about the serious waste management crisis that Campania has been enduring for years now , especially when we consider the severe impact it is having on the local populations ' quality of life .
As a European institution , we have a duty to intervene to ensure that this situation does not drag on too long .
We must be very vigilant and keep a close eye on the local authorities , urging them without hesitation to adopt credible measures that will enable Campania to end this serious crisis .
The truth is that we have spoken at length about the waste crisis , without knowing how things really stand .
The Campania region made a commitment to present a regional plan by 2010 , but it has now been postponed until March 2011 .
The situation will become unmanageable if there are any further delays : the risks to public health are increasing , and organised crime continues to profit from the crises .

Under Decree-Law No 195 / 2009 , the Italian Government declared the crisis over and delegated responsibility for waste management to the provinces .
We do not support that decision ; it will be difficult to implement it in a province such as Naples , where 52 % of the Campanian population live .
The municipalities must be placed at the heart of matters , since they alone are capable of providing targeted and effective solutions .
Various Campanian trade unions have begun separate collections , investing considerable effort and obtaining significant results .
They should be given the resources that have already been transferred to the region .
Listening to the local authorities is more important than ever : they are on the front line and have a real , comprehensive oversight of their own region .
They are the ones sounding the alarm about the full landfills .
In the years to come , new landfills and new incinerators will be required , and the associated sites will need to be identified .
This is partly because of the exclusion of the Vitiello Quarry in Terzigno , which the local community and our Parliament requested in order to avoid the risk of the entire urban waste collection system grinding to a halt .
We await the Commission 's response regarding the plan presented by the Campania region .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , despite the Italian Government 's propaganda , which was soon disproved by the Commission , the waste crisis in Campania is a structural problem that is anything but resolved .
Questionable lists aside , we need to realise one thing : the people of Campania continue to live - and die - surrounded by waste .
The local , regional and national politicians , on the right and on the left , have an enormous responsibility .
The task of solving the problem cannot be offloaded on to the citizens , who are already suffering from completely unhealthy living conditions .
The European Union must insist that a worthy solution is found , or else its intervention will have been in vain .
The construction of incinerators , which , by the way , are financed as renewable energy sources and thereby infringe current European legislation , will not solve the issue .
The waste would be turned into ash , causing harmful and deadly emissions .
Pursuant to the Waste Directive , incinerators shall be the last option in a hierarchy of integrated waste systems that presents virtuous alternatives that have no public health or environmental impact but instead create employment .
As far as Mafia infiltration is concerned , I feel it should be acknowledged that , while Mafia infiltration , particularly in the field of waste , does happen in the south , it happens primarily in the north .
This has been especially true over the last few years .
I therefore have three questions for the Commission : what action does it intend to take to ensure that the solution to the problem does not affect people 's health , and how does it intend to prevent decisions from being imposed on the public and areas from actually becoming militarised ?
Does it think that the immediate launch of a cancer registry for the entire region should be one of the conditions for closing the infringement procedure ?
What is the Commission 's assessment of Law No 210 of 2008 and , in particular , of Article 9 on incentives for the construction of incinerators , in which European legislation on State aid is clearly infringed ?
Madam President , after the fairy tales from the Italian members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , perhaps we could come back down to earth .
The facts are that proceedings were brought against Italy , and quite rightly so .
The court found against Italy - again , quite rightly so .
Italy did not meet the deadline .
Evidently , the government did submit a plan , but this was not forwarded in time .
We keep coming back to the same situation .
One cannot help but get the impression that those responsible delay and delay for as long as it takes for an emergency situation to arise , so that it can then react and make decisions using Italy 's emergency legislation - which overrides all other standards .
If there is a lot of rubbish on the streets and if this is also mixed with industrial waste from the north and from the south , then it can quickly be put into unsecured landfill somewhere without taking or being able to take adequate precautions .
To the honourable Members from Italy , I say that this is not an Italian debate .
It is a debate about European law not being adhered to and not being implemented .
If this way of dealing with things were to spread to other countries , then it would have consequences for the whole of Europe .
What is happening down there is not a pleasant Sunday afternoon stroll .
It is a scandal .
It is not a matter of continually designating 536 new sites and using police violence to stop citizens protesting because they do not want domestic refuse that has been mixed with toxic industrial waste to be dumped on their doorsteps .
It will not do .
There must be consequences , and they must be consequences that make themselves felt .
It is a good thing that the financial resources can no longer be used to the extent that they were previously .
Enough has seeped away already .
We need to impose tangible consequences once and for all , because what we are talking about here is the implementation of sensible , necessary and good European law .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the waste disposal plan drawn up must be implemented in such a way as to provide for separate collection , recycling and , only in the last instance , incineration .
It would be wrong to consider imposing further penalties .
Moreover , I would remind you that the blame lies neither with the north nor with other political groups ; one of the previous ministers even belonged to the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , of which you are a Member , so please think about what you are saying .
For decades , people have been talking about the waste crisis in Naples and the Campania region .
Although substantial funds have been set aside , it is true that there is still a crisis situation .
There are no excuses , however .
To say that northern Italy is responsible , or even - as my fellow Member said - that waste from the north can today be found on the streets of Naples is simply untrue .
The responsibility clearly lies with the previous local authorities , which allowed organised crime to freely traffic in waste , on the one hand , and failed to provide suitable and adequate collection and disposal areas , on the other .
What we need is for the people of Campania and Naples to be brave and vote to replace their incompetent officials , as has already happened at regional level .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the waste crisis in the urban area of Naples has now been going on for a full 14 years .
The existing landfill sites are full to excess , while the building of new facilities is blocked by the communities concerned .
However , the mistrust that citizens display towards any waste project can be explained by the fact that much has been promised in these times at a political level , but practically none of those promises have been kept .
In practice , this problem has been dealt with to date by means of short-term interim solutions .
Special commissions have been set up , but these have not even been obliged to keep local authorities and residents informed .
On the other hand , disposable items are part of everyday life in Italy .
As a result , its daily production of waste is far above the European average , while , at the same time , very little value is placed on separation of waste and recycling .
The sad result of this lack of environmental awareness on both sides is that Campania is today a region with large areas of contamination , and the cancer rate among its residents and the rate of respiratory disease among children in the urban area of Naples are both much higher than the average for Italy .
There is therefore an urgent need to find solutions and to get these implemented .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mr Seeber and to all my fellow Members for the task assigned to me , but I would like to stress , if I may , that some extremely positive steps are already being taken in Campania .
I believe , therefore , that invoking Article 260 of the Treaty in order to obtain financial penalties , as some have done , is exploiting the situation .
The regional council , which has been in place for only a few months , has already drawn up the hazardous waste plan and the plan on the integrated waste system .
Furthermore , a separate-collection policy has been launched and initiatives to reduce the overall amount of waste produced have been adopted .
Bidding is under way to construct an incinerator in Salerno , and the procedures relating to the publication of the call for tenders for the incinerator in East Naples are at an advanced stage .
Finally , the policies put in place are aimed not only at cleaning up the city , but also at devising an integrated waste system involving separate collection , a reduction in waste , the construction of modern facilities - not least to eliminate ' ecoballs ' , or huge mounds of compacted waste - and the redevelopment of old landfill sites .
The people who are really to blame for what happened in the past should be punished .
They certainly include former Campanian officials belonging to the left and , in particular , to the Greens , but also certain officials who , in northern Italy , used the local underworld to dump the toxic waste they produced .
The European Union must help Campania , without prejudice , and I call on everyone to work for , not against - do not work against just to live up to the media image of your party or your ideology .
Do you genuinely think that imposing financial penalties on Campania will resolve the crisis ?
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , after the lies told by the Berlusconi government , which assumed office in 2008 telling Italians that the waste problem had been resolved , the European Union is doing the right thing by refusing to grant Italy funding until an environmentally friendly waste system based on recycling of waste and composting has been presented .
That system is certainly not provided for by Mr Caldoro 's plan , which is based once again on uncontrolled landfills such as the ones at Chiaiano , Taverna del Re and Terzigno - the Terzigno landfill is actually inside Vesuvius National Park - nor by incinerators , which cause death , cancers and full-blown health crises .
In the 13 years that the environmental crisis has been going on , public funds in Campania have strengthened the criminal links between politicians , both on the left and on the right , businessmen and the Camorra .
Furthermore , environmental issues are not resolved by criminalising dissent or by criminalising local communities , families and the region , as the Italian Government has done by using batons to restrain anyone who defends the environment and the land .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe , centralist and bureaucratic as it is , does not recognise the differences between regions and between administrative structures within the Member States .
The responsibility for the disastrous situation in Campania lies primarily with the people of Campania , and I , as a native of Padania , reject these accusations and level them against those who , in Campania , voted for local officials who were incapable of resolving the problem , and who repeated their mistake by re-electing them in subsequent polls .
Padania is willing to help the people of Campania , but it will not accept any accusations made against it .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I certainly do not intend for my speech to deny the seriousness of a situation that is the inevitable outcome of obvious administrative and political failings , which have been - and still are - in danger of burying an entire city and its surroundings in waste .
Mr Søndergaard and Mrs Lichtenberger , the crisis in Campania initially began and then developed so dramatically because of the inability of a regional council and a left-wing Naples city council , together with aldermen from the Greens , to take decisions - including unpopular and brave decisions - to create an environmentally friendly waste collection and disposal system .
Irresponsibility , indecision , political gain , sinister collusion and waste characterised a political and administrative phase that is now definitively over .
I want to reassure those who tabled the oral questions and the political groups that supported them that the political situation is viable and has completely changed .
The national government and the new regional council have shouldered their responsibilities and have the political determination to resolve the crisis .
Through a dialogue with the populations concerned and with the necessary resolve , they are overcoming obstacles and objections that are often caused by Nimby Syndrome , or the idea that people do not want others ' rubbish in their backyard .
As a result , they have drawn up an integrated waste collection and disposal plan that will shortly provide incentives for separate collection and the construction of the necessary facilities .

It would therefore be extremely unfair , counterproductive and exploitative to do as Mr De Magistris is requesting : imposing inhibitory penalties and measures today would harm institutions that are cooperating fully with the European Union as they attempt to close this terrible chapter in the age-old history of Naples and Campania through the efficient use of European and national resources .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is my desire - and I hope it will be case - that today 's debate will represent the starting shot of a comprehensive revision of waste management in Campania .
The ruling or order by the European Court of Justice must be implemented once and for all , and the European rules on waste collection and disposal must be implemented in that region .
Second , the damage that has been done by illegal landfills also needs to be tackled .
I know what I am talking about .
In East Germany , we are still today - twenty years after reunification - having to deal with the pollution caused by illegal or poor waste disposal .
However , I do not think that we will be successful in all this unless we attack the root of the problem .
Talk about management all you like ; the fact is that mafia structures exist there .
We have to destroy these , otherwise we will not be successful in this .
Quite honestly , I would set four conditions .
First , a waste management plan must be drawn up .
It seems this has now been done .
However , the Commission should also assist in this .
Second , financial resources must be made available for the creation of new recycling facilities and waste facilities .
Third , there must be harsher penalties for illegal disposal , and I also think - and I am directing my comments here at the Commission - that Europol and Eurojust should support the Italian police and prosecutors in their fight against organised crime .
The resources that are available should be blocked until these conditions are met .
I would then be happy to vote in favour of the resources being released again .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in taking the floor , I wish to clearly state that the waste situation in Campania is better than it was before and is in the process of being resolved .
The issue is a very complex one ; it presents various types of problem , and finding an appropriate , definitive solution to it will take time .
The oral questions we are discussing call for the application of the procedure laid down in Article 260 of the Treaty , but applying a financial penalty will not resolve the situation in Campania .
By proceeding in this way , we would be in danger of endorsing a scenario in which a Member State is found guilty of an infringement on a purely objective basis , simply because it has not yet objectively fulfilled an obligation arising from European law .
The subjective behaviour of the State must be taken into account , too .
It certainly cannot be said that Italy has failed to meet the obligation of sincere cooperation , but as the Commissioner has confirmed , the Commission staff are in constant contact with the Italian national and regional authorities and are closely monitoring the development of the situation .
There can be no denying the will and commitment shown by Italy .
It is important to stress that the operational role has shifted from the regions to the provinces , to allow for the development of a plan meeting the various requirements of the region .
Europe must show solidarity with Italy , with both parties cooperating in perfect synergy .
I would like to conclude by mentioning that the regional council of Campania also used to comprise the Italy of Values party , which perhaps has a short memory these days - too short a memory to recall what it did or , rather , did not do .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not taking the floor simply to stand up for my region .
Rather , I want to share with you the Italian response to the Community violation , and to point out that our concern is to defend the interests of the citizens and our people .
The Campania region and , in general , the Italian State are working on the creation of a network of waste disposal installations , in accordance with European law .
I wish to point out that the European funds earmarked for waste disposal in Campania have been used for measure 1.7 of Regional Operational Programme ( ROP ) 2000-2006 and for operating target 1.1 of ROP 2007-2013 .


With regard to ROP 2000-2006 , the Campania region has accounted for the EUR 140 million funding package made available ; the money has been used to construct storage , treatment and recovery facilities , waste to energy facilities , and wet and dry separation facilities , to secure landfills , to construct , or extend , waste materials recovery facilities , and to implement separate-collection measures .
As for ROP 2007-2013 , EUR 110 million has been earmarked for the construction of waste treatment facilities , and EUR 50 million for the financing of municipal separate-collection facilities .
The activities carried out under target 1.1 of ROP ERDF 2007-2013 and measure 1.7 of ROP 2000-2006 have been greatly restricted by the spending conditions imposed as a result of the infringement procedure launched in relation to the waste management situation in Campania .
Consequently , a sum from the Fund for Underused Areas ( FAS ) has been set aside thus far to ensure the continuation of the activities subject to the European veto on the granting of ROP funds .
To conclude , we feel it is important to be able to present to the Commission and Parliament the real difficulties that exist in complying quickly with the Court of Justice ruling .
( LT ) Madam President , I would simply like to take this opportunity to draw attention to other waste management problems in the European Union .
These problems are , first and foremost , down to the negligent attitude of central and local government institutions to waste management priorities .
For example , in one of Lithuania 's towns , business people who want to build a waste incinerator are misleading the public by maintaining that the incineration of waste is the same as or better than other methods of waste management , such as avoidance and sorting .
Unfortunately , local government institutions and managers responsible for waste management are failing to draw much attention to such misinformation .
When addressing waste management problems in the European Union , I therefore call on the Commission to draw attention to such violations where waste management priorities laid down in the European Union directive on waste are not followed and there is encouragement not to follow them .
( DE ) Madam President , I have been able to see for myself the waste management situation in Campania as part of a delegation from the Committee on Petitions .
It must be said that the institutions there are faced with an extremely difficult task .
Not only do they have to deal with the waste management problems of the past - ecoballs being a particular issue - but also those of the present and the future .
My impression from this trip was that management of today 's waste had been pretty much resolved at the time of our visit , in part , using military intervention .
Resolved in that the waste was taken away from the city and dumped in landfill ; unfortunately , it must be said , sometimes in illegal landfills .
What we need are strategic solutions for the past but , above all , for the future .
The offer made by the EU is good , comprehensible and fair .
Once the region presents a coherent waste management plan , the European Union will release the funds .
We should also encourage the local authorities to do this .
I will say it again : as far as I am concerned , neither the Commission nor the European Parliament is interested in financial penalties .
We are interested in seeing the waste problems being dealt with locally in Campania .
We should make this deal with each other and work together .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the funds that may be blocked by the European Union are those specifically intended for land improvement .
I wonder how anyone can possibly think of blocking these funds , and I call on the Italian Members in particular - who were , moreover , elected by the people of Campania - not to fly into an ideological rage or penalise their fellow citizens .
I urge them to represent the interests of their community and not of themselves .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I should like to thank the Members very much for all their views .
There are three or four issues which I would like to address .
First is the issue which has been quite passionately addressed by many of you .
The situation is critical ; there is no quick fix .
There have been some positive developments but it is obvious that we still need a systemic answer to the question .
It is not easy but it is more than needed .
In that respect , our partner in finding a solution is , of course , Italy , but cooperation with regional authorities in this respect is undoubtedly necessary .
So I am very much looking forward to the evaluation of the new draft waste management plan which we sincerely hope is what we all believe it should be .
It will be evaluated by my services , by the experts , and I can assure you that it will be done in such a way that there will be the same treatment for Italy as for any other Member State , because it is of fundamental importance that we keep that trust between Member States on the table .
So when we talk about dealing with these problems , my approach could actually be put into four words .
I want to be helpfully strict and strictly helpful .
The idea is certainly not to impose fines .
As was mentioned by some of you , the idea is to solve problems , but by imposing fines if there is no other way to solve the problems , because that is my duty .
So I am truly doing everything in cooperation with the Italian authorities so that we find proper solutions .
That is my sincere hope .
At the end of the day , we are talking about the health of Italian citizens and the Italian environment .
The second thing I want to mention is connected with the Waste Framework Directive .
It is a new directive which was recently adopted .
In that directive , it is pretty clear that each of the countries , as a matter of law , has to introduce a waste hierarchy .
That means the best waste is no waste ; there is re-use , recycling , energy regeneration and , if there is no other possibility , landfilling .
That is the picture which is taken from the report that will be published tomorrow on how efficient the Member States in the European Union are .
It is about the trends in landfilling municipal waste because our best available data are on municipal waste .
Believe it or not , there are five Member States where landfilling is below 5 % of municipal waste , but there are also seven Member States where landfilling is over 80 % , so we have really very different situations in Europe when we deal with these programmes , and this is an issue which we certainly want to address .
This picture is of the situation between 1995 and 2007 and , if it shows anything , it shows that if countries want , they can change .
If they organise themselves in a proper way , they can really change .
Fundamentally , you can today divide Europe into two parts : one part which sees waste as a problem and one part which sees waste as a major opportunity for resources and also for the new financial profits because that is the reality .
I have heard many stories of the need for the question of who will take the waste to be decided by public procurement , because there are more than the necessary number of users who would like to have it in order to use it .
However , for this purpose , the waste has to be selected at the very beginning .
That is the fundamental and most important need .
The last thing which I would like to mention is the honourable Member who said that we should be more careful about waste management problems elsewhere in the European Union .
In the infringement cases by sector in 2009 , waste accounts for 19 % , water 20 % , nature 19 % , air 16 % , and the rest less .
We are looking horizontally at all implementation problems and we are bound to do that .
I can assure you that we will do it also in the future .
To conclude , we should truly do our best , you as Members of Parliament and I as Commissioner for the Environment , to spread across Europe the message of waste as an opportunity for the future .
We desperately need that message in the context of the limited resources which we are increasingly facing from day to day .
Resource efficiency is the name of the problem and resource efficiency is at the core of our future competitiveness in Europe .
If you do not believe me , ask me in 10 years ' time .
I can guarantee that this will be the case .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next part-session .
Violation of freedom of expression and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Lithuania ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission by Renate Weber , Sophia in ' t Veld , Leonidas Donskis , Cecilia Wikström , Alexander Alvaro , Sonia Alfano , Gianni Vattimo , Sarah Ludford and Ramon Tremosa i Balcells , on behalf of the ALDE Group , on violation of freedom of expression and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Lithuania - B7-0669 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Ulrike Lunacek , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on violation of the freedom of expression and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Lithuania - B7-0803 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Cornelis de Jong , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on violation of the freedom of expression and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Lithuania - B7-0804 / 2010 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission by Michael Cashman , Monika Flašíková Beňová and Claude Moraes , on behalf of the S & D Group , on violation of the freedom of expression and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Lithuania - B7-0005 / 2011 ) .
author . - Madam President , we are discussing today , and not for the first time , legislation that may be passed by the Lithuanian Parliament with a potentially very negative effect on the position of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender ( LGBT ) people in Lithuania .
I think it is unfortunate that we are discussing the subject again , as Parliament has already passed a resolution on it .
I think the resolution we have proposed for vote tomorrow is very clear .
We would appeal to our Lithuanian colleagues to reflect further on this matter and to make sure that whatever legislation they pass will not discriminate against LGBT people .
I do not have much to say about the resolution , but I think it is becoming increasingly clear that the European Union needs to equip itself with stronger legal instruments for the enforcement of fundamental rights .
We recently debated the controversial media law in Hungary and now we are facing very similar issues .
We have laid down the principles - the shared values of 500 million citizens - in the European treaties but , when it comes to putting them into practice , we run into trouble .
Therefore , Commissioner , I would like to hear your views on our proposal for a European road map for LGBT rights .
The European Union has done a lot for gender equality in the past and , indeed , we have regular road maps for gender equality .
We have all sorts of strategies to combat racism and xenophobia , to combat social exclusion and to strengthen fundamental rights , but not for LGBT people .
I think it is very urgent and very necessary that we have such a strategy : a strategy to fight prejudice , ignorance , discrimination and hatred and to strengthen the rights of LGBT people .
There are many examples of the problem .
Today , we are discussing the amendments which have been put to the Lithuanian Parliament , but that should not distract us from the fact that homophobia exists in all Member States .
I would like to bring another fact to your attention , Commissioner , and to hear your views on it .
This concerns the European asylum policy , and the fact is that people seeking asylum because they are prosecuted on grounds of their sexual orientation in a Member State which I will not name have to undergo something known as a phallometric test .
This is particularly degrading .
It has no place in the European Union and I would like to hear what the Commission intends to do about it .

author . - Madam President , my colleague , Mrs in ' t Veld , has already explained what the resolution is about and referred to it and I strongly agree with the question she put to you , Commissioner : what about a road map for LGBT rights in this common European Union ?
But I would like to take a different angle to hopefully convince those in this Parliament who have not yet decided on voting in favour of this resolution .
You know what ?
Last summer , four Members of the European Parliament , Mrs in ' t Veld , myself , Mr Cashman and Mr Fjellner , representing four groups , the majority of this Parliament , were in Vilnius , in Lithuania , together with the first Baltic Pride to be held in Vilnius , empowering and supporting lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people in this city and we were there under the European flag telling everybody , ' this flag protects us , lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people , and that is true also for Lithuania ' .
Now , what would happen to us and to Lithuanians who next year might go marching in favour of our equal rights in Vilnius if this law is adopted in the Seimas ?
Each one of us could be fined up to EUR 2 900 for publicly promoting sexual orientation - meaning homosexuality in this case , because I guess for heterosexuality that does not apply .
Is that really what this Parliament would want ?
Is that what the Parliament of Lithuania would want , the parliament of a country which , 20 years ago , struggled for its own freedom , with lesbians and gays among the people struggling for that freedom ?
So I am very happy that the President of Lithuania , Mrs Grybauskaitė , former Commissioner , and the government of Lithuania , have already said that this proposed law contravenes Lithuania 's obligations under its own constitution .
I hope it will be clear that different forms of sexuality , of sexual orientation , of forms of living , have been part of all cultures and of all societies and are so in Lithuania , as well , and that hiding facts like that from the public , from young people , is simply a basis for inciting hatred , hate speech and hate crimes .
That is something that I think nobody in this Parliament or in the Lithuanian parliament would want .
Therefore , I hope that we will have the support of this Parliament and of the Commissioner for the resolution .
We do not need your support , but I hope we have it .

Madam President , I would like to add my voice to what the previous speakers have said , but I would also highlight another aspect of this issue : finalising the proposed amendment may have serious consequences for people other than just the LGBT community in Lithuania .
This is another example of a law which could be used to deny recognition to the partnerships and marriages of same-sex couples from other Member States .
We have already debated this in this House , in September last year , and , because some questions remained unanswered then , we and other members of Parliament sent a letter requesting clarification .
Your Commissioner sent us a reply , in which , amongst other things , he wrote that the residence rights of such couples is recognised by European law .
I have this question to put to you : are you also going to challenge Lithuania in cases where one of the partners is not a national of a Member State ?
I would appreciate a very clear answer on this .
I have read in the Commission Work Programme that , in 2013 , the Commission is going to draft a legislative proposal on the mutual recognition of the effects of certain acts of civil status .
My question is : Does that proposal also include the mutual recognition of marriages and partnerships ?
If so , that is , in itself , good news , but why only in 2013 ?
The Commission has announced that it will take the necessary action once its officials have analysed the Lithuanian legislation , and my question is : has the analysis been carried out yet and have your officials , as part of that analysis , considered what the consequences could be for the recognition of same-sex couples from other Member States ?
What action will the Commission take against Lithuania , then , and what will it do about Romania , for example , whose legislation specifically excludes recognition ?
Finally , Commissioner , you promised during the September debate that you would respond rapidly to the report by the European Fundamental Rights Agency on homophobia .
However , in your letter , you simply referred to the Commission 's annual report .
Do you not think that , in light of the developments in Lithuania , that matter should be given much more attention ?
Could you also make a promise that you will issue a separate report on homophobia in the European Union as soon as possible ?
Madam President , I have to say frankly that I do not understand what is happening in Lithuania , or rather , that we feel disenchanted and indignant about this .
Just when it seems that we are making progress in the European Union , at least insofar as we know what basic human rights are , we get a signal from one of the Member States that this simply is not true .
The idea that it is necessary to prohibit by law , for example , the promotion of relationships other than heterosexual ones seems to us to be unbelievably regressive , riding roughshod over what we have achieved together on human rights over recent years in the European Parliament and in cooperation with you , the Commission .
Protecting the spiritual health of children is just a shameful pretext exploited by insecure politicians .
We must and we want to protect children .
We must protect them particularly against violence and poverty , and we want to provide the conditions for their education , safety and personal development .
Everyone , however , or a majority of us , know from our own experience that children are not harmed by displays of affections and love , nor by the promotion of relationships other than heterosexual ones .
I therefore firmly believe that it is no longer appropriate in this day and age for us to hold discussions with the proponents of such views , Commissioner , or to keep on trying to explain something to them . To try and explain to them why their views are so woefully misguided .
In my opinion , there is a need to take decisive action .
There is a need to state unambiguously that attempts at homophobic legislation are unambiguously contrary to the fundamental principles of the European Union , and are quite clearly in conflict with the treaties , with the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights and with the European Convention on Human Rights .
They do not respect freedom of expression and information or freedom of assembly , or the prohibition on discrimination based on sexual orientation .
I would also like to ask , Commissioner , in the event that such a law is passed , whether the Commission will initiate proceedings against Lithuania concerning the violation ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to start by stressing that the Commission unambiguously rejects homophobia because it is a blatant violation of human dignity .
That is also why , on 22 November 2010 , I visited Lithuania and discussed with President Dalia Grybauskaitand the Minister of Justice the proposal to amend the Administrative Code , which establishes a new offence punishable by a fine for ' the promotion of homosexual relations or financing of such promotion in public places ' , as well as the related proposal to amend the Penal Code .
According to the latest information in my possession , the adoption by the Lithuanian Parliament of this draft amendment to the Administrative Code was postponed and is now expected to take place in spring this year .
This means that it is still under discussion .
The Commission is examining the proposals to amend the Lithuanian Administrative and Penal Codes , as well as other Lithuanian legislation , from the perspective of compliance with relevant EU law .
In 2009 , the Commission expressed serious concerns to the Lithuanian authorities in relation to the compatibility with Union law and fundamental rights of the Lithuanian Law on the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effect of Public Information .
Following the Commission 's intervention , this law was amended in December 2009 .
The law qualifies as detrimental to minors information that ' expresses contempt for family values , encourages the concept of entry into a marriage and creation of a family other than stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania and the Civil Code of the Republic of Lithuania ' .
The practical application of this law may raise questions in terms of compliance with the e-Commerce and Audiovisual Media Services Directives and with the principle of non-discrimination .
The Commission is continuing to look into this matter .
According to the information in my possession , an amendment to the Law on Provision of Information took effect on 18 October 2010 .
This amendment prescribes that ' advertising and audiovisual commercial communication [ ... ] must not contain manifestation or promotion of sexual orientation ' .
If these provisions were to remain in the law , we would see the same problems in terms of compliance with the Audiovisual Media Services Directive and possible violation of Article 21 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
In May 2010 , the Commission wrote to the Lithuanian Government expressing worries about the last-minute suspension of the Baltic Gay Pride event .
You will remember this .
We recalled in that letter that freedom of peaceful assembly , as provided for in the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 12 of the Charter , is one of the principles on which the Union is founded .
On that basis , Baltic Gay Pride was held on 8 May 2010 : that was the event to which a previous speaker referred .
As regards the question of a possible European strategy on the fight against homophobia , the Commission 's priority is to ensure that EU legislation complies fully with the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights , including Article 21 prohibiting discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation .
How this is to be achieved was explained very clearly in the Commission 's communication on the strategy for effective implementation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , adopted on 19 October 2010 .
We will come back to this matter in the annual report on application of the Charter , which also covers progress on the application of Article 21 .
That will happen in spring of this year .
According to this logic , the phallometric test as a procedure under asylum policy is , of course , subject to EU law and relates directly to Article 21 of the Charter , which prohibits discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
This clearly means that if , in EU law or in its application at national level , there is discrimination , then the Union is empowered to intervene .
It is very clear that the Union can intervene here .
To conclude , I would like to reiterate the Commission 's strong commitment to combating homophobia and discrimination based on sexual orientation , to the full extent of the powers conferred by the treaties .
Regarding the recognition of civil status , we have no intention of proposing any legislation that would interfere with Member States ' substantive family law or modify national definitions of marriage .
This is subsidiarity .
Our green paper on recognition of civil status is designed for cross-border situations , such as the recognition of birth certificates , and is not concerned with the recognition of same-sex marriage .
We must not mix things up . It is for the Member States to define what marriage is .
It is for the European Union to permit free movement and non-discrimination .
These are two completely different things .
Such is the position in European law and that is what we apply in real terms .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , the EPP is committed to upholding the values and principles upon which the Union is founded , in particular , the respect for human rights .
Europe should fight against all forms of discrimination and that includes discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
At the same time , we have to respect the right of any democracy , as long as it respects human rights and the non-discrimination principle , to discuss , modify and adopt national laws , without interfering in the debates of national parliaments , without infringing the principle of subsidiarity and without acting or condemning a Member State prematurely .
We do not like the idea of condemning a Member State , especially since , in this particular case , the proposed modifications have not even been voted on by the plenary of the Lithuanian Parliament and are still under review by the Lithuanian authorities .
Not only that , but the proposed modifications have already been deemed to be in conflict with European law by the Lithuanian authorities themselves , who have declared that they will be taking action to remedy the situation and to respect the principle of non-discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
So this proposed legislation will probably not even make it onto the statute book of Lithuania and therefore there is no need to condemn this Member State .
To conclude , I do hope nonetheless that tomorrow , the EPP will be able to support the joint resolution as long as it does not condemn any individual Member State and as long as it is modified to make it more balanced .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I hope very much that Lithuania will learn from the experience in the UK , which went through its own agonies of having a law which banned the promotion of homosexuality in schools .
David Cameron , then Conservative leader and now Prime Minister , said 18 months ago that his party was wrong in its support for that 1988 law , which was subsequently repealed .
Indeed David Cameron predicted that the first openly gay Prime Minister in the UK would be a Tory .
We will see , but that is what he predicted .
So you could see a huge change in attitudes in the space of two decades .
This development in attitudes , which my colleague , Charles Tannock , knows a lot more about , and this move by the centre right are reflected in a quite modest and moderate EPP resolution and , indeed , in Simon Busuttil 's opening remarks .
I am hopeful that the EPP might be able to rally to the main resolution if most of their amendments are accepted in the vote tomorrow .
The situation in the UK has been transformed to the extent that the proprietors of a small guest house were today forced to pay compensation to a gay couple whom they refused to allow to stay , in breach of the law .
As the judge remarked , these proprietors were perfectly at liberty to hold or discuss their personal views on homosexuality , but what they could not do was discriminate on the basis of those views .
It is talk , discussion , debate , right of assembly that would be affected by the proposed Lithuanian laws .
Banning the promotion or propagation of homosexuality is likely to have a chilling effect on free speech and discussions , as the Fundamental Rights Agency has pointed out .
I join Sophie in ' t Veld in calling for an EU road map to combat homophobia and discrimination and I call on everyone across the political spectrum in this House to unite in support of the whole range of human rights .
Madam President , this is not the first time that Lithuania has violated the EU 's basic values and the EU Treaty .
Their Parliament seems to be becoming ever more shameless in the way in which it is curtailing gay rights .
We must take action to stop this .
The values and laws of the EU cannot be treated like an à la carte menu - we will take this dish , but not that one .
Anyone who wants to become and remain a member of the EU must comply with all our legislation .
That applies to Lithuania , but it equally applies to France and the Netherlands .
Suppose the Netherlands , for example , starts tampering with the rights of migrants at some point in the future .
We must take action .
If we do not do this , it will mean that no one in the Union will actually be able to feel that they are really well protected .
I am pleased that the Commissioner has immediately started a legal analysis and I hope it will be followed up on very soon .
Because , surely , we cannot allow a situation where people first become a casualty of these laws and then have to go to neighbouring Member States to seek their rights as EU citizens through the European Court of Human Rights .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , the EU is founded on the principle that all its citizens enjoy equal rights and freedoms .
Every country that wants to become a Member State of the EU must commit to that principle and be signatory to the ECHR , not least with regard to sexual orientation .
When Lithuania joined the EU seven years ago , it pledged to uphold our common values of tolerance and equality .
Since then , the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights - and I believe its Articles 12 and 21 - have come into force , further guaranteeing in law citizens ' freedom from discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation at EU institutional level .
As a spokesman for my party and group on human rights issues outside the Union , I can say categorically that the ECR upholds and endorses principles of equality , tolerance and diversity everywhere .
However , many Europeans do hold traditional views with regard to homosexuality , often based on religious conviction .
Just as we seek to uphold the law to protect LGBT rights , so too should we seek to ensure that those who wish to express contrary , non-inflammatory views within the bounds of the law regarding free speech should be free to do so as well .
Undoubtedly , Lithuanian society remains , by and large , conservative and we should understand that .
People are entitled to their own private views , but at an institutional and legal level , we cannot compromise on the principle that we are all equal .
Equality is a hallmark of our progressive society in Europe , and I believe in fact that the legal safeguards and individual rights guaranteed by the EU acted as a kind of magnet to countries such as Lithuania as they emerged from communist totalitarian domination .
I would therefore urge the Lithuanian authorities to reflect on the fact that the EU is committed to preventing the marginalisation , vilification and persecution of minorities that was so commonplace throughout Europe for the first half of the 20th century .
The Commission should indeed look at this proposed draft Lithuanian piece of legislation and pronounce whether or not , in its opinion , this piece of legislation is compatible with EU law - although , as Simon Busuttil put it , it is entirely possible that this bill will not become law , as Lithuania is a democracy and is only too well aware of all the issues we are going to raise in this debate tonight .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Madam President , the proposed law to ban what is called the public promotion of gay relations in Lithuania is another excuse to crush the rights of gay , lesbian , transgender and bisexual people in that state .
How cruelly ironic that a country which threw off the shackles of Stalinist dictatorship only 20 years ago should now revert to aping one of the many crimes of that system : the suppression of the right of people to live freely and in peace according to their own sexual identity .
I salute the courage of the hundreds of gay people and their supporters who braved the hate campaign against them to march in the Baltic Pride parade in Lithuania 's capital , Vilnius , in May of last year .
It is revolting to see right-wing politicians scapegoating gay people in Lithuania .
The political establishment in that country has dismally failed its people , particularly the youth .
Just as in Ireland , market capitalism and financial speculation have devastated the economies of the Baltic States , including Lithuania , where unemployment has rocketed to 18 % and youth unemployment to a staggering 35 % .
In these circumstances , using minorities , including gay people , as scapegoats is a standard , cynical way to divert attention from the failures of the establishment .
Just as in the hate campaign against gays in Uganda , the homophobic campaign in Lithuania tries to insinuate that gay people pose a threat to children , implying sexual abuse of children .
This is a poisonous slander , designed to confuse and mislead .
It is a slander that would have parents look in the wrong direction to protect their children .
Coming from Ireland , I can confirm tragically that threats to children come traditionally from within institutions where they are supposed to be safe , within certain families and within certain areas of the Catholic Church .
It is reprehensible that young people in Lithuania coping with their emerging sexuality - which is a difficult enough time - must now do so in a climate of intolerance and fear .
So , we should stand in solidarity with the right of all people in Lithuania , in Russia , throughout the European Union , and elsewhere , to live in peace and in accordance with their own identities .
( BG ) Madam President , the main message I get from the contributors is that they assume that the proposed changes will discriminate against homosexuals .
However , they are not sure of this .
It is just an assumption .
That is why I was reminded a little of the film Minority Report , in which the local police used clairvoyants to convict people before they had committed the crime .
At the moment , Lithuania is precisely in this position : it is being condemned for something it has not yet done .
Here also lies another fundamental problem which will haunt us for years to come , and that is the conflict between the different rights of different groups .
You know , for example , that the right to assembly which we are discussing here now is not unrestricted and absolute .
An assembly must be peaceful ; it has to be held under certain conditions which do not threaten public order .
I know this goes beyond the context of this particular case , but do not forget that in future , these conflicts of rights will become a huge problem for the European Union more and more often , and that , if we continue to expand the scope of so-called citizen 's rights and freedoms , we will reach a point where we will have to decide whose rights and freedoms have priority over others .
( PL ) Madam President , in Lithuania at the present time , we have a situation where , on the one hand , we are talking about the right of every democratically-elected government to create its own laws in its own country and , on the other , about the obligation to abide by human rights protected by European Union law and international conventions .
The role of the European Parliament is undoubtedly , inter alia , to consider every case where there may be a violation of human rights , which may also result from membership of particular social groups .
Parliament has proposed resolutions in this regard on numerous occasions .
It has always opposed the violation of these rights .
Today 's debate is also a result of the concern that a proposed change to Lithuanian law could lead to the restriction , for example , of freedom of speech in Lithuania on the grounds of sexual orientation .
This concern is well-founded in the sense that the European Parliament has repeatedly raised instances of selective treatment of human rights in Lithuania by the government of that country .
I am thinking here of ethnic minority groups in particular , which are not treated equally in Lithuanian law regarding the rights due to them .
This is why it is worth stressing that draft laws of a country should comply with defined standards and be in accordance with European Union law , which guarantees equal treatment for specified minorities , including ethnic minorities .
( LT ) Madam President , today , as we debate what is a sensitive issue for my country Lithuania , I would , above all , like to stress that , as an EU Member State , Lithuania respects human rights and freedoms and EU values .
Unfortunately , there have been cases where individual Members of the Lithuanian Parliament have initiated laws that violate human rights and discriminate against citizens .
However , I would like to report that last Wednesday , the Lithuanian Government gave a negative conclusion on the proposal debated in the Lithuanian Parliament to introduce penalties for the public promotion of homosexual relations , because it is contrary to international and European Union legislation , as well as the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania , and is regarded as discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
In addition , having ratified the Treaty of Lisbon , Lithuania must respect the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , which prohibits any form of discrimination , including discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
This bill was condemned by the President of the Republic of Lithuania , Ms Dalia Grybauskaitė .
I would like to point out that the amendments proposed in the bill have not yet been adopted by the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania .
Furthermore , the Lithuanian Parliament 's Committee on Human Rights has yet to present its conclusion on these proposed amendments .
I hope that Lithuania will take into account EU and international criticism , the negative conclusion of the government of the Republic of Lithuania and the European Parliament resolution , and that the Lithuanian Parliament will have the political will to reject the law proposed , which would violate human rights and freedoms , and that all discrimination will be stopped , including discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
Madam President , I think it is pretty clear that the message we want to send to the Lithuanian Parliament - and not only to them but also to all those who still presume to debate what are basic facts - is more necessary than ever .
I think there are two facts of which we need to remind some colleagues who may have forgotten them .
The first is that homosexuality has been declassified as a mental illness ; and the second , which is particularly relevant here , is that there is no credible research to show that educating children about homosexuality can affect their sexual orientation .
These are facts , and no legal text or proposed legislation can contradict them .
So the message we want to send tomorrow is simply to remind our colleagues that these matters should not be up for discussion .
That is why we need to pass this resolution and that is why we also need to support the attempts by the President of Lithuania to stop what is happening .
But I insist : the message is directed not only at the Lithuanians but also at all those who still presume , on occasion , to put such matters up for discussion .
( PL ) Madam President , it seems to me that there is no more hypersensitive Parliament in the world as regards the protection of the rights of sexual minorities than the European Parliament .
The Lithuanian law , which was badly translated in the resolution which we are to vote on , has not yet been passed .
The European Parliament is already beginning to criticise one of its Member States .
I believe that we should not interfere in the sovereign legislative process in Lithuania , a sovereign state .
We should certainly show more confidence in the legislative process in Lithuania and more understanding for those members of the Lithuanian Parliament who are actually pointing out that children and young people in particular should be better protected against frequently aggressive exposure to material with a sexual content .
This is a completely natural debate .
It seems that the rights of children in this debate have been completely disregarded .
We will not find confidence , respect for sovereignty , restraint or consideration for children 's rights in this resolution .
This is why we cannot endorse this resolution .
( PL ) Madam President , the majority of European Union citizens believe that everyone is equal and everyone has the same rights .
However , in some European countries , the level of tolerance for sexual minorities is still too low .
There are cases of incitement of hatred towards homosexuals , prohibition of marches for equality , and even legal regulations which contravene European Union law , such as the discriminatory Lithuanian draft law .
The creation of a uniform , minimal EU level of protection for people affected by discrimination due to age , sexual orientation , disability , religion or world-view would put a stop to these practices .
When will this happen ?
The complete separation of church and state is important , as homophobia is spreading in those areas where religion plays too great a role .
Even now , homosexuality is illegal in 76 countries across the world , and 8 Islamic countries impose the death penalty for homosexual relations .
In Europe , at most we only have provisions or draft laws which discredit the free world .
This is why our resolution and the EU Anti-Discrimination Directive are so important .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the amendment which is currently being examined by the Lithuanian Parliament and which would make it a punishable offence to publicly promote homosexuality , was drafted within the framework of a law for the protection of minors against the detrimental effects of public information .
How can we , supposedly for the sake of protecting minors , undermine both freedom of expression and of information , and , above all , sanction discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation ?
We know very well that a text of this kind leads to concealing one 's sexual orientation and runs counter to Lesbian , Gay , Bisexual and Transgender ( LGBT ) rights which we have defended and which this Parliament has defended .
Furthermore , at a time when we are witnessing acts of violence and aggression towards homosexuals , this is an incitement to criminalising homosexuality and a call for violence .
We cannot give to young people an image of Europe as a society that is closed , intolerant , inward-looking and that disregards respect for other people .
For us , therefore , this law is in complete contradiction with European values , as contained in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
As has been said , it also goes against the whole antidiscriminatory corpus of Union law , which has greatly contributed to making our national laws more egalitarian in many aspects of everyday life from employment to information or education .
I thank you , Commissioner , for making a very clear statement , and I would like all groups to understand your argument as well as that of my fellow Members .
I would like to call upon all fellow Members from all the political groups to join with the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament ( S & D ) , the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( ALDE ) , the Greens / European Free Alliance ( Verts / ALE ) and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ( GUE / NGL ) , who have taken the initiative in drafting this resolution .
( SK ) Madam President , why is this Parliament getting involved in a bill submitted by one member of a national parliament ?
I would like to ask when it was that we began to dictate to Member State lawmakers what they could discuss and what not ?
Neither this debate nor the motion for a resolution , which we will vote on tomorrow , relate to a law currently in force .
They relate to a non-binding text which is the subject of a debate in the parliament of an EU Member State .
The law which potentially threatens media freedom in Hungary is a law currently in force .
Most of us , however , ultimately take the view that , before getting involved in it , we should give the Hungarian Government time to amend the law , if necessary .
If nothing else , let us be consistent .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us also put this resolution on hold , at least until the end of the debate in the Lithuanian parliament .
( LT ) Madam President , I am from Lithuania , and the resolution being debated today is based on one amendment to the Code of Administrative Offences .
I would stress that this is an unfinished legislative process in the national parliament with which the European Parliament is trying to interfere .
This is the reading stage , not a final decision , and there have not even been any debates or discussions in the committee .
For the sake of justice , I have to say that the institutions that had to evaluate our Parliamentary Group 's amendment presented conclusions which are not favourable to the draft , meaning that the projected result being discussed today will probably not be the one we are speaking of here .
I therefore cannot support the resolution , as it is an excessive reaction .
Once again , I would like to address my friend Mr Higgins .
Please do not refer to something you have not experienced .
Comparing today 's Lithuania with the Soviet Union is simply incomprehensible .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ban discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union and Article 19 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union oblige the bodies of the EU and all the Member States to fight discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
Lithuania is a Member State of the EU and has thus undertaken to share these common values of the 500 million citizens of the Union .
Firstly , I welcome the fact that following our first resolution in 2009 , the planned act entered into force in Lithuania in a less severe form and that we have not yet become aware of any instance of this law having been applied , and that its application in respect of the ban on the Christopher Street Day Parade failed and the parade took place .
I am all the more astonished , therefore , that new legislative measures are now being proposed under which speaking publicly about or providing information on homosexual relations could effectively result in fines of up to EUR 2 900 and there will no longer be equal opportunities for homosexual people - but at least for women .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's strategy to combat homophobia and would particularly like to thank Commissioner Reding for emphasising the importance of protecting these fundamental rights through her attendance here in plenary when the time is nearly midnight .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I have noted very broad agreement in this House by all the major political parties on the principle of non-discrimination .
I believe that if there were a resolution that really underlined this principle and its application in national law - an obligation that the national states have signed up to vis-à-vis the rules of Europe - then this would be a very important moment .
Those parliamentarians who have clearly stated that we are speaking here about a law which is not a law but a proposal by some parliamentarians are right to highlight this fact , but I would also like to point out that both the President of Lithuania and the government of Lithuania have spoken out clearly against those proposals made by some parliamentarians .
I hope that a nearly unanimous decision in tomorrow 's vote will underline these principles which have been freely agreed upon by 27 Member States , which are the principles behind our European directives , and which have been reinforced by the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I can only subscribe to the strong position of this Parliament .
I have received two motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 19 January 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - While we are critical of the violations of civil liberties in third countries , we must exercise similar scrutiny in the Member States .
It is very disappointing that the Lithuanian Parliament has gone as far as criminalisation of the dissemination of information about sexual orientation on the pretext of protecting minors , religious feelings and political convictions .
It is a clear violation of freedom of expression and it cannot be justified even by the will of the majority of the population .
Inviolable rights of minorities are always an attribute of democracy , but the Lithuanian Parliament has mistaken populism for democracy .
I would like to see the Lithuanian Parliament amending or repealing laws that are , in their essence , homophobic and in breach of the Lithuanian constitutional law , the European Convention on Human Rights , the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
I applaud the courage of the Lithuanian President , Dalia Grybauskaitė , in standing up against discrimination in public and hope that others will follow her suit .
However , should the Lithuanian Parliament fail to comply with its international obligations , an intervention on behalf of the European Union is needed .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23 : 55 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 05 )
International adoption in the EU ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Conclusions of the European Council meeting on 16-17 December ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the European Council and the European Commission on the conclusions of the European Council meeting on 16-17 December .
Pursuant to the Treaty , the President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy , will make a presentation of the report .
President of the European Council . - First of all , I wish you a Happy New Year !
As simple as that and I wish it for you personally and I wish it for our Union , in these difficult times .
As the last European Council is already a month behind us , let me remind you that I already give a full report each time to your Conference of Presidents on the results of the European Council just a few hours after every meeting .
At the December European Council , we focused on the first day on economic issues and on the second day on foreign policy .
On economic policy , we reached some important conclusions .
First , we decided on the proposal for a limited Treaty amendment required to establish a permanent mechanism to safeguard the financial stability of the eurozone as a whole .
Following our agreement , in principle , in our October meeting that such a Treaty change is needed , I had consulted the members of the European Council about its possible wording and content .
I secured agreement on a text consisting of two sentences , to be added to Article 136 of the Treaty .
I quote :
' The Member States whose currency is the euro may establish a stability mechanism to be activated if indispensable to safeguard the stability of the euro area as a whole .
The granting of any required financial assistance under the mechanism will be made subject to strict conditionality ' .
It is an essential piece in our efforts to make Europe more crisis-proof .
It is important , not just for legal certainty , but also for market credibility .
As this amendment will not increase the competences of the Union , all members of the European Council agreed that it was appropriate to use a simplified revision procedure .
This now requires an opinion from your Parliament , as well as from the European Commission and the Central Bank .
We hope to secure your approval .
I need hardly remind you of the importance of proceeding as rapidly and as smoothly as possible in this matter in a period where market volatility remains a concern .
I know that you , and your responsible committees , have been following this matter closely , not least during the work of the Task Force on Economic Governance which I chaired and which gave rise to meetings between myself and the seven chairs of the parliamentary committees most involved .
I would like to thank President Buzek for his contribution on this at the European Council and for informing us of Parliament 's willingness to proceed quickly in considering this matter .
With the benefit of your opinion , the European Council will be able to turn this draft decision into a full decision at its March meeting .
Then , the Treaty amendment will have to be approved in each Member State .
The aim is for the amendment to enter into force on 1 January 2013 at the latest , so that the permanent mechanism itself can be in place in June 2013 .
The European Council also examined what could be the key features of the future mechanism .
Already in October , we had asked the Commission to undertake the preparatory work .
This resulted in a statement by the Eurogroup Finance Ministers on 28 November , which was fully endorsed at the European Council meeting .
It foresees that the future European Stability Mechanism will be designed on the basis of the current mechanism , so IMF involvement is provided for .
The EU will continue to adhere strictly to standard IMF and international practices .
Concerning the role of the private sector , decisions will be taken on a case-by-case basis , so private sector involvement will not be a prior requirement for support under the future Stability Mechanism .
Finally , the European Council also had a very good and in-depth exchange of views on recent economic developments and on how to deal with the challenges for all European economies , short-term and long-term .
The President of the Central Bank was also present and a statement by the Heads of State or Government of the eurozone and the EU institutions present was welcomed by the European Council .
This discussion confirmed the sense of determination and unity amongst the Member States and the institutions .
Everybody around the table shared the basic analysis .
I insist : all 27 agree , even if the analysis focuses particularly on the current 17 euro countries .
We thus have a joint will to make our economies more resistant to crises and to enhance structural economic growth in Europe .
Let me mention the elements of this joint approach , which reflects the statement adopted .
Three points concern work to be done by the national governments : first , fiscal responsibility ; second , stimulating growth ; and third , the two countries with support programmes are forcefully implementing the necessary measures and we all welcome the efforts of those two governments , of Greece and Ireland , and their populations .
Two other points concern work to be done by the Member States and the institutions of the European Union together .
Firstly , the European Council asks the other institutions , not least your Parliament , to make sure that the agreements reached in October , on the basis of the Task Force which I chaired , regarding the Stability Pact and macro-economic surveillance , are in place by the summer .
It is our common duty .
Secondly , we agree to conduct new stress tests in the banking sector to ensure full transparency in the broader context of the EU annual exercise .
Our determination is clear .
The Heads of State or Government of the eurozone and the EU institutions ' stand ready to do whatever is required to ensure the stability of the eurozone as a whole ' .
Work is going on to develop these elements of this overall approach .
On the second day of our meeting , we focused on our relations with strategic partners .
Cathy Ashton presented progress reports on how to deal with strategic partners and I briefed colleagues about the positive outcome of three recent summit meetings , namely : the summit with President Obama , where we opened new avenues for transatlantic cooperation on growth , jobs and security , such as green growth and cyber-security ; the summit with President Medvedev in which we reached the bilateral agreement on Russia 's WTO accession , a major achievement ; and the summit with Prime Minister Singh of India , which showed good progress for an ambitious and balanced free trade agreement , hopefully with a result in the first semester of this year , and which also produced a joint declaration on international terrorism .
These meetings all showed that , for our partners , the European Union is not only an economic union and a trade bloc , but also a geopolitical partner .
The European Council also decided to give Montenegro the status of candidate country .
It underlines the conviction within the European Council that the countries of the Western Balkans have a European vocation .
Finally , we agreed also on the position on Côte d 'Ivoire , in line with what the Ministers of Foreign Affairs decided a few days previously , sending a clear signal on the need to respect the results of democratic elections .
As you know , the European Council , on 4 February , will deal principally with our growth agenda .
Innovation and energy - especially energy security - are key in this regard .
In March , we will have our first exercise of what is called the European Semester .
It must not be a bureaucratic process but a real occasion to have an in-depth discussion on the state of play of our economy and the actions to be taken .
Colleagues , we know of course that we have to strengthen and deepen economic coordination and convergence inside the eurozone .
We will work as much as possible in a comprehensive framework and I am convinced we will find the necessary consensus .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , last year , the European Union faced a series of stern tests and December 's European Council has shown just how determined we are to take whatever decisions are necessary to defend our achievements .
In particular , by agreeing to establish a European Stability Mechanism and to make the linked Treaty change , we have demonstrated our total commitment to supporting the euro area and the Member States that use it for the benefit of the entire EU .
The Commission will adopt its formal opinion on the text of the Treaty change before the Spring European Council .
We will certainly play our part in explaining to Europe 's citizens why this limited change deserves support .
This agreement allows us to step up a gear and the Commission will work closely with Finance Ministers to iron out details of the permanent Stability Mechanism before the Spring European Council .
Although this will be an intergovernmental mechanism , which was the only option the Member States could consider , it is important that it is set up in a manner fully consistent with the Treaty and that it reinforces our stability rules , in accordance with the principles and instruments of budgetary surveillance .
These decisions are linked to the wider range of measures we are taking as part of our approach to dealing with both the economic crisis and its consequences and the need to generate growth with jobs .
The European Council has recognised that .
The Heads of State or Government of the euro area and the European institutions in particular have also made it clear that they stand ready to do whatever is required to ensure the stability of the euro area as a whole .
In particular , the Heads called for determined action in ensuring the availability of adequate financial support through the European Financial Stability Facility pending the entry into force of the permanent mechanism .
These were the conclusions of the last European Council .
The European Council also called for accelerated adoption by June of the Commission 's economic governance proposals from last September .
It recognised the important role the Europe 2020 strategy will also have in returning Europe to sustainable growth .
The European Union Semester , which we launched last week with the Annual Growth Survey , ties all these trends together .
I believe it breaks new ground , improving decisively the way in which we manage and coordinate our interdependent economies in the European Union .
It is bringing in genuine European economic governance .
This is our new economic governance at work - governance that should be the comprehensive response to the crisis .
The Commission has signalled this very clearly in the Annual Growth Survey .
Let me just concentrate on that because I think , based also on the very important conclusions of the December European Council , it is now more important than ever to look at the next steps .
I believe a new reality is emerging .
The politics of economic governance and economic coordination have changed and this is not just because the so-called federalists wanted it .
The markets want it .
Our international partners want it .
It is a matter of simple common sense and we are delivering it and will continue to deliver it .
The new European Semester combines tighter fiscal rules by reinforcing the Stability and Growth Pact with effective economic coordination .
It offers ex-ante coordination , which means we discuss each other 's policies , both economic and fiscal , before they are adopted .
We are no longer looking back to introduce corrections , but are looking ahead to give guidance .
This ex-ante approach is at the heart of what makes this a historic step for the European Union .
Effectively , we are introducing a genuine European dimension into national budgetary and economic policy making .
From now on , we will be helping to shape policies upfront rather than assessing and trying to correct them afterwards .
The final decisions on national budgets will , of course , be taken by national parliaments .
That is right and proper , but this new form of economic governance simply reflects a rational response to a new reality .
When we see the level of interdependence in the euro area and the European Union as a whole , a country should be able to take decisions knowing what its neighbours intend to do .
This sharing of information empowers and strengthens national parliaments .
It does not undermine their authority .
The Annual Growth Survey launches this process and its key messages are clear : bring back stability , do not delay structural reforms any longer , and speed up growth-enhancing measures .
First , we need to re-establish stability by consolidating public finances .
Unless we balance the books , we will not restore confidence in Europe 's economies .
If we do not restore confidence , we will risk economic stagnation and all the negative social consequences that flow from that , especially for employment .
But we have to approach this in a sober and well thought-out way .
Fiscal consolidation does not mean reducing debt by taking a slash-and-burn approach to spending .
It is more than anything a matter of prioritising and some areas - innovation , education , new forms of energy - are good candidates for such priority treatment .
The second key message from the Annual Growth Survey is to push forward with structural reforms so that we can create new job opportunities .
The choice is a simple one : do we want jobless growth or growth with jobs ?
If the latter , then there are a few things we are going to have to do .
We need to urge Member States to focus this year on labour market reform so that we can remove obstacles to higher employment levels .
We need to help people get back to work or find new jobs by making work more attractive .
We need to reform pension systems and make sure that the unemployed are not left worse-off when they find work .
Let me be quite clear : structural reform does not mean reducing our level of social protection , but it does mean bringing in those who are currently excluded from the labour market , especially our young people .
Levels of youth unemployment in some Member States , even in good times , are a scandal .
Anyone who truly cares about a social Europe knows this cannot continue .
In the face of increased international competition , we can only sustain our social market economy if we adapt .
The third key message in the Annual Growth Survey is to frontload and speed up measures that are growth enhancing .
Our Europe 2020 programme is central to this .
We must focus on measures that have clear economic benefits in the short to medium term and which lend themselves to relatively fast adoption .
That means investing in areas that derive growth , unleashing the full potential of our single market , increasing investment in energy , transport and IT infrastructure - in part , through innovative financing , including , we believe , the European Union project bonds - and continuing to press for a conclusion of the Doha Round , while pushing forward free trade agreements with key partners .
All of this needs to be reflected in the next multiannual financial framework proposal .
Europe 's next budget must be a growth-enhancing budget .
Ladies and gentlemen , our economies are starting to move in the right direction .
The recovery has taken hold and is currently progressing in the real economy .
This year , we should see GDP growth at around 1.5 % , rising to 2 % of GDP in 2012 .
Europe 's manufacturing sector has improved markedly in recent months .
We should also see a steady improvement in employment prospects and we are starting to see public deficits decline , thanks primarily to the consolidation measures already taken , supported in some cases by a resumption of growth .
In the European Union , the government deficit is expected to decline from 6.8 % this year to 4.2 % of GDP in 2012 on average .
But to breathe a sigh of relief and slip back into bad habits would be a grave error .
The world has changed .
We cannot return to the old ways of doing things .
If we do not act now , in the face of the biggest crisis since the beginning of European integration , when will Member States be ready to take real steps for economic policies that are consistent with the goals they have themselves set ?
If it is not us at European level , who will encourage them to take those decisions , who will do it ?
Only by sorting out our debt and stabilising finances can we move from crisis management to fostering growth - not any kind of growth of course , but sustainable , inclusive growth .
That means structural reforms , many of which we have been advocating for several years - reforms that challenge all structures but do so to reduce prices and increase opportunities for new jobs and innovative ways of doing things .
I really believe we have a responsibility towards our citizens to choose the path of growth with jobs .
The Annual Growth Survey points the way .
So let us now commit seriously to proper economic policy coordination and real common European economic governance for all our citizens .
Thank you for your attention .
[ Applause ]


Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , the last European Council clearly showed that the euro is a vital pillar of European integration .
Everything possible must be done to stabilise and strengthen it .
Our Heads of State or Government have since confirmed their deep attachment to the European currency and the fact that Estonia is joining the euro area at the beginning of this year is yet another signal in this direction , as well as setting a very good example of how to respect standards to the major countries that fail to respect them .
That said , no one underestimates the seriousness of what Europe is going through economically and socially within the euro area .
Everything possible must be done in 2011 to overcome these problems and to reassure the markets , not superficially but structurally , in other words , by creating the right conditions for growth and employment in the long term .
I think we are speaking the same language on this issue .
Firstly , this means that national public finances must be restored to better health .
Push hard for this , let us not give in !
Secondly , it means that the Member States must get their fiscal policies to converge more closely , and also their taxation and social policies .
It also means that we must come to a swift agreement on the euro area bail-out fund and that this fund only makes sense if it is backed up by strict enforcement of the fiscal discipline rules .
Our citizens must know that the countries they are assisting in difficult circumstances are keeping a very strong check on their public accounts ; otherwise , they will no longer agree to stump up , if I may put it that way .
Finally , as I said , we must create the conditions for growth and employment .
That also implies completing the European internal market , investing more in research and innovation , and in lifelong education and training .
My group wants the EU approach to be promoted over the intergovernmental approach in all these areas , quite simply because it is far more effective and far more sustainable .
Mr Van Rompuy , I call on you to ensure that reform of the Treaty , confirmed at the last European Council , be concluded as soon and as swiftly as possible .
The budget debate is only just beginning .
My group will continue to call for a thorough review of European public finances in forthcoming years , with the aim of once again creating the conditions for growth and employment in Europe .
Mr Barroso , let us scrutinise everything , let us not be afraid and , as I have already said several times , let us take two or three different examples of budgets : for example , how can we pull Europe out of its current situation with 1 % , 2 % or 5 % ?
We will not succeed by reducing resources .
If we want to create jobs , we need more European resources , and this does not mean that the Member States have to spend more money .
Let us not be afraid , President van Rompuy and President Barroso .
Put these proposals to us and we , the Heads of State or Government , as well as Parliament , will be forced to find the right solution - but at least let us have a number of options from which to choose .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , December 's European Council at least gave us political agreement on a permanent crisis resolution mechanism but - given the reaction of the markets after Christmas , with new fears over the solvency of Portugal , Spain , and Belgium - we have to ask whether , once again , this was a case of ' too little too late ' .
The proposed European stabilisation mechanism itself raised new questions on the financial markets and the existing Financial Stability Mechanism is now regarded as insufficient .
Opportunities have been missed again .
In December , Parliament sent a clear signal to the Council on eurobonds but there has been no constructive response from either the Council or the Commission .
What we have had ever since 2008 is repeated hesitation and internal wrangling between Member States and the institutions , and each time , a painfully extracted response - but produced too late and constituting less than what was required .
The clearest illustration of the problem is the fact that , in the face of today 's economic and monetary challenges , we simply do not have the tools we need .
They are inappropriate or non-existent .
Our institutional decision-making processes are complex and lacking in democracy , and our economic policy strategy is divided and ineffective .
The financial markets are not keeping the pressure on us just because of high debt and deficit levels , President Barroso : they are also doing so because they want compensation for the risk of lending money to a project that seems incapable of reaching maturity or fulfilling its own destiny .
What is holding the eurozone together today is less the dream of the founding fathers than simply the nightmare of the alternative : total collapse of the system .
The abject failure to deal with the crisis is driving the European project into political deadlock .
What chance is there , right now , of a stronger and more democratic set of institutions emerging from a revised Treaty ?
Intelligent calls for more political integration , like that last week from the head of the German Bundesbank , really do not stand a chance .
Against this background , I am shocked , President Barroso , at the frontal attack by the Commission on social Europe and the interference with national labour markets , as in the case of Ireland .
The annual growth survey is indeed a frontal attack on long-established , socially and economically essential workers ' rights and on the very concept of collective bargaining .
If this is validated by the European Council , it is a strategy which , in my view , is the worst imaginable in the situation we currently face .
Not only will it be exposed as economic lunacy , but it will be profoundly damaging to the European project .
Big ideas can fail , Mr President , and I really worry about this European project .
As history tells us , people will deny the possibility of failure right up to the last moment .
Let us recognise the possibility of failure .
Mr Farage is nodding .
The failure to act , President Van Rompuy , President Barroso , is feeding ammunition to Mr Farage and his allies .
Let us act , for heaven 's sake !


Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , I would like to make two comments on the conclusions of last December 's European Council .
The first comment involves reminding you that the crisis is having a most singular impact on the Union for one simple reason : we have been a legal community from the very beginning and , in a legal community , the law is particularly important .
It is not a question of undermining compliance with the law , but when dealing with such a serious crisis - as the Annual Growth Survey that you have just published reminds us , Mr President - it is time for action , not legalism .
You tell us that this revision of the Treaties is essential to reassure the markets .
In the first place , if you would permit me to be slightly impertinent , it seems to me that the meetings were not particularly reassured after the conclusion of the October European Council meeting .
Really do take care , therefore , when your intention is to reassure the markets .
Just think what would happen if this revision were to fail .
I come from a country that has experienced the trauma of a negative referendum with no Plan B. You were there already , Mr Barroso .
Sometimes we need to consider what happens when we say to the markets , ' We need to change the Treaties , it must all be done by this date ' , and then hope that it will be done .
Clearly , therefore , you are choosing the simplified procedure in the hope that it will happen .
If it does happen , though , you might reassure the markets , but certainly not the people .
Therein lies my second point : much ado about nothing .
You are changing the Treaties for a point of law .
You are not changing them in order to give citizens the answers they are waiting for .
There are six of us rapporteurs here working on the ' economic governance ' package that the Commission has produced without the need to change the Treaties .
We agreed to work without the need to change the Treaties , but along the way , we were told , ' We are going to change the Treaties ' .
It looks like we are saying to people that we can change the Treaties , that we can go that far amid all the legal red tape , but that when it really comes down to it , we are not doing it either for the 2020 strategy to be taken seriously or for them to have jobs and growth .
On top of all that , then , the December European Council is asking us to speed up our work .
Very well , let us speed up !
I would like the Council to speed up , Mr Van Rompuy .
Parliament has already presented its reports .
There is a very easy way to go faster : you move closer to our positions and we stop thinking of codecision as a procedure by which the Council decides and Parliament adjusts .

Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , my main memory of the last Council meeting was not reflected in your summary and , therefore , I would like to sum the meeting up in a different way .
From today 's perspective , the most important thing which I remember is that during the summit of the Heads of State or Government in Brussels , the rating agency Moody 's downgraded Ireland 's credit rating .
That was the point at which we all became aware of the extent of our failure to manage the crisis , which we still have to deal with today .
Anyone who compares the key figures for the debt crisis from different countries can only be surprised at how successful the speculation against the euro has been .
In the meantime , one country which has much greater problems than Portugal and Spain , namely the USA , remains completely untouched by the war that the speculators are waging on the euro .
That is the current state of affairs .
A new year has started and we have new problems to contend with .
We should be dealing here and now with the problem that we predicted during the meeting , in other words , that what was decided in the meeting would not be enough .
I believe that we have all realised by now that many European countries are in difficulties .
They have a huge burden of debt , including both private debt and an unacceptable level of public debt .
Many of the Member States of the European Union will not be able to resolve their problems without help .
What should our next step be ?
We believe that simply reducing national debt , as many countries are beginning to do , with the encouragement of the European Union and its joint resolutions , is not sufficient on its own and that these countries are being pushed to the limits of what is acceptable .
A new agreement needs to be reached concerning how this can work in a genuinely acceptable way .
I believe that developments like those in Hungary , for example , are sending out a warning signal about what happens when the distribution of wealth in the countries of the European Union is too unjust and the divide is too great .
During the process of reducing public debt , we must pay much more attention to fairness than we have done so far .
In addition , we believe , and I would like to make this very clear , that the banking sector must be restructured .
We are not convinced that we can justify increasing the debt burden even further in order to rescue the ' walking dead ' in this area .
I would like to endorse fully what Mrs Goulard has said .
We need an approach which will allow us to prepare Europeans for the future in the context of a Green New Deal and to set a new course in this crisis .
I would like to emphasise once again that Europe is a wonderful place to live and we have a lot to do to ensure that it remains that way .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the European Council took important decisions about the future management of crises , but I agree with President Barroso that the underlying problems remain : the need to return to fiscal discipline and the reluctance by some Member States to pursue seriously economic reform .
We were told that in a single currency , Member States would no longer be able to devalue their way out of trouble , and would instead have to reform their economies to make them more competitive .
Whilst a superficially attractive proposition , many of us were right not to be taken in as this has proved a false prospectus .
Some Member States were able to find other solutions to prop up their economies artificially : through asset-price inflation , in part , caused by an unsuitably low interest rate and a refusal to take corrective action by other means ; or by injecting borrowed public funds on an unsustainable scale and , in some cases , to cover up the size of the resulting fiscal deficit .
Whilst , of course , we must find solutions to deal with the immediate consequences of these policies , and fiscal retrenchment is essential , we must equally importantly commit ourselves to economic reform : to extend labour market flexibility to create jobs , to open markets and remove barriers to trade , and to stimulate private investment so that we can fill the void left by reduced public sector spending .
The financial and economic crisis made large-scale government intervention in the economy unavoidable - but we must not confuse the palliative with the cure .
The long-term solution does not lie in bigger government .
It lies in economic growth being generated by successful businesses and entrepreneurs , operating in competitive markets , which are able to deliver value to the consumer and create jobs for our citizens .
That is why the Europe 2020 strategy , the Single Market Act , and the Innovation Union , for example , are so essential and must be given the attention they merit .
The stakes are high .
Whilst we have been dealing with this immediate crisis , other countries around the world - some with political values that seem very different to our own - have been forging ahead .
If we do not come out of this crisis on a progressive path to reform , we will be condemned to inexorable relative decline with the most profound consequences for the promotion of our values and , indeed , for the future of the planet .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , the permanent Financial Stability Mechanism in practice is nothing more than another tool to cushion major European banks from the consequences of their reckless speculation on the financial markets .
It is a mechanism to make working class people throughout Europe pay for the crisis of a broken financial system and a crisis-ridden European capitalism .
Mr Barroso and Mr Van Rompuy , tell me this morning - because you have not done so yet - about the morality of transferring tens of billions of euro of private bad debts by speculators and bankers gambled wildly on the Irish property market and placing those debts on the shoulders of the Irish people who carry no responsibility whatsoever for them .
Far from being a bail-out , your IMF-EU intervention in Ireland is a mechanism to make the Irish taxpayers vassals to the European banks .
You are destroying our services and the living standards of our people .
You claim to be democrats , but you enslave the working people of Europe to the markets , the financial markets , which lead you around by the nose .
Your Financial Stability Mechanism is a vicious weapon dictated by the markets , masquerading as something benign .
We , on the left in Ireland , will insist that it goes to a referendum of the Irish people before it is passed .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , what is the most commonly used word in association with the euro ?
No , it is not ' failure ' - although it could be .
It is ' stability ' , is it not ?
A decade ago , everybody said that once we had the euro currency , it would bring us stability .
Well , a decade on , I would suggest that what it has brought is chaos , discord and misery for millions , and yet the word ' stability ' is still being used this morning .
Mr Barroso used it , Mr Van Rompuy used it : ' stability ' .
In fact , we are patting ourselves on the back because the bond auctions in Portugal went well last week , whereas the reality is that the European Central Bank was actually using taxpayers ' money to buy their own debt .
Your reassurances that all is well do not work .
Who do you think you are kidding , Mr Van Rompuy ?
Bond yields in Portugal rose to nearly 7 % yesterday .
The public right across the Union no longer supports the currency , and the battle for Spain has not even begun .
The model itself is failing and yet what you want is to double the size of the bail-out fund .
You even want to increase the scope of the bail-out fund so that , along with the ECB , you , too , can go on buying yet more of your own debt .
You are using the crisis as a massive power grab to take us towards fiscal union .
If you succeed , then we should change the name : get rid of ' European Union ' and call it the ' Debt Union ' .
If you do succeed , you will trap those southern countries inside an economic prison , in which people 's suffering will be untold , while the northern countries will find themselves paying , forever , a massive bill and interest rates that are far too high for their own economies .
We have reached a point where it actually does not matter what any of you say .
Nobody believes you .
The public does not support you .
I hope and pray the markets break you .

( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from all the fine and empty words of Mr Barroso , I have only , for the most part , been able to make out one real point , namely , that it is the job of the rich Member States to pay for the poor Member States , because that is the reality of the matter .
It appears that this situation will continue for quite some time .
We have to help other countries , we keep hearing , but no one has mentioned how we are actually supposed to do that .
The long and short of this , basically , is that Dutch citizens are having to get their wallets out and foot the bill for the weak Member States , some of which joined the euro by fraudulent means .
Mr Barroso says : ' Choose sustainable growth ' .
All those empty words , but he has not said how we are supposed to do this .
What if it does not work ?
Why do we not develop a scenario which will enable countries like Greece to reintroduce their own currency ?
It seems that that is not possible and that you are not prepared to develop scenarios of this kind , although many economists believe that they could , in fact , work very well and that they might well be our best option .
Moving then to creating the conditions for growth and employment .
How should we go about that ?
The general message that I hear is that this should be done by reducing public spending and that is exactly what we in the Netherlands have been doing .
And so what does the European Union do ?
Rewards the Netherlands by spending even more .
Do you remember asking for a 6 % budget increase for the EU ?
Obviously , it was mainly Dutch citizens who were supposed to foot that bill , so you lack a great deal of credibility on that score , too .
In brief , my point here is : The Netherlands is paying for the poor countries with declining economic growth in the Netherlands .
Dutch citizens are exposed to a risk of EUR 27 billion and that amount seems to do nothing but increase .
Every year , we pay EUR 4.5 billion net to the EU , most of which is channelled through to the weak Member States , the EU 's spending is on the rise , while we are having to make cuts and while the value of the euro is continuing to slide , as a result of which the cost to Dutch citizens is rising , too .
Mr President , the EU cannot be trusted .


( Blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) to Nigel Farage ) Mr President , it is always - or at least sometimes - amusing to listen to Mr Farage because he knows all the answers , and he asks himself all the questions .
But , Mr Farage , would the alternative of 16 , 17 or , indeed , up to 20 different currencies - as we had in the 1990s when the pound sterling collapsed - have been preferable ?
Would that have improved the current situation in Europe ?
No economist would agree with you on that , Mr Farage .
You cannot simply say that we are living in the past .
We are dealing now with issues that concern Europe today .
You never answer the question of how to deal with this current situation and with the future .
You are a populist and it is too easy for you to answer all your own questions .
Mr President , I did say a decade ago that you could not have Greece and Germany put together in the same monetary union and that it would not work .
If you go back through history , you find that when people are put together in false currency unions , when governments think they know better than the markets , governments always lose .
You ask me what my solution is today .
It is absolutely as plain as a pikestaff .
Greece , Portugal and Ireland do not fit inside the euro .
What we should be doing , what Mr Van Rompuy should be doing in order to give real leadership , is to be introducing a plan B and to allow these countries to go back to their own currency , to have competitive devaluations and to have a chance , because what we are doing with this policy is killing them off .
( ES ) Mr President , anyone who reads the newspapers today will find out two things : that we are at a crucial point in the sovereign debt crisis , and that the European response is a succession of isolated provisions with no internal consistency .
Even now , we have on the table the European Semester , the economic governance package , the provisional and permanent rescue strategy , the so-called ' Eurobonds ' to cover part of the sovereign debt that is considered to be secure , plus an action plan based on the European Investment Bank and bonds for specific projects , which is in the proposal that the Commission sent us on the internal market .
The first thing that the rapporteurs are trying to do is to combine all of this and create a complete design , a final picture to be shown to the public .
Secondly , this design needs to be a European design that does not divide Europe in two - let us not stumble into a two-speed Europe - and that pursues two objectives with equal intensity : budgetary discipline - as much as is necessary - and economic growth to bring us out of the crisis that we are in .
I have one comment regarding the rescue mechanism to which the President-in-Office of the Council was referring .
In his first statement , he said that private investors would participate in the rescue plans , which caused shock and led to a protest by the President of the European Central Bank .
It was explained , as Mr Van Rompuy did just now , that firstly , it would be case-by-case - who decides and based on what criteria ? - and secondly , that it would be done according to the criteria and policies of the International Monetary Fund .
The only case in which the International Monetary Fund has used this type of rescue plan was in Argentina in 2003 ; it plunged the country into chaos , from which it has still not emerged , and the private bondholders have still not been paid .
Regarding Eurobonds , many issues have been set out here today .
I would just like to add two more .
It would create a market as liquid as that in the United States , and would give a boost to the euro as a reserve currency , enabling the central banks and sovereign funds to invest their reserves here .
My final comment is that this needs to be complemented by the European Investment Bank and the specific bonds to respond to growth .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , you agreed to chair what is referred to as a Panel of Eminent Persons .
It was made up of finance ministers who were threatened with a downgrading of their sovereign debt .
Were they capable of providing a panel of eminent persons ?
The discord that pervades the current debate between Mr Trichet , President Barroso and Chancellor Merkel , just like the turbulence in the markets. tells us that this was not a panel of eminent persons .
You have been asked to manage the euro crisis .
We need to manage the euro for the benefit of European citizens and not speculators .
For this to happen , you have agreed to a revision of the Treaty for reasons of convenience , even though our Conference of Presidents had said how unnecessary this revision was - words confirmed by the President of the Euro Group .
However , Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , you risk enticing us down a path that could lead us along the route of ' too little , too late ' .
Indeed , the day will come when you will need the wisdom of this Parliament , of a convention in order to revise the Treaty , so that we might , in future , have tax harmonisation , a European treasury , loans for mutual debt management and for restoring employment to the heart of our economic policies .
If you do not want the Treaty to be revised , take the bull by the horns and introduce stronger cooperation for the euro area in order to manage the problems and the responsibilities of the Member States of that zone , rather than letting it float as and where the markets take it .
Mr President , because this is a matter of such importance to the European economy as a whole , even though ( thankfully ) my country is not part of the eurozone , I welcome at least some of the measures that were agreed at the eurozone Council , and notably the fact that eurozone countries themselves should be responsible for sorting out their own problems .
I also welcome the somewhat belated recognition from the Council that Article 122 of the Treaty is completely inappropriate for supporting the bail-out mechanism .
These are not natural disasters and they were not beyond the control of the Member States concerned .
However , in preparing the basis for that mechanism to come into force , perhaps in 2013 , we should not forget the fact that we remain very much in crisis now .
The situation is still very dire in a number of Member States : Portugal will almost certainly face difficulties , possibly Spain and possibly Belgium .
But what is particularly of concern to me is the effect on natural democracy in these countries .
These countries are , in effect , becoming economic protectorates led by Mr Barroso , Mr Van Rompuy and others .
The decisions made by national electorates in these countries with regard to the spending priorities they adopt and the economic policies they pursue now have very little effect .
They are under the control of Brussels and they are under the control of the international financial institutions .
Once we get through this crisis , we really need to look at restoring democracy in these countries and restoring the will of their national electorates to be in control of their own national economic policies .
( PT ) Mr President , in politics , there are reasonable measures , mistaken measures and improper measures .
It is reasonable for Europe to issue European public debt , although Mrs Merkel does not approve .
It is reasonable for us in Europe to be able to mutualise part of our sovereign debt , although Mrs Merkel does not approve .
However , what is improper is the news that has become public that the European Stability Mechanism and the International Monetary Fund could end up mutualising part of the sovereign debt accumulated by private banks at 6 % or 7 % interest , in Portugal 's case , after the same banks have financed themselves at 1 % interest with the European Central Bank .
Mr Van Rompuy , my question is as follows : how long is Europe going to be expected to be the miracle worker of financial capital ?
How much longer are we going to go on transforming private debt into public debt ?
How much longer are we going to force European taxpayers , workers and pensioners to pay debts that have been generated by the private bank sector which is attacking us ?
This is the real issue at stake here today .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a law has been passed in the United States requiring the Federal Reserve to detail how much of the USD 3 300 billion rescue package has gone to which banks .

I wonder whether it would be subversive to ask you to adopt the same transparency criteria , unless the finance and banking super-lobby blocks it .
Let us consider the situation : what future is there for this forced Union of free countries , which is based on the stronger countries bailing out the weaker ones ?
Technically , do we want to acknowledge reality , which is that the euro is a virtually bankrupt currency ?
How can we think of forcing countries with a weak economy to use it ?
Is a centralised monetary policy acceptable for countries that have such decidedly diverse interest rates ?
Mr Trichet himself , who has denied the danger of the European Central Bank becoming insolvent , does , however , admit that one of the reasons behind increasing its capital is to face up to the credit risk , in other words , the insolvency of the bonds purchased .
It is also time for new stress tests on the largest banks and to give greater weight to high-risk bank debts , as the Minister for the Economy has requested .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the political message from the last Council decisions addressed to speculators , media and the markets is that the EU Member States will do whatever it takes to safeguard the eurozone and defend the euro .
Whatever internal discussions take place , whether the financial facility will need to double its capital and the right to buy bonds , whether the Financial Stability Mechanism after 2013 will include trimming or will be ordered to sell eurobonds , are ideas that are not excluded by any Member State .
Only the timing is under discussion : whether and when needed and how .
Let the media and analysts be under no illusion .
The EU will introduce all that is needed , when it is needed .
Regarding the Financial Stability Mechanism , the Council 's decision says that the mechanism is ' to be activated if indispensable to safeguard the stability of the eurozone as a whole ' .
As a Member from a small Member State , may I ask for reassurances that members like Malta , Cyprus , Estonia or Slovenia will be included , because if they are in trouble , they may not be indispensable for the stability of the whole ?
( EL ) Mr President , we need to acknowledge that , even though it was completely unprepared institutionally and politically , Europe made serious steps to deal with the crisis right from the start .
From the application of the support package for Greece nearly a year ago , through to the decisions taken by the last European Council to set up a permanent stability mechanism , important steps forward have been taken .
However , continuing and increasing pressure from the markets , which is no longer being exerted solely on the most vulnerable economies in the euro area , prove that our decisions are fragmentary and inadequate , in terms of providing an integrated response to the crisis .
We therefore need an integrated European response to the crisis , which will not replace or overlook the responsibilities of the Member States to keep to their word and restructure their public finances , but which will protect these economies from attacks by the markets and help to ensure that their efforts are successful .
Mr President , a few days ago , the European Parliament passed a resolution calling on the European Commission to carry out a feasibility study into the issue of Eurobonds without delay .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Mr President , we have reached the end of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Has the Council taken stock of its achievements ?
No .
If they had done , they would have concluded that poverty has never seen such a sharp increase , and that the number of people living in poverty in this wealthy Europe has now exceeded 100 million , and that the decisions that they have made will only continue to heighten unemployment , inequality and social exclusion .
However , the profits of economic and financial groups are proliferating , as are speculative gains from sovereign debt , supported by European Central Bank guidelines , and by the policies of the Council and the Commission .
Is this the purpose of the euro area ?
Countries with more fragile economies continue to be pressured and blackmailed , and the governments , confronted by the protests and struggles of the workers , are resorting to repression and violence against trade unions and workers , as happened yesterday in Portugal .
The reason for our protest , our indignation and our firm conviction is that we want a different kind of Europe : one based on social progress ; one that respects those who work and fights for their rights .
Believe me , we will stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the workers in their struggle to break with your policies .
Mr President , I am happy to say that today is the 19th day of Estonia 's membership of the eurozone , but Estonia has been preparing for this since its accession .
Even the design of the Estonian euro coin was already agreed by popular vote six years ago .
However , joining the eurozone is not simply a question of individual choice - it is about more solidarity , taking common responsibility and actively contributing to the stability of the continent as a whole .
At a time of economic crisis , moral values and ethics have become more important .
We can see that economic potential in itself is not sufficient .
What is crucial is whether a country can be trusted as being willing and able to meet its commitments in time and engaging in serious structural reforms .
I welcomed the fact that the Council was able to agree on a European Stability Mechanism , but the practical way to economic growth and stability is , first of all , to complete the single market , and especially the European single digital market .
The latter should be integrated into the road map of the European single market , as well as into the European digital agenda .
This could be a real chance to boost European competitiveness in the world .
European citizens expect us to ease business-making in the digital sphere where operations like electronic payments and e-identification should be coherent and understandable .
A single digital market also requires determined efforts to develop a services market .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , I would like to offer two thoughts .
The first thought concerns the scope of the permanent crisis management mechanism .
The non-Member States of the euro area are , in fact , divided into two categories : the United Kingdom and Sweden , which are not obliged to adopt the euro , and the other states which , together with the members , represent 25 states .
I would suggest that these states which use the euro should benefit from special treatment in the mechanism , something for which there is no current provision .
Secondly , I would like to draw your attention to the national parliaments .
The national parliaments are not involved in the simplified procedure , unless it be in the ratification procedures .
I propose that the national parliaments be included in the consultation process , on a voluntary basis , since the question arises as to who will provide political control of the future mechanism .
Will it be the European Parliament or the national parliaments ?
As , however , there is no parliamentary dimension to the euro area , we do not know how we are going to provide political control of this mechanism .
This is a question that I put to you .

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , ladies and gentlemen , I see two major problems with the proposed amendment to Article 136 , one of them institutional and the other political .
The institutional one is that Article 3 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union states that monetary policy for the countries whose currency is the euro is the exclusive competence of the Union , but Article 2 provides that exclusive competence may be exercised by the Member States if authorised by the Union .
It is difficult to understand why the application of a rule clearly set out in the Treaty should require reform of the Treaty .
Then there is also a political problem : choosing the Treaty reform option , rather than using Article 2 or Articles 352 plus 136 , places the European Stability Mechanism , and hence the future of the euro , at the mercy of 27 ratification processes .
Do people realise that if just one of these 27 ratification processes proved unsuccessful , it would then be difficult to find a plan B for the euro ?
Does the European Council realise that choosing this path puts the future of the euro at great risk ?


( HU ) Mr President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , the stability of the euro and the setting up of the crisis management mechanism are our most important operational tasks in triggering growth that will create new jobs and which will , at the same time , reduce Member States ' public debt , with which all Member States agree .
However , the completion of these tasks must not force us to postpone issues , the discussion of strategic issues such as innovation , which already took place in December .
The next summit in February will be suitable for taking strategic decisions on important issues such as energy .
The Hungarian Presidency has begun the preparations for the energy summit .
The most important rules have already been laid down last year .
The regulation on the security of natural gas supply has entered into force .
Mr President , I ask you to put me at ease that the concerns relating to the stability of the euro area will not overrule the matter of the energy summit .
( EL ) Mr President , as you know , the US Government has been forced , for the second time in the present credit crisis , to intervene drastically to support two major banks that collapsed and the insurance organisation ING .
Thus , it has pumped USD 700 billion into its banking system in financial aid .
Despite these measures , the US economy still needed more help and , without any thought of thrift , the government recently provided another USD 600 billion to get the economy out of the recession .
Obviously , the United States of America is printing new money .
Unlike the US economy , the euro area has remained constant to the principle of budgetary discipline and strictly controlled monetary policy , thereby leaving a margin for various speculative enterprises to speculate at the expense of the countries less resistant to pressure .
Mr President , I propose that quantitative easing be considered in the euro area ; it may prove to be an egg of Columbus .
( FI ) Mr President , there is no doubt that the doubleedged sword of Damocles is hanging over Europe - that is , the economic crisis and an increase in nationalism - and both of these have joined forces .
Mr Hughes asked , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , whether it was the dreams of the founding fathers that were holding Europe together at present or the nightmare of its collapse .
Unfortunately , this nightmare about its collapse is now the main trend .
I would therefore hope that the Commission will show greater strength regarding issues relating to a social Europe .
It is very odd that it should be weak on these matters .
It is not even a question now of whether policy is governed by the markets or by politics : politics is coming out on to the streets .
It is moving towards demonstrations and getting into the hands of various extremist groups and the extreme right .
The Commission should therefore prioritise issues relating to a social Europe .
Regrettably , though , nothing is happening .


Mr President , unlike many speakers , I would like to compliment Mr Van Rompuy and Mr Barroso for at least being proactive in the present crisis and introducing measures which hopefully will be successful in the future .
Whether they will or not , we cannot be certain at this point in time .
If they are , they will be seen as heroes .
If not , they will probably be seen as villains , but give them credit where credit is due .
Hopefully , the supervisory architecture will ensure that many of the flaws which led to the present situation will not happen in the future .
Where my own country is concerned , unfortunately , we have had to avail ourselves of a bail-out and that was largely due to the recklessness of our banks and poor governance .
In a few months , we will have a new government , and hopefully that will bring political stability , but I would make an appeal to Mr Van Rompuy and Mr Barroso to try and reduce the current interest rate in the bail-out because it is too high and it could cripple the country .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , this debate has shown the complexity of the crisis and the complexity of the answers .
One thing I want to say to you - and it is clearly a huge majority that shares European ideals and need to have a European response - is that we should not be divided by some differences that are not the most important ones .
As some of you said , there is indeed a real challenge - sometimes a threat - to European integration today .
We have seen that threat in this debate today .
I have heard some comments , nationalistic comments , prejudiced comments that , frankly speaking , I am not used to hearing in the European Parliament .
They were a minority , but those comments were made , trying to deepen divisions between Europeans , so-called rich and so-called poor Europeans .
And to those who made those comments - and I am amazed by those comments - against European solidarity , trying to deepen the cleavages between the rich and poor , I say : where were you when Europe was financing your farmers after the war to feed your own people ?
Where were you when Europe was financing your infrastructures for the development and competitiveness of your countries ?
Where were you when Europe provided the internal market for selling your services and your products ?
Where were you when Europe was the basis for the prosperity and growth of your countries after the war ?
Only selfish , short-sighted , short-term views can sustain these kinds of statements against European unity .
I think this is a serious problem and several of you have highlighted it .
My appeal to all those who share the European ideal is that we should be united in trying to have a comprehensive response in a matter that , being serious , we have to admit requires building a consensus .
Sometimes that is not easy in a European Union with 27 Member States , with the euro area now with 17 Member States - and I very much welcome Estonia as a new member - and with a process of decision making that is not always the simplest one , in part , because we are based on the principle of democracy .
We have not only the European institutions ; we have 27 democracies .
The task we have in front of us is extremely difficult .
That is why I want to appeal to all those who share the European ideal to not let us be distracted by what can be some differences of policy orientation .
Mr Hughes , I very much respect your concern with social Europe , but let us be completely open about this .
What is the best way to support governments like the Greek Government , the Spanish Government , the Portuguese Government , that are led by very distinguished members of our political family .
Is it to support the reforms they are taking courageously , or to say simply that those reforms are against European values ?
We need structural reforms in Europe , including in the labour sector .
This is the reality .
If you ask Prime Minister Papandreou , Prime Minister Zapatero , Prime Minister Sócrates , this is exactly what they are doing or they are planning to go even deeper in those reforms .
I believe the best way to support the courageous efforts that all of us are trying to make in Europe at different paces is to have the language of truth .
In the current world of competition , with the pressure of some stronger emerging economies now , either we adapt or we will be putting at risk our social market economy .
We need it .
We will do it , I believe , without calling into question workers ' rights .
I want once again - I am going to respond to you in a minute , I have not forgotten your question - I believe it is extremely important that we respect the principles of social dialogue .
I said it yesterday , I reaffirm it today .
But , in fact , if you do not make this kind of fiscal consolidation and social reform , we will not have confidence , and without confidence , we will not have growth , and without growth , we will not be able to provide employment to our citizens .
To the distinguished Member of this Parliament who comes from Ireland and asked a question suggesting that the problems of Ireland were created by Europe , let me say : the problems of Ireland were created by irresponsible financial behaviour by some Irish institutions and by the lack of supervision in the Irish market .
Europe is now part of the solution , it is trying to support Ireland .
But it was not Europe that created this irresponsible fiscal situation and this irresponsible financial behaviour .
Europe is trying to support Ireland because it is important to know where the responsibility lies .
This is why it is important to those of us - and this is clearly the majority - that believe in European ideals that we are able to have as much as possible a common response .
Another point which was made by some of you was : what is the level of ambition ?
Once again , let me make clear the position of the Commission .
We are for the most ambitious position in terms of integrated response .
That is why the Commission will be ready to support some of the measures that some of you have proposed .
But we are living a situation where we believe , in times of crisis like this , in times of market instability , that it is critically important that we make a contribution to a consensus regarding Member States and there were , in fact , some divisions on the way to address this crisis .
Revision of the Treaty : you know what was the position of the Commission .
We said from the beginning that we thought it was possible to make a permanent mechanism without a revision of the Treaty .
But at least one Member State of the European Union - you need unanimity for those matters - stated clearly that a revision of the Treaty was needed .
Since we believe it is important to have a permanent stability mechanism , the Commission played a constructive role supporting this limited revision of the Treaty .
So I think it would be a complete mistake now to be divided on this matter ; since we want to reinforce stability , I think it is important that we agree on this limited revision of the Treaty .
Some of us would like to go further .
I personally would like to go further in terms of the structuring and the deepening of the Community approach .
But we have to be responsible at this very specific moment we are living through and to try to have the most ambitious highest common denominator and not the lowest common denominator .
That is why I want to state again that some of the proposals which were put forward are indeed themselves interesting ones , but they are not able at this moment to generate the necessary consensus , and the Commission has to be very attentive to the contribution it gives to forging this consensus .
Finally , I think everybody has to make a contribution .
I do not like those divisions about rich and poor or new and old or centre and periphery .
In Europe , all the states have exactly the same dignity and those ideas of discriminating between Member States are , in fact , very dangerous ideas for the European project .
So how should we do it ?
We should ask all Member States that are in a more vulnerable position to do whatever they have to do to restore confidence in their economies through appropriate macro-economic stability , fiscal consolidation , structural reforms ; this is critically important at this moment .
We are not helping them if we are suggesting that they can escape that route ; that is not helping them .
At the same time , those countries that are now in a better position should show solidarity with those countries as well .
I think it is critically important that we have a strong response regarding stability of the euro area ; that we are not , as happened sometimes in the past , behind the curve but ahead of the curve ; that we give a comprehensive response which restores confidence in the determination of the euro area and the European Union as a whole , and not just by statements but by acting .
That is an important thing , that is a question of credibility .
Statements are important but that is not enough ; it is important to act and for all of us as a whole to commit to stronger governance in the euro area and in the European Union .
This is indeed something that markets are asking of us .
There is a problem of perception as to how we can take decisions and how we can implement those decisions .
So we need stronger governance in the euro area ; we need stronger economic policy coordination in the European Union as a whole and basically , we should , all of us , commit to the principles of solidarity and responsibility .
It is not just a question of responsibility ; it is question of solidarity .
It is not just a question of solidarity ; it is also a question of responsibility .
Only then can we achieve stability , and stability is the basis for our future prosperity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I will begin with a few positive facts .
I apologise for appearing positive every now and then .
Firstly , economic growth is much stronger now than we thought it was a few weeks or months ago .
Unemployment is falling in some countries .
Who would have believed that in 2008 or in 2009 ?
As far as the European Union in general is concerned , overall , from 2010-2011 , employment will increase again after the biggest crisis for 70 years .
I will say it again : we did not expect that a few months ago - and yet it is happening .
Secondly , of course there is a crisis , but our common currency - the common currency of 27 countries , at any rate - is stable , insofar as its exchange rate against the US dollar is now 1.30 .
Once upon a time , it was 0.85 .
At that time , no one said that the euro was at risk .
Compared with other continents and other major currencies , we have a stable balance of payments and , compared with other major countries , we have a budget deficit that is practically half of theirs .
This therefore explains why , despite all our problems , the euro is a stable currency .
I wanted to highlight this before moving on to other points .
Clearly , we are fully aware that we need to forge ahead , but we really must remember , as I mentioned the last time I was here , that we entered this crisis in the euro area - which is more a crisis of the euro area than of the euro - without any suitable instruments .
We virtually had to make them up on the spot .
That is a joint responsibility , but it also explains why we did not go as quickly as we might have thought at the beginning , or also as quickly as circumstances required .
We had nothing , though .
There was a Stability and Growth Pact which was not observed .
There was no macro-economic oversight .
There was no crisis mechanism , either temporary or stable , and there were no strong institutions to provide financial supervision .
We had to come up with everything on the spot , in mid-crisis , and that is a joint responsibility .
Some of you have said , ' It is too little , too late ' .
Well , the fact that we had few or no instruments explains why we are not in the ' too little , too late ' situation , but in the ' step by step ' situation .
It is a worthy explanation .
A second point I would like to make is that some of you have said , ' Yes , but the crisis is not under control .
Look at developments on the markets ' .
At the same time , and in the same breath , others - sometimes exactly the same people - are saying , ' You cannot let the markets dictate how you act ' .
It is one argument or the other , but it is not always very coherent .
As for the measures taken , naturally , there are reforms to be embarked upon in the Member States , not only those that are facing problems , but in all the Member States : reforms to free up employment potential and to free up growth potential .
Clearly , reforms are often painful .
Clearly , there is a colossal job to be done to spread what is to be asked of people in a fair way .
I would remind you , however , that some major countries that are now coming out of the economic crisis more quickly took measures four , five , even six years ago , very tough measures at home which , at that time , met very stiff resistance on the social side .
They were effective in terms of growth and an increase in employment , though .
We have to go through difficult times , but we need to work harder for the load to be spread fairly .
Our Union can hold up meaningful examples to show that this is the right approach .
Reforms are necessary at Member State level , and reforms are , of course , necessary at the level of the Union itself and of the euro area in particular .
That is why it is very important to set up as quickly as possible the economic governance that was decided in the Task Force , which was debated on the basis of six proposals from the Commission to Parliament , and for all those involved in codecision to reach agreement .
This is extremely urgent .
It must be done if we are to go further still in the convergence of economic growth and in economic policy within the framework of the euro area .
If we can achieve it through agreements between the euro area countries , we need not only to think about it but to work towards it to reach a conclusion in the next few weeks and in the next few months .
Perhaps , however , we need to go further within the euro area than was decided in the Task Force involved in the Commission 's proposals because in fact , when there is a common currency , there is greater need of a common economic policy and of parallel economic development between all the members of the euro area .
Has structural economic growth been forgotten ?
No !
That is why , right in the middle of the crisis , in March , we decided on the Europe 2020 strategy .
That is why , in a few days , at the February Council , we will be debating the innovation and energy policy .
Amid all the problems that the crisis is forcing us to deal with , we must not overlook the longer-term prospects , the structural prospects for growth and employment .
Furthermore , in the very short term , we are preparing for a global approach to improving the instruments created in 2010 to overcome the crisis .
There is an agenda - a clear agenda .
Can we go faster ?
Yes !
As I said , there were two obstacles .
The first stemmed from the fact that we had to make everything up on the spot and the second relates to the need - because we live in a democracy - for consensus among our 27 Member States , our 27 democracies .
Ladies and gentlemen , those who support the European project are very much in the majority in Parliament .
Let us not fall into trying to outdo each other to find out who is the most European .
I believe that the gap is growing wider between those who support the European project and those who do not , but in spite of all our problems , the important thing is to hold our course , to maintain our direction and stay focused .
That is far more important than progress made separately .
The common will to work towards the same direction in terms of the European project is what counts , as was repeatedly said at the December European Council .
We will get there by this gradual , progressive approach .
I am convinced that we are heading in the right direction .
I am convinced that there is a common will .
I am convinced that we will make it in the end .
( Applause )
Thank you for your report , Mr President .
The next meeting of the European Council will be on 4 February , and after that , also in February , the next report from President Van Rompuy .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Council is going to establish a permanent emergency fund for the euro area .
That may be necessary if we are to regain financial markets ' confidence in the government bonds issued by the weak countries of the euro .
However , this also begs questions about the foundations of our economic and monetary union .
Those who have been tasked with establishing this fund do not appear to feel confident that Member States are budgeting prudently or that they are adhering to the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact .
I would have liked the European Council to have said more about the significant disparities within the euro area , including the different competitive positions of Member States .
Would it appear that the diversity within the monetary union is too great to enable a uniform interest rate ?
Or are there adequate solutions to the differences in the competitive position , budget and social and economic structure of various Member States ?
To this end , any additional guarantees for the temporary emergency fund should be accompanied by concrete commitments and progress in cuts and structural reforms from the weak countries of the euro area .
I wish the Member States within the Council the wisdom they need to determine this matter !
Our objectives should be compliance with the agreements and ensuring that we do not allow things to go too far again .
Therefore , both Member States and the European Commission have a great responsibility .
The nature and objectives of the process of European capitalist integration are becoming ever more evident as the effects of the crisis of capitalism in the EU are deepening , which is exacerbating the economic and social situation in several Member States , exacerbating imbalances .
The last European Council showed this clearly once again .
Not one word was uttered on the social situation in the EU , on unemployment , poverty and social exclusion , which have increased throughout 2010 , declared the Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Not one word was uttered on the causes of all of this .
Not a word was spoken about taxation of financial transactions or about an end to tax havens .
Changes are now being proposed for the Treaty that was once intended to last for a generation , with a simplified process , as demanded by the powers that be in the EU , in order to create a mechanism that they believe to be ' fully consistent with [ International Monetary Fund ] policies ' .
In future , they want to further tighten the straitjacket on countries such as Portugal , making them the target of demeaning pressure , blackmail and threats relating to financial capital , with the active complicity of the EU .
All this is happening alongside the deepening of antisocial and anti-democratic measures associated with so-called economic governance and the requested ' structural reforms ' .
In his recent book , the former Prime Minister of England , Mr Gordon Brown , says that , as a result of delays on the part of the EU in passing decisions on the economic crisis in Greece , the amount that Greece needed to borrow rose by 90 billion .
Germany 's filibustering in terms of speeding up the procedure to increase and restructure the borrowing fund is having an economic knock-on effect on Greece and Ireland .
I ask the Commission : how can the members of the Union damaged by late decisions on the part of the Council be compensated ?
Will the Commission support Greece in an effort to establish why its debt has increased since the Greek crisis was announced ?
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
The programme of activities of the Hungarian Presidency of the Council ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the programme of activities of the Hungarian Presidency of the Council .
A different country now holds the rotating Presidency .
Hungary is occupying the Presidency for the first time in its history , which is always an important event in the European Union .
During the Belgian Presidency , we developed new ways of cooperating with the Presidency and the Council , with meetings at administrative , Commission , ministerial and presidential level , or , in other words , between the Presidency and the President of the European Parliament .
We will continue these forms of cooperation during the Hungarian Presidency too , as I have already established with the Prime Minister , Mr Orbán .
Today , we will discuss the programme of activities of the Hungarian Presidency .
I would like to welcome the Prime Minister , Mr Orbán , to the European Parliament .
We are pleased that we will be able to engage in a thorough discussion of many matters relating to this six-month period and our cooperation .
Mr President , honourable Members , I am pleased that our presence has excited so much attention in the European ...
( The President takes the floor ) .
Colleagues , we understand that this is a demonstration and you have made your point , but please leave it now .
We must continue with our debate .
Mr President , I am pleased to see that the sittings of the European Parliament are no less animated and rich in performances than those of the Hungarian Parliament , which makes me feel quite at home .
Thank you very much for the invitation .
I extend my respectful greetings to the Members of Parliament , and to President Barroso , as well as the President of the European Parliament , my dear old friend .
Ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to state that it is an honour for me to be speaking here today as the President-in-Office of the Council .
For you , of course , this is a six-monthly routine .
Every six months , you see a prime minister standing here , presenting the programme for their Presidency .
From our point of view , the Hungarians ' point of view , however , this is far more significant than a six-monthly routine .
For us , the fact that we can stand here today is an act of historic justice .
I would like to remind you that it was Hungary who gave the most human lives and blood for freedom and democracy after World War II , both during the revolution of 1956 and during the subsequent retribution .
We were the ones who struck the first blow against the communist regime , who took up arms against the Soviet empire and proved to the world that communist doctrine is not a harmless ideology , but a dangerous threat to western civilisation .
We dislodged the first brick in the wall of communism and , through the crack we had opened , the draught swept out the entire communist system .
Ladies and gentlemen , for this reason , I feel that we Hungarians can rightly claim that we have contributed a great deal to Europe becoming unified once again .
For Hungarians , it is therefore a historic justice of sorts that the Prime Minister of Hungary may speak here today as the President-in-Office of the Council .
I would like to assure you that we are following in the footsteps of the revolutionaries of 1956 and intend to serve the cause of European unity through their ideals and faith .
Ladies and gentlemen , we in Central Europe , including us Hungarians , have always been interested in a unified Europe , and remain so to this day .
However , creating and maintaining European unity needs strength too .
Twenty years ago , Europe could muster the strength to overcome dividedness and become unified .
It had realised that this was an historic moment it had to seize in order to reunite Europe .
This strength is recalled in the motto of the Hungarian Presidency : ' Strong Europe ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , today we are facing a challenge of similar proportions to that of twenty years ago , and thus it is perhaps no overstatement to pronounce that the European Union is facing its most challenging period of the past twenty years .
Today , we must overcome the storms of a global crisis and find Europe 's place in a global economy that is undergoing complete transformation and rearrangement .
I am of the opinion that , in order to be able to stand its ground , Europe must remain unified , and even today , unity needs strength .
I am convinced that all Member States of the European Union , including my home country , can only become strong and successful if the European Union itself is strong .
If it is strong , it can respond to the challenges of global competitiveness , as well as demographic , environmental , climate and security challenges .
The only question is from where Europe can draw such strength .
This question will be answered if we ask ourselves another question , namely , what is weakening Europe today ?
What is impeding the competitiveness of our entire civilisation today ?
Obviously , it is not other continents threatening us , and it is not a foreign ideology either .
Quite the contrary ; our true problem is a very practical one .
The English language has a very short , simple word to describe it , and that word is debt .
Today , the strength of Europe is being marred and eroded by a monumental amount of debt .
In the new competition of the post-crisis world , debt will be the greatest impediment and the greatest risk to the western world , including to Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Hungarian Presidency is convinced that there is only one way debt can be combated , and that is called work .
We Hungarians are all too aware of this , as the ailments of the Hungarian economy have been caused by the very fact that we have the lowest employment rate throughout Europe , in all the European Union .
I am ashamed even to say it out loud , but it is only 55 % .
And where there is no work , where there are no jobs , there is no money either , and from that follows debt and loans .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , our true resource for the future lies in the traditional European mentality , which values work .
It was the European mentality of valuing work that has made our civilisation successful .
We have a European code of conduct , one of the cornerstones of which has , for centuries , been the principle of prudent economics , meaning that we must not spend more than we are able to produce .
Another fundamental European value is that we must not pass on our debts to our children and grandchildren .
I am convinced that respect for work includes the idea and the mentality that we can only acquire something if we work for it first .
If we can get everything in advance that we could otherwise only have obtained as the fruits of years of work , the very meaning of our work is called into question , and that meaning is increasingly transformed to mean the repayment of our ever-accumulating debt , and changing our whole attitude to work .
This is the crisis we are all facing .
Ladies and gentlemen , everyone agrees on the diagnosis of debt .
To us , debating European politicians , it is like a disease .
Everyone agrees on the diagnosis , but there is vast debate regarding the cure .
The disease , however , is a dangerous one , and our time is short .
It is my opinion , therefore , that we do not have much time for debate , especially not on whether we should automatically reject certain cures that seem unusual or new for the very reason of their being unusual or new .
We need courage and open-mindedness for the governments and parliaments of the individual nation states to be able to overcome their debt crises .
However , I am convinced that this is exactly what the citizens of Europe expect us to do .
They expect jobs , growth and security , and therefore , ladies and gentlemen , the focus of the Hungarian Presidency , the exact point-by-point transcript of which you will also find in this small book , the focus of this Hungarian Presidency will be on economic issues , and at the top of the priority list of the Hungarian Presidency are the very issues related to the economic and debt crisis .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Hungarian Presidency believes that the direction set out by the Council , that is , the direction of crisis management , is the right way , but further efforts will be required , and we are therefore convinced that the Treaty will need to be amended and that a legal basis must be created for the current temporary crisis management mechanism to be replaced by a permanent stability mechanism from 2013 .
The Hungarian Presidency will do everything in its power to this end .
Furthermore , at the core of the Hungarian Presidency 's thinking are the strengthening of economic policy coordination , the facilitation of economic growth and the promotion of sustainable economic growth for job creation .
It is therefore a special goal for our Presidency , and in this I would also like to ask for your cooperation , to create six laws that will facilitate the achievement of this goal , that is , economic policy coordination .
I would like to ask for your committed cooperation in this regard .
The Hungarian Presidency will be a Parliament-friendly Presidency , and so I ask you to do everything to ensure that these six laws can be adopted as soon as possible in cooperation with us .
The Hungarian Presidency is convinced that the structural reforms of the Member States must be implemented in a more consistent manner and must be coordinated to a greater extent than before .
The European Semester has begun and this is something new for everyone ; not just for us Hungarians , but for you as well , as it is a completely new programme of the European Union .
The Semester has begun with the Commission 's annual macro-economic growth report , and I would like to congratulate Mr Barroso on this excellent document , which is suitable for taking the first step , and which lays out the directions and issues that will serve as the basis for the debates that will be conducted in the various Council configurations during our Presidency .
Ladies and gentlemen , national credibility is , of course , also required when one intends to propose a common economic policy for Europe .
I would like to inform you that there is a good chance that my home country , which has been on the wall of shame of the European Union for a long time due to the excessive deficit procedure initiated against it , now has a realistic chance of getting out of this situation .
In 2011 , Hungary 's budget deficit will be below 3 % and we will be one of the two EU Member States whose national debt will decrease in 2011 .
This will be crucial for the credibility of our Presidency programme .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Hungarian Presidency considers it especially important that we strengthen the single market .
We believe that the strengthening of the single market is one of the potential sources of economic growth .
Our intention is to remove existing barriers , implement deregulation and extend the single market to new areas , such as digitalisation .
We support the favourable business environment that is to be created for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Among the priority topics of the Hungarian Presidency are energy policy and innovation , which we will be discussing on 4 February at a joint summit .
I would like to inform you that Hungary is of the opinion that it is crucial for us to remove any existing regulatory barriers in the field of energy policy and to establish the missing infrastructural links in order to create a real and interoperable energy market in Europe .
A similarly important objective of the Hungarian Presidency is to ensure that Europe possesses diversified supply lines in the field of energy .
European energy policy is standing before a breakthrough ; the Member States have signed the agreements - I will be signing the Slovak-Hungarian agreement with the Slovak Prime Minister next week - that will enable the first north-south gas distribution network , ranging from the Baltic Sea to the Adriatic and through Romania to the Black Sea , to commence operation , thereby creating a complete interconnector .
Since , for the last 40 years , we have been thinking in terms of east and west , a north-south connection has been missing , and this is where I consider the treaties to be signed a breakthrough .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Roma strategy is a priority aspect of the Hungarian Presidency , because there is no point in a smart Europe if it has no heart .
Europe , however , will only have a heart if it creates opportunities for social inclusion for the most disadvantaged social groups .
This is not the time to discuss the Roma strategy , and I would therefore only like to point out , as the leader of a country concerned on this issue , that we are all playing with fire , and if we do not manage to establish a Roma strategy at European level , the Roma communities that are already settled and , to a certain degree , already integrated , will once again choose a nomadic lifestyle within Europe , and the problem will thus be transmitted from the countries involved today to others as well .
This provides the grounds for presenting a European strategic answer to the Roma issue , which otherwise falls under national competence , and I would personally be very proud if we could jointly manage to adopt a common European Roma strategy by the end of the Hungarian Presidency in June .
Ladies and gentlemen , I must also touch upon the matter of enlargement , even though I , too , am aware that understandably , there is a fear of enlargement in Europe .
We are barely able to overcome our own internal problems , and under such circumstances , coming up with newer and newer ideas for enlargement is extremely risky .
Nevertheless , the Hungarian Presidency would welcome the return of an optimistic approach to enlargement in Europe .
We would welcome it if the European Union found that we have unfinished business before us , as not all European nations that could be integrated into the European Community are currently part of the European Union .
Furthermore , I personally find it unfair that a country like Croatia , for example , which has shown better performance over the past years than Hungary , a Member State of the EU , is still left outside and is not allowed to join the circle of Member States .
The Hungarian Presidency would therefore like to see Croatia 's accession negotiations through to the signing of the treaty , the period of conclusion .
I am aware that the extension of the Schengen area is a controversial issue .
The countries concerned here are Romania and Bulgaria , but as someone who knows this region well and also lives in a country bordering it , I know with certainty that these countries are ready , and although I know that the Hungarian Presidency must expect debates , I will always stand up , I will personally always stand up for Bulgaria and Romania being included in the Schengen area as soon as possible , that is , without delay .
Ladies and gentlemen , the programmes of the Hungarian Presidency also include the Danube strategy , as well as the belief that the European Union must continue to take a leading role in the global fight against climate change , and for this reason , we would welcome it if the results of the December 2010 Cancún Summit could enter into the implementation phase , and we could continue with the negotiations to ensure that legally binding decisions are adopted by the end of 2011 .
Ladies and gentlemen , since my time spent talking is beginning to border on impoliteness , I will mention only briefly that the topics of the Hungarian Presidency also include the discussion of family policy and the demographic situation , and I would be pleased if Hungary could , without provoking interinstitutional debates , contribute to the European Union forming a clear and firm position on the freedom of religion and taking action against the persecution of Christians , which is an important issue for the coming six months .
Ladies and gentlemen , finally , I would like to point out that I am aware that all of us sitting or standing in this House are politicians .
We all have our own points of view , our own principles , our own comrades , and also our own interests .
While acknowledging this , I respectfully advise you , whatever opinion you may have about Hungarian internal politics , not to associate your criticisms and actions related to Hungarian domestic politics with the following six months of the Hungarian Presidency of the European Union .
If you do associate them , I will , of course , be ready for a fight , but if you do so , it will not be Hungary 's loss , but above all , a loss for the entire community of the European Union .
I therefore ask you , for the sake of the European Union and the difficult tasks that lie before us , to make this distinction whenever possible .
The last debate was also pulled back to the grounds of reason and rational discourse by Hungary when I agreed with President Barroso that we would welcome EU investigations relating to the criticised media law , that we would engage in ongoing discussions about its observations , and that if any faults could be found and verified , we would , of course , be willing to amend the law .
For us , these issues are not a matter of prestige , and are not about flexing our muscles or vanity .
On a side note , if anyone wishes to fight for the freedom of the press in Europe , they can always rely on the Hungarian Government , which has had its share of anti-communist struggles .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are aware that an extremely difficult six months lie before Europe , but I am optimistic and believe that Europe is up to the task .
After World War II , Europe managed to build cooperation between the peoples of Europe amidst hatred and ruins .
In 1989 and 1990 , it managed to reunite Europe , and so I have reason to assume that it will also be capable of responding to the similar historic challenge we are facing now .
This means that we will need more , during and after the Hungarian Presidency , than ambitious administration .
We must look further than the files massing on our desks , and we must look to an even farther horizon than that of issues which can be solved within six months or one or two years .
The Hungarian Presidency is convinced that a community can only be bound together by shared goals and shared values .
Shared goals can only be based on shared values .
The Hungarian Presidency will carry out its day-to-day work in the spirit of this great , far-reaching European goal , will accord due respect to all of us , and will show the utmost humility to the cause .
Thank you for honouring me with your attention .
Prime Minister , thank you for your speech and presentation of the programme of activities of the Hungarian Presidency of the Council .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , the start of 2011 is an historic moment for Hungary as it takes over the helm of the Council of the European Union for the first time , but it is also a critical moment for the European Union as a whole .
The Hungarian Presidency comes at a time that demands a special sense of responsibility regarding the tasks ahead for Europe .
It is particularly appropriate that the Hungarian Presidency has chosen as its motto ' strong Europe ' .
Europe is at its strongest and most effective when we are united , when we act in a coordinated manner with strong institutions , when we show a common resolve to steer a course through these stormy waters , and when we show that , by working together , we are capable of finding solutions to the most pressing problems .
This is important to remember because we are not out of the woods yet .
There can be no backtracking and no return to business as usual .
We must implement our reforms without delay and develop the innovative policies needed to make the Europe 2020 vision a reality .
So I look forward to working in partnership with Prime Minister Orbán and with the Hungarian Presidency to make sure that it is a successful one .
Let me tell Prime Minister Orbán here and now that he can count on the Commission 's full support on this .
At the same time , the Commission hopes very much that it can count on the support of the Hungarian Presidency .
A fruitful partnership is particularly important in the areas of financial services , economic governance , the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy , energy and the internal market .
So I am pleased that the Presidency 's priorities fully reflect this .
A strong partnership with the European Parliament is also essential , as in some cases , fast-tracking of proposals will be important .
For example , we must have the new tools for reinforced economic governance at our disposal as soon as possible .
A clear target has been set by the European Council to deliver by June 2011 .
The rhythm of work already set by the Hungarian Presidency and the comments we have just heard from the Prime Minister are encouraging in this respect .
As we start this new Presidency , a comprehensive EU agenda and appropriate governance tools are already in place .
The European Semester , Europe 2020 strategy and its flagship initiatives and the Single Market Act - all these key initiatives have been discussed and endorsed by the EU institutions .
But , of course , we need to do more and it is now also time to act decisively to implement a comprehensive programme .
The European Semester is at the heart of the reformed economic strategy of the European Union .
Its proper implementation will be a major task in the months ahead .
The Commission kick-started the Semester by adopting the Annual Growth Survey last week .
Following discussions in several Council formations , the process will culminate at the European Council in March , which will provide essential policy guidance for Member States , to be reflected in their stability and convergence programmes as well as their national reform programmes , both of which we are expecting in April .
Since we have already discussed this in the previous debate , I will not go into detail , but , of course , the priorities are macro-economic stability , namely , fiscal consolidation , structural reform and , of course , frontloaded economic growth , employment being , of course , our most important concern .
Final agreement on the European crisis management resolution mechanism will also be a key deliverable during the Hungarian Presidency .
The Hungarian Presidency will also have an important role to play in shepherding through our efforts to relaunch the single market .
Following the public consultation launched by the Commission on the Single Market Act , the EU institutions will be asked to agree on a definitive action plan to be realised by the end of 2012 .
Energy will also be an important area in the coming months and already at the European Council meeting on 4 February .
The Commission already has a series of important energy initiatives on the table which will feed into the February European Council .
These include the energy agenda 2020 , our communication on energy infrastructure priorities .
We will soon be adopting a ' resource-efficient Europe ' flagship initiative in which energy also features strongly .
The Commission intends to develop its work around the following five axes : a strong energy policy as a key to competitive and sustainable growth and energy security ; the internal market in energy as an asset ; building the European Union 's new energy infrastructure ; making decisive progress on energy efficiency ; and developing an effective and united new approach to external energy policy .
Support from the Presidency and the European Parliament will also be essential to ensure an agreement on the European Union Patent .
As requested by several Member States , the Commission adopted a proposal for enhanced cooperation in this field on 14 December .
The Commission appreciates Hungary 's commitment to taking forward work on the EU patent under its Presidency .
Negotiations with Croatia are now in the final phase .
Conclusion of negotiations under the Hungarian Presidency is an ambitious goal , especially considering the remaining requirements Croatia still needs to fulfil .
This will require an all-out push on Croatia 's side .
I welcome the fact that the Hungarian Presidency considers the social and economic integration of Roma as one of its priorities .
The Commission set up a Roma taskforce to analyse the use and effectiveness of EU and national funds in all Member States for Roma inclusion .
Building on this work , the Commission will present a European Union framework for national Roma integration strategies in April .
The new Presidency will also put the spotlight on our Danube strategy .
The Danube region has great potential that has not yet been properly exploited due to ineffective cooperation .
The aim is to develop a more coordinated approach to bring European added value to this region .
The Commission welcomes the Presidency 's commitment to this strategy .
Hungary has already contributed significantly to its preparation , including producing policy papers and hosting a conference in Budapest which I had the pleasure of attending .
It will be in charge of guiding it through the Council and launching the Danube strategy implementation .
Finally , the debate on cohesion policy will intensify in the coming months .
The Commission welcomes the intention of the Presidency to discuss the proposals set out in the fifth cohesion report .
We will present legislative proposals for future cohesion policy this summer , following proposals on the next financial framework .
The fifth Cohesion Forum , to take place at the end of January in Brussels , will allow for a major stakeholder discussion .
It is encouraging that Prime Minister Orbán himself will participate .
Effectiveness and European added value must be the driving principles of the reform .
The Commission is convinced that cohesion policy needs to underpin more strongly the policy priorities and reform agenda of Europe 2020 .
I count on the support of the Presidency in this work .
It is our common interest and responsibility to make funding more effective .
Only in this way can we defend an ambitious budget for cohesion policy .
Since I know this is a matter of political concern , let me add a final comment on Hungary 's media law .
The principle of freedom of the press is a sacred one in the European Union .
I stated this in Brussels and in Budapest when I had the honour to be received there by Prime Minister Orbán .
The Commission has looked at the law and this week will write to the Hungarian authorities to seek clarification on certain aspects that could create legal problems and that have raised some concerns .
On the basis of the Hungarian authorities ' answers , we will assess the situation further .
The Prime Minister has already made it quite clear that adjustments will be made should the Commission decide after this legal assessment that changes need to be made .
Prime Minister Orbán has just said he is a politician .
I am sure that he is a very committed politician and I think you can agree that , leaving aside the legal issues - which will be dealt with in an objective and impartial manner because we will treat Hungary exactly like any other Member State - we must also concern ourselves with the political aspects .
Hungary , like any Member State taking on the rotating Presidency , needs to have the full backing of all the other Member States and the European institutions to make the Presidency a success .
I hope that Prime Minister Orbán will take this into consideration .
I have no doubt that this Presidency must be a success , coming at such a critical time for the European Union .
Let us allow the proper procedures to take their course and , at the same time , let us give our full support to Hungary as it takes on this heavy responsibility .
During my recent visit to Hungary , I received messages from young people who said that they were proud that their country for the first time had the responsibility of leading the Council of the European Union .
Let us make Hungary closer to Europe and Europe closer to Hungary .
There is a lot to do .
The Hungarian Presidency can count on every assistance from the European Commission in pushing forward its priorities .
It is only by achieving these goals together that we will build a strong Europe , a Europe which delivers growth and jobs , which preserves and reaffirms our values - namely , the sacred values of freedom and justice - and which positions our societies to thrive in a changing world .
( Applause )


Mr President , Prime Minister Orbán , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , rarely will the Presidency of the Council of Ministers have had to face so many challenges : the challenge of the euro , which we must stabilise , the challenge of employment , which is experiencing stronger growth and therefore a more efficient economy , the challenge of energy independence and food security , while prices for raw materials are rising alarmingly .
I have no doubt that the Hungarian Presidency will be able to deal with these challenges , alongside the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
Mr Orbán , you have won the confidence of your electorate in Hungary .
Your party , Fiatal Demokraták Szövetsége ( FIDESZ ) , is based on an idea , on an ideal , on a value : that of liberty and democracy .
Since your election , you have , with the Hungarian Parliament , undertaken a whole series of reforms which your people have called for by democratically giving you a large majority .
Today , one of those reforms - the one concerning the media - is the subject of legal scrutiny by the European Commission , guardian of the Treaties .
You yourself stated last week - and I thank you for doing so - during your talks with Mr Barroso , and since then , that were this law incompatible with European law , you would submit it to your parliament for the necessary changes .
I have complete faith in your word .
For my part , I , like you , have confidence in the European Commission , which plays its role as guardian of the Treaties , and I also have confidence that you will respect the letter and the spirit of the European rules .
Prime Minister Orbán , we have known each other for a long time and I consider you a very great European .
For my part , I have no reason to doubt that you will do what you have said with regard to the media law and to the other priorities faced by your Presidency .
I now come to those priorities , beginning with the first : the stability of Europe .
Perhaps it is a good thing that the two presidencies of the Council that will follow one another in 2011 will be assumed by countries that do not belong to the euro area but which wish to join it in the very near future .
Indeed , both Hungary and Poland are both entitled to join it .
They therefore have a stake in ensuring the stability of this currency .
I repeat : the only effective way of ending the speculative attacks against the euro and of strengthening the fundamentals of the European economy is to restore order to our public finances .
This involves stronger coordination of fiscal and social policies in our countries , as is quite rightly provided for by the new budgetary period for the European Semester .
It also depends on greater flexibility in our employment market and greater productivity .
Like the Hungarian Presidency of the Council , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) firmly believes that the future of 500 million Europeans depends on a stronger , more united and more coherent Europe .
It depends on having more of a Europe and certainly not less of a Europe .
Mr Orbán , we need European economic governance .
We need more communitarianism and I am sure that you will work towards this .
President-in-Office of the Council , you have defined the setting up of a common energy policy as one of your main priorities .
I think you are right .
Mr Buzek , our President , has also , quite rightly , made it one of the strengths of his Presidency .
I agree with you on this point , but I also want to warn you about the terribly worrying consequences that may result from the increase in the prices of all kinds of raw materials which has been particularly sharp over the last few months .
We have already seen the social implications in several Mediterranean countries of such a price rise in basic foodstuffs , especially for the poorest countries .
I hope that Europe will take this problem seriously and deal forcefully with speculators .
I also hope that the Hungarian Presidency - I thought that the Group of the Greens were going to be silent , but I can hear them talking ; it is not right , people should be quiet all the way through - will back the Commission in its assistance to Tunisia , which is going through a crucial time and must be supported as it moves towards change .
Mr Orbán , you know that to succeed in your mandate and help Europe through its current difficult phase , you need the confidence of Parliament .
In December , when we were in a difficult position with regard to the Council , you had the courage to sign the first-rate letters for us which really helped Parliament to approve its budget .
Thank you , already , for what you did in December !
Even before January , you included the political groups when defining your priorities , and naturally chose Mrs Győri , one of our very fine former colleagues , as Minister for EU Affairs .
These are all positive signs which , I have no doubt , will be accompanied by a perfect balance between the reforms you are undertaking and the European values that every one of us here defends .
Mr President , I believe that we are currently in a serious situation .
These are serious times .
Firstly , Mr Orbán , you will be familiar to many Europeans as an opponent of the Communist regime and a supporter of freedom for your country .
We respect that .
I was pleased that we both had the opportunity yesterday afternoon to discuss another man whom Hungarians can be proud of and that is the former prime minister and foreign minister of your country who opened the border between Hungary and Austria , together with Alois Mock , and paved the way for German unity .
This man is the leader of my party , Gyula Horn .
Let us pay tribute to another great Hungarian .
( Applause )
Mr Orbán , in your capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , you acknowledged something in your answer to Mr Barroso 's question .
You said that if the Hungarian media law is not compatible with European standards , you will change it .
That is a good thing .
However , in saying this , you have also acknowledged that this is not just an internal political debate in Hungary , but also a European debate .
It is clear that this law concerns the fundamental rules and values of the European Union , which is a community based on the rule of law .
I would like to look at two elements of the media law .
It will establish a media authority which is intended to supervise the balance of reporting in the media .
In addition , the law will introduce an obligation on the media to take a balanced approach .
You have a two-thirds majority in parliament and it is a legitimate majority .
Using this two-thirds majority , you have set up a media authority which consists exclusively of members of your party , from the government or from the group of people who have close links with it .
This means that a media authority with members from only one side of the political spectrum will be responsible for monitoring balanced reporting .
This is not acceptable within a European community based on the rule of law .
( Applause )
In a democracy , Mr Orbán , the media monitor those who are in power .
The result of this law is that those in power will monitor the media .
This is also unacceptable in a democracy and that is why the people of Europe are so concerned about this law .
( Applause )
You have rightly pointed out that we have a lot of problems to solve .
We are in the midst of a severe financial crisis and we have difficulties with the budget .
Another pressing issue for the European Union involves rising food prices , in particular , in our neighbouring regions , but also within the European Union itself in the foreseeable future .
This is a problem which we need to address quickly .
We also need to focus on employment in the Member States .
There are certainly many items in your programme which we can work on together .
In that respect , you are a genuine representative of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
When Mr Sarkozy , the French President , was President-in-Office of the Council , he also gave a left-leaning speech here in Parliament and then proceeded to implement right-wing policies once he was at home .
I told him that he spoke like Karl Marx in exile .
Everything that you have said sounds good .
If you can now act in accordance with your words , that will be good enough .
( Heckling )
Therefore , I believe that we must , and indeed will , assess your achievements on the basis of the programme that you have presented here .
You have referred , Mr Orbán , to the fact that you have a large majority at home .
That is a good thing .
We have had to deal with a number of governments , including some from your party , who have done nothing but sit here and call home to find out if they were still in office .
We cannot afford that sort of thing now .
From this point of view , your two-thirds majority is excellent , because it gives you plenty of time .
However , it also puts you under an obligation to use your strong position to make Hungary and also the European Union stronger .
I would like to ask you a question .
What is the purpose of your gift of a carpet which has been laid in the Council building in Brussels and which shows Hungary with its 1848 borders ?
What sort of a message is this in the context of European gesture politics ?
As you seem intent on using symbols from the 19th century , I would like to tell you what the German philosopher , Friedrich Nietzsche , said to the German people in the 19th century .
He said : ' A great victory is a great danger .
Human nature finds it harder to endure a victory than a defeat .
Indeed , it almost seems to be easier to achieve a victory than to endure it in such a way that it does not turn into a serious defeat ' .
I believe that you should take into consideration that a large majority provides a great deal of support , but also imposes a major obligation .
Therefore , I am talking to you in your capacity as President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union and not in your role as prime minister .
The President-in-Office of the Council must do everything possible to dispel any doubts about the Presidency 's readiness to defend fundamental European democratic values .
It would be best for you not to wait for the Commission 's investigation .
Mr Barroso , I would like to point out to you that following a ban on trucks imposed by one Austrian province , the Commission suffered a severe identity crisis and then took immediate measures against Austria .
However , when one of the fundamental principles of European democracy is put at risk , you sit and do nothing .
( Applause )
You must make sure that we receive the results of the investigation soon , otherwise this debate will place a heavy burden on the Hungarian Presidency .
We all want the Presidency to be a success and we do not want to see its progress blocked .
You , Mr Orbán , can do something yourself to help the situation .
Withdraw the law and introduce a new and better one .
Hungary needs a balanced media law .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all , let me say very clearly to Mr Orbán that my group supports the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
Mr Prime Minister , like you , we also believe in a strong euro , so we are fully backing you in your priorities for this Presidency .
I think that in the six months of this Presidency , you have one top priority and that is to establish , as fast as possible , real economic governance inside the European Union and inside the eurozone .
Because let us be clear : 2010 was not a good example for the euro and for the European Union .
We were always running behind the facts , after the events .
What we need now , as fast as possible , under your leadership and the leadership of the President of the Commission , is a global package on economic governance , a real economic and fiscal union , because it is nonsense to have a monetary union and not have an economic and fiscal union at the same time .
I am not asking you to invent new ideas but to take last week 's package presented by the President of the Commission and Commissioner Olli Rehn and to put this package with its four cornerstones on the table of the Council and the table of your colleagues .
Mr Orbán and Mr Barroso , only one element , one cornerstone is missing in this package .
Nowhere in the world is there a currency without one bond market behind it .
In Europe , we still have 27 bond markets , 27 speculations and 27 spreads .
In the eurozone , we still have 17 bond markets , 17 spreads and 17 speculations .
What the markets are doing at present is not speculating against the euro but speculating on the differences inside the euro .
The only way to tackle that is to have a genuine bond market in Europe of EUR 4 000 billion or 5 000 billion which can be compared to what exists in other parts of the world , with special treatment for the triple-A countries .
( Applause )
Finally , Mr Orbán I want to say something about the elephant in the room .
The elephant in this beautiful room is naturally the media law in Hungary .
I will not talk about the law itself ; I will rather use the example of one of my favourite writers , a great Hungarian writer , Sándor Márai .
With the language policy of the former Slovak Government and the current media law in Hungary , I doubt that Márai would ever have existed .
Why ?
Well , Márai lived in Kassa , which today we know as Košice .
He wrote in Hungarian which , as you know , was , until recently , a problem in Slovakia .
Also importantly he was a journalist , which is becoming a problem for tomorrow because , with the new legislation , which obliges the media to provide proper information and adequate information about public life , I think Márai and his books would never have existed .
The Confessions of a Citizen , his masterpiece , is quite improper and , in many respects , totally inadequate , but it is a masterpiece of literature .
In my opinion , the aim of media governance is not to guarantee proper and adequate information .
No , the aim of media governance is to uphold pluralism and to guarantee that any initiative in media can be developed .
( Applause )
I hope that you will use your majority , your two-thirds majority , which is something that all politicians dream about ...
( Interjection from Mr Cohn-Bendit : ' No !
No ! ' )
Not you - you are an exception .
I hope that you will use your two-thirds majority to guarantee that pluralism , and that you will change the law as fast as possible .
Mr President , first of all , allow me to say one thing so that there can be no ambiguity .
The Group of the Greens , and I personally , love Hungary .
I cried in 1954 when Hungary lost the World Cup .
My first demonstration , holding on to my brother 's hand , was in 1956 against the Soviet invasion of Budapest .
As Mr Verhofstadt said , many intellectuals , many Hungarian writers have supported us politically and intellectually for years .
I sided with Prime Minister Orbán when he fought the Communists at the end of the 80s and the beginning of the 90s .
I sided with Prime Minister Orbán when he asked liberal Europeans to expel Jörg Haider from the European liberal party .
There was a Viktor Orbán who , for me , was a politician who ought to be respected .
Today , Prime Minister Orbán , you are on the way to becoming a European Chavez , a national populist who does not exactly understand the essence and structure of democracy .
I am going to tell you a very simple fact , Prime Minister Orbán : there is no such thing as balanced information .
Do you think that Mr Nixon found the Watergate information balanced ?
Obviously not !
Do you think that Mr Bush found the information about Abu Ghraib balanced ?
Of course not !
Are you familiar with one of the great political issues - the Dreyfus affair in France - in which the government found that the information was balanced ?
With regard to research , for example , on the life and politics of Mr Berlusconi , do you think he finds that information balanced ?
Of course not !
Information should upset politics .
It upsets us , too , and sometimes that hurts .
That is why , Prime Minister Orbán , your law today is not a law that reflects the values of the European Union .
You say that you want a strong Europe , Prime Minister Orbán .
A strong Europe , Prime Minister Orbán , must be a credible Europe .
If we agree to this kind of law in Europe , how are we going to have discussions with Mr Lukashenko ?
How are we going to have discussions with China ?
They all want balanced information .
Prime Minister Orbán , are you aware that Europe came into being against totalitarianisms ?
And that the basis of democracy , the basis of freedom , is precisely freedom of expression ?
A democracy never died from having too many freedoms .
Democracies died when people started restricting freedoms , Prime Minister Orbán .
You knew that twenty years ago .
Think back to that time when it was so - and , what is more , it makes sense .
You see , then , that what I am telling you is right .
I want to finish on one thing , Prime Minister Orbán .
If you want to fight for the world 's Christians , we are with you , but I would have imagined , and I did imagine , that you would have welcomed the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia , which is the same revolution you went through , Prime Minister Orbán : freeing yourself from a dictatorship .
You did not have a word for the Tunisians , and it is for that reason that I reproach you .
We are with you for the world 's Christians .
I trust that you will be with us when it comes to fighting the world 's dictatorships , whether they be in Belarus or whether they be in Tunisia , Algeria , Egypt , China or Russia - wherever they be .
These are the common values of Europe that we must all defend together .
( Applause )
' I cannot know what this land means to other people . / For me , it is my birthplace , this little nation embraced / by flames , the world of my childhood rocking in the distance . / I grew out of her like a tender branch from a tree / and I hope one day my body will sink into her . / I am at home ' . - wrote Miklós Radnóti .
Hungary is at home here in Europe , and is worthy of holding the Presidency .
But is the Hungarian Government at home ?
Is it worthy of this post ?
I am not merely referring to the media law here ; there are nine other elephants in the room .
There is a continuous and gross violation of the delicate system of checks and balances that characterise democracy .
Discharging civil servants without stating the reason .
An excessive , discriminative , and structurally distorting crisis tax .
Support to the wealthy to the detriment of the poor .
Dissolution of the Budgetary Council , just like in Venezuela .
Impairment , and soon , revocation of central bank autonomy .
A 98 % special tax on severance payments with retroactive effect .
Nine amendments of the Constitution over the course of seven months .
Restriction of the powers of the Constitutional Court .
Nationalisation of the private pension system through open extortion , just as in Bolivia .
The elevation of tax fraud to the level of government policy : Palinka distillation .
Populist hacking , as though going at a botanical garden with an axe .
Destruction of the fine fabric of society , of its solidarity .
Ágnes Heller , János Kornai , Jenő Ranschburg - Hungarian scientists of world renown have written about this .
Yesterday , Guy Verhofstadt said that the Belgian Presidency had been successful because their government had not allowed domestic tasks to distract them from European matters .
Now we are facing the risk of the very opposite .
The chaos and the diplomatic disaster at home will distract the government and the European public eye from Europe .
This would truly be a shame .
I , as a Hungarian , will have none of this shame .
It is not too late to reverse our direction .
Mr President , Mr Orbán , I would like to make some brief remarks about the media law .
Many speakers have mentioned this , but I will not repeat what they have said .
I would just like to make one point .
This is not interference in Hungarian affairs .
I believe , and I have only learnt this late in life , that the media are responsible for monitoring those in power and the economy .
This situation must remain unchanged .
Therefore , the media must not be monitored themselves by other higher level bodies and a media authority of this kind would make this possible .
For this reason , the composition of the media authority is , in our eyes , not ideal .
You have clearly stated that you are prepared to change this and I hope that you do move in this direction .
Otherwise , and I would like to make this quite clear , it is a Hungarian affair .
Of course , there are other Member States whose media legislation we could mention in this context .
This does not only relate to Hungary .
I would like to say quite clearly with regard to your plans for the Council Presidency , firstly , that I welcome the fact that you have made promoting cultural diversity one of your overriding objectives .
I believe that this is very important .
I look forward to your initiatives to improve integration , including the integration of minorities , and you yourself have referred to the Roma .
A European strategy to integrate the Roma more effectively is a very important issue .
Secondly , I am pleased to see that you are committed to the enlargement negotiations and the policy with regard to our eastern neighbours .
Bringing more Eastern European culture , together with the historical and social experience of the area , into the European Union can only be a good thing .
For many reasons which I do not want to go into here , the European Union is still primarily a Western European institution .
I would like to see your Council Presidency exerting a greater Eastern European influence .
Thirdly , I will be interested to see how you handle the forthcoming reorganisation of agriculture and cohesion policy and the preparation of the European Union 's multiannual budgetary perspective .
My group calls on you to ensure that Parliament is fully involved in all of this and we expect you take seriously your promise to support small and medium-sized businesses and to improve environmental protection , the sustainable use of resources and food security .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I welcome Mr Orbán .
After the six months ' farce of the Belgian Presidency , it is nice to see an elected Prime Minister from a proper country .
How I enjoyed your denouncement of Communism as a dangerous ideology - and I noted the pride that you took in the fact that Hungary was the first country to take up arms against the Soviet Union .
Twenty years after you won back your ability to govern yourselves democratically , you are now part of a new political union that increasingly shows similarities with that old Soviet Union .
In fact , you are going to meet lots of Communists over the next six months , including the boss of the Commission here , old Barroso who was an advocate of Chairman Mao !
You will see centralised economic planning and control and , above all , what you will see is the desire to impose a political union upon the peoples of Europe without their consent .
Wake up Mr Orbán .
Look at how they are trying to bully you this morning .
They are trying to tell you how to run your own country .
Tell them where to go .
Stand up and fight for democracy once again .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in 1956 Hungary , showed the world that a stand must be made against oppression and lies , even if it seems to be a hopeless endeavour .
At that time , this was our historic mission .
And now it is the same .
In today 's world , lies and oppression rest on two pillars .
One of them is that global plutocracy and the banks are privatising profits , while nationalising losses and costs , thus passing them on to firemen , nurses , teachers and pensioners , who suffer more and more .
The other pillar is that they - and here I am referring mainly to politicians , who , instead of representing the interests of the people , persistently act as representatives of the global plutocracy and banks , even here in the European Union - make it all seem as if it were natural , or at least that there were no other way .
The Hungarian Presidency and Hungary , my home country , must show that this is not true , that the emperor is naked .
Instead of a mindset centred on profits and money , we must show that a human-centred and justice-centred approach is also possible , where the question we are asking is not about what is best for money and profits , but instead what is best for the people and for justice .
I wish the best of luck to Hungary , my freedom-loving home country .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Morvai , we have already had a brief exchange of views yesterday .
I have two questions for you .
It is not surprising that you support the Presidency from your position on the far right .
However , whether that suits Mr Orbán is another matter .
Are you aware that the Hungarian revolution was supported by many , many people and not only by conservatives on the right of the political spectrum , as Mr Schulz has said ?
Have you noticed , Mrs Morvai , that the criticism of the Hungarian media law has come not only from social democrats , but also from very many citizens , including Mr György Konrád , who have nothing to do with social democracy ?
Are you aware of this ?
( HU ) Mr Swoboda , though I may once have held the belief that there is meaning in using the attributives ' right wing ' and ' left wing , ' my one and a half years at the European Union have convinced me that there is no point .
You left wing people continue to represent the interests of plutocracy and the banks , and show absolutely no regard for what people want .
You have completely forgotten about the original ideals .
There has been mention here today of your predecessor named Marx .
What he said about justice is no longer referred to here .
You are the greatest oppressors of the working people .
This is one thing .
The other thing is the media law , which is Hungary 's internal affair ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on behalf of the Hungarian delegation of the European People 's Party .
I myself am a person with a disability , and I am perhaps more sensitive than the average person to discrimination or double standards .
That is why I have been following with concern the political witch hunt about the Hungarian media law , which we could also witness here today in this House .
Fidesz Hungarian Civic Union has demonstrated on countless occasions that it is doing its work in the spirit of our shared European values , and does so for the freedom of the press and with honour .
Our European values represent responsibilities .
This is also proven by the six months of the upcoming Hungarian Presidency .
This is also proven by its objectives .
Economic governance , energy policy or , for that matter , the Roma strategy - these directions and strategies prove the existence of shared values , just as our goals are also shared in order to ensure a strong Europe .
Europe is , after all , not just a community of interests , but also a community of values .
In fact , you are now showing disregard for these very goals and values .
Without even waiting to hear the opinion of the European Commission , you are already making statements , putting forward malicious accusations and making excessive and unfounded comments .
Is your goal perhaps to weaken the Hungarian Presidency in doing so ?
In truth , you are inflicting harm on the European Union , on the entire European Community .
We are currently facing our most severe crisis , and you are exhibiting irresponsible behaviour .
As a Member of the delegation of the European People 's Party , I reject this .
I encourage the Hungarian Presidency to continue its work despite the accusations and indeed to carry on with its ' Strong Europe ' programme .
I agree with the title of the programme .
Through unity , we will achieve much more , and we must strive for progress .
( HU ) Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , it is in the interests of the European Union and Hungary , as well as of all Hungarian patriots regardless of party affiliation , that the Hungarian Presidency be a successful one .
This is even more important if we consider that today , the EU , including the euro area , is facing extraordinary challenges .
Prime Minister , you are a man of purpose .
I ask you to put this ability to the service of Europe as the President-in-Office of the European Union , so that Europe may become much more dynamic and efficient .
At the same time , however , I ask you to preserve the rules of democracy and protect the values of the European social model .
Unfortunately , as the current debate has also shown , the beginnings of the Hungarian Presidency are turbulent .
Can you feel , Prime Minister , how low the confidence in your government is in Europe ?
People in many Member States , regardless of party affiliation , consider the anti-democratic measures of your government , its economic populism , the media law and its tolerance for the far-right to be contrary to EU norms and values .
The EU Presidency cannot absolve you from criticism ; moreover , you should lead by example in adhering to the fundamental values of the EU .
The famous quote by Attila József , ' my anger is for you , not against you , ' applies in this case , because when well-founded criticism is voiced , the EU is not angry with the Hungarian Government ; it is angry for it .
And this criticism is especially not directed at the Hungarian people .
Prime Minister , as a Hungarian and a European , I would like to go through the six months of this Presidency with pride and with my head held high .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Orbán , in an article which appeared yesterday in a major German newspaper , you cited Otto Graf Lambsdorff as one of your role models .
We last met at his funeral service in December 2009 .
You attended as a private individual and we very much appreciated that .
I would like to ask you to honour his memory by respecting , following and defending the principles of the liberal constitutional state in all the measures that you take .
You have responded to the criticism of the media law with two arguments .
You have said that this is a campaign against Hungary and against you personally and that the campaign is unspecific .
I would like to make it very clear on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe that this is not a campaign .
It is an issue for Europe if fundamental freedoms are interfered with and called into question in a Member State of the European Union .
I would like to say to the Commission and to Mr Barroso that a legal assessment must be carried out by Mrs Kroes .
However , the Commission is not just a solicitor 's office ; it is also a political body .
The assessment must take a political form and it must be completed quickly .
Your second argument is that the criticism is unspecific .
Mr Orbán , I would like to make a few specific points : slander , defamation and incitement to hatred are against the law in Germany and in other democracies .
That is what the criminal law is there for .
Please let the criminal law take effect in this case .
You need to improve the legal protection in Article 163 , change the composition and the powers of the media authority in Articles 123 and 183 , together with a great deal of other things .
There are many specific points .
I suggest that you postpone the application of the law until the Commission 's assessment has been carried out and this must be done as quickly as possible .
( NL ) Madam President , the European Parliament and Member States are operating double standards .
We cannot talk enough of civil rights and freedom of the press when it comes to countries which want to join the European Union , but these things do not seem to apply to the existing members of this club .
Are the Copenhagen criteria sacred obligations for all of us , or just for new members ?
Member States are turning a blind eye to what each other is doing .
If I keep my nose out of your business , then you will have to keep your nose out of my business , too !
Even Hungary is asking everyone to keep their noses out of its business .
That is a strange attitude for a Presidency of the European Union .
It is your job , Prime Minister Orbán , to lead the European Union and , indeed , to encourage Member States to concern themselves with each other 's business to some extent .
There is no place for retreat here .
Turning now to our Parliament , the house whose job it should be to preserve the high standard of European values .
We are failing to do that !
Madam President , it has once again been a pleasure for me to be able to speak the truth and give my balanced view here .
( PL ) Madam President , it is good news that a government enjoying so much support in its own country is taking over the EU Presidency .
The Hungarian Government enjoys this support because it acts in the interests of Hungarians , and because it is rebuilding Hungary after the bankrupt , scandal-ridden governments of the Hungarian socialists .
It is not such good news , however , that Hungary has been subject to unfair , ideologically-motivated attacks on the eve of its Presidency .
The whole matter of the media law shows the hypocrisy of these attacks .
There is an identical Media Council in Poland , where it is dominated by the governing party , and it is responsible today for dozens of people - journalists with conservative leanings - being thrown out of the Polish public media .
No one in Europe , Mr Schulz least of all , is defending them .
Those are the simple facts of the matter .
The bizarre letter published a week ago attacking Hungarians , signed by the former presidents of the Czech Republic and Hungary , and also by the head of the Gazeta Wyborcza newspaper in Poland , points to the hypocrisy of the attack .
This is the very Gazeta Wyborcza which ensures that people who hold differing opinions have their property confiscated .
The truth about today 's attack on Hungary is that it is nothing other than revenge for the putting into practice of successful conservatism .
I hope that your Presidency of the EU is as successful , Mr Orbán , as ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Madam President , as of 1 January , the Presidency of the European Union was assumed by the Hungarian Government , which has reminded us of the fact through what might be termed a cultural carpet .
I will not talk about the map , Prime Minister , only about the culture you have brought to Brussels .
Cherished symbols , portraits of figures of whom your people are justly proud , on the ground , underfoot , in a public space , trodden on and befouled by people from all over Europe .
Does that seem like culture to you ?
Is it a dignified presentation of proud Hungary ?
I do not know what led Hungarian diplomats to demean the symbols of their own history .
They could have placed them with dignity on the panels or walls of this very hall .
Have you seen , Viktor , where the symbols that we cherish are placed in this hall ?
They are in an honourable place , adorning the President 's table .
I know , Prime Minister , that your country has many problems , but I firmly believe that the proud Hungarian people do not deserve such disrespect from their own government towards their famous figures and symbols .
( HU ) Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I basically wished to speak about the Hungarian Presidency , but the speakers before me have infuriated me , and now I must give in a little to the provocation and speak about the Hungarian media law .
To put it simply , in Hungary , the Jobbik Movement for a Better Hungary also criticised the language law .
We , too , disagree with it .
However , to see so many turncoats and hypocrites in one place is astonishing .
Where were those who now fancy themselves as protectors of rights , where were you when the Slovak language law was introduced ?
Where was Mr Cohn-Bendit when the Hungarians in Vojvodina were terrorised by Serb extremists ?
Where was Mr Martin Schulz when graves in Vojvodina , Hungarian graves , and the graves of Hungarians in Transylvania were desecrated ?
This is why I see this as a double standard .
I cannot accept the criticism you allow yourself against the Hungarian Government and against the Hungarian Presidency .
Unlike the empty cawing of MSZMP or MSZP , Jobbik has always had positive proposals .
Yes , we must bring up the matter of the Slovak language law .
Yes , we must bring up the matter of annulling the Beneš decrees .
Yes , we must bring up the territorial autonomy of the Székely people .
Yes , we must bring up the halting and elimination of Roma crime in Hungary and in all of Europe , and it would be welcome if the Hungarian Government could focus just as much on its domestic task of implementing the will of millions of Hungarian voters and finally putting the former Hungarian dictator , Ferenc Gyurcsány , behind bars .
These are the real problems and I wish you success for the Presidency .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Orbán , you have two difficult tasks ahead of you .
The first involves overcoming eight years of socialist maladministration , bringing political and economic dynamism and stability back to Hungary and reducing debt levels .
The electorate has given you a clear mandate to do this .
Your second task is to lead Europe in your role as President-in-Office of the Council during these difficult times and to do everything in your power to resolve the economic and financial crisis .
You will have the active support of Parliament and of my group .
We are pleased that you have not presented us with a wish list today , as many socialist Presidents-in-Office of the Council have done in recent years , but instead have made your priorities clear .
Thirdly , we are pleased that Hungary has been a member of the European Union since 2004 and that the governing party in Hungary belongs to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
The campaign relating to the new media law , which involves calls for the withdrawal of the right to vote under Article 7 , and which was initiated here in Parliament and not by you , but by the parties that lost the 2010 elections in Hungary , they sat here and they are still sitting here now at the front , at least those who have not gone running straight to the press , is hypocritical and intolerable .
The assessment will show that the media legislation in Hungary is no different to that in many other states .
In the case of Mr Schulz , who called for the law to be withdrawn , I can only say that he obviously has not read the law which was voted in by a majority under the socialist and green state government in North Rhine-Westphalia .
This includes provisions for the establishment of a media authority , for sanctions and for the diversity of opinions .
This is exactly what you are doing .
This hypocritical approach must not gain a majority in this House .
( Applause )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Langen , is it the case that the state media law in North Rhine-Westphalia puts the responsibility for supervising the media in the hands of one party ?
Is it the case that the media supervisory body in North Rhine-Westphalia will be used by the government for nine years ?
Is it the case that in North Rhine-Westphalia , one party decides on whether reporting is or is not balanced ?
If that is the case , then the situation is the same as it is in Hungary .
I do not think that this is what you want .
I would also like to ask why Mrs Merkel is criticising the Hungarian legislation , because she is a member ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , I am sure you will allow me five minutes .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
Firstly , Mrs Merkel asked whether the law complied with European regulations in all respects and Mr Orbán agreed to change the provisions of the law if necessary , following the assessment by the Commission .
I think that this is an approach which is correct , honest , open and fair to everyone involved .
My second point concerns the state media law in North Rhine-Westphalia .
Radio programmes are not allowed to present only one opinion or to cover only one party , group , lobby , religious denomination or philosophy under the terms of paragraph 31 .
( Heckling )
The law also states that the head of the state of North Rhine-Westphalia can give instructions to the state media authority and can impose fines of up to EUR 500 000 .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to turn to the head of the Hungarian Government .
Welcome to the European Parliament , Mr Orbán .
Hungary has taken on its Presidency at a time that is certainly not easy , and the programme you have presented to us is certainly full of major challenges .
You asked us several times , as Parliament , to help fulfil this programme , and believe me , Mr Orbán , we really are here in order to support what is good and what is European in your programme .

Your speech also included a call for a strong Europe , however , and I must say that it is not entirely clear to me where your European-ness begins and what its limits are , because I cannot otherwise explain why your government has begun its Presidency with the presentation of a non-existent territorial unit , instead of presenting , as the presiding country , a new vision of Europe .
Therefore , Mr Orbán , I hope that the good European-ness in you continues to develop positively and that there will also be positive Hungarian-ness in you .
Madam President , for a long time , our Union has taken the path of setting target after target , but no one looks back to see if all these targets were achieved or properly implemented .
Growth , jobs , a citizen-friendly Union : they all tend to become eternal objectives .
We are actually at the point where we should recognise the failure of at least some of our policies and of the one-size-fits-all solutions that are too often applied .
To stimulate the EU 's economic growth , maybe we should start thinking outside the box and accepting the various interests and specificities of our 27 Member States .
The Commission is proposing , and the Presidency endorses , a mere coordination of our economic policies .
This might turn into a trap for exactly the economic growth we are seeking , with solely macro-economic and financial targets and policies .
While we have an incomplete single market , red tape burdening companies and entrepreneurs , and a messy labour market , our EU growth might turn out to be that of a whale in a pool of barracudas - because such is the global market in today 's crisis context .
With regard to other eternal objectives set out in the Presidency programme , such as achieving a common energy policy , what we need is to identify energy interests and needs common to all the Member States .
I am not convinced that spending billions of euro on gigantic infrastructure projects is the answer .
Mr Orbán also talked about enlargement : I hope this does not mean the Hungarian approach of granting citizenship to all Hungarian ethnic citizens in the neighbouring countries .
Is EU enlargement in a Eurosceptic context and an economic crisis actually realistic ?
In conclusion , I wish us all good luck .
( NL ) Madam President , the Hungarian Presidency has got off to an unfavourable start .
The example which the Hungarian Government has set to the European Union with its new media law has not been a positive one .
The new law gives a media watchdog very extensive powers , which casts a worrying shadow on the beginning of the Hungarian Presidency .
This law is only one element in a series of worrying developments in Hungary .
Where a single political party dominates , other voices grow silent .
The 17th century French author , Rochefoucauld , warned of this a long time ago : ' Few are wise enough to prefer useful reproof to treacherous praise ' .
My advice to the Presidency is that it should take Rochefoucauld 's words seriously , in its capacities both as the holder of the EU Presidency and the Hungarian Government .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , welcome to Strasbourg , Mr Orbán .

As Mr Cohn-Bendit has pointed out , everyone here loves Hungary but not everyone loves the Hungarian Government , as you will have realised .

We , on the other hand , love Hungary , think highly of the Hungarian Government and , what is more , are shamelessly cheering your party on .
Why are we cheering on the Fides party ? Because that party has been a decisive factor in Hungary 's return to a democratic life after a long and terrible dictatorship .
We are cheering Fides on because over the years , over all these years , it has pursued the same values of democracy and freedom , both in government and in opposition .
We are cheering Fides on because Fides is today the only real alternative to the populist trend that seems to be taking hold in so many countries of the European Union .
We are also cheering Fides on because , through the priorities that you have mentioned , Fides makes us realise that the battle for a united , free Europe is not yet over .
We are backing you , Mr Orbán , and we are cheering you on , because that means cheering Hungary on and cheering Europe on as a whole .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ever since the founding of the European Union , one of its most important issues and challenges has been energy security .
For a long time , we believed that the most critical point was the reduction of dependence on energy sources .
The economic crisis , however , has clearly demonstrated that what is most important is accessibility and affordability .
This was the first year in Hungary when more people froze to death in unheated flats than in the streets .
A couple of days ago , the residents of a block of flats requested their heating to be turned off because they could no longer afford it .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is very important for us to address the issue of energy security as one of the effects of the economic crisis , and we must do this on the background of our outdated energy infrastructure .
The most important task of the Hungarian Presidency at the energy summit will be to lay down the foundations of this new infrastructure , not just in respect of gas , but electrical lines as well .
Our task is not to upgrade the networks of the past , but to guarantee investors and capital binding capabilities for the intelligent energy networks of the future .
The task before the Hungarian Government is to convince all Member States to support unanimously the increase in nuclear waste management security .
We must guarantee that all this remains within the limits of affordability .
Mr President , we cannot approach this with a hot head and cold blood , but only with a clear head , a clear heart and a clear vision .
We will be your partners in solving these issues .
( FR ) Madam President , the peoples of Europe are experiencing a grave , destabilising crisis .
I think that it is precisely at times like this that we need to go back to the fundamental values underpinning Europe .
The first of these values is the fight against all forms of nationalism .
Let me tell you how concerned I am when , having offered the Hungarian nationality to the Magyar populations , you now raise the possibility of giving them the right to vote , in breach of all international conventions .
The second of these European values is the defence of democracy and freedoms .
Now , since you came into office , a number of measures have been taken that are of such a nature as to cause us concern and regarding which you may now provide us with answers .
The powers of the constitutional court have been restricted , the independence of the European Central Bank has been undermined - in contradiction of the Treaty of Accession - and you are getting people to vote on a media law which , under the pretext of transposing a European directive , is , in actual fact , a law that destroys press freedoms , as the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) recently showed .
You explain that your law is similar to that of other Member States , but even if some of them - and I am thinking in particular of my own country - clearly still have progress to make , in what other country of the Union does any part of the media risk a fine of EUR 700 000 for infringing moral standards ?
The affair is now in the hands of the European Commission , which must talk to us about the main issue , and beyond merely legal issues , whether this law infringes freedom of expression .
Were that the case , the Union has instruments for guaranteeing respect for fundamental rights .
This is the message of firmness that we are now awaiting .
( FR ) Madam President , Prime Minister , Hungary is a European country .
It likes the European Parliament .
Hungary has chosen as President of the Republic one of our very fine former colleagues , Mr Pál Schmitt , and you have been wise enough to choose as one of your ministers a very fine colleague of ours , Mrs Győri , to whom I pay tribute .
Democracy works .
You have been elected .
Well done !
Europe works .
A law of yours is challenged and you reply , ' I will change it ' .
You are challenged on the application of values , and you have stated that , when reforming the constitution , which is the former communist constitution , you will adopt the entire Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Well done !
Politics works .
Should anyone doubt the fact , we have a political Europe .
That is good news !
You face economic challenges .
You are putting the economy of Hungary right , Mr Orbán .
You are probably the prime minister we need at this time .
It is not the first time you have done this , though .
You already did it in 1998 , when you were prime minister then as well .
I will end by drawing your attention to Croatia . You want it to join .
We are in favour of that .
I would draw your attention to the misgivings of certain groups of European public opinion and suggest that you undertake a widespread publicity campaign capable of proving to European citizens that Croatia meets all the criteria for membership , because we no longer follow the course of block membership as we did after the fall of the Berlin Wall .

( ES ) Madam President , Mr Orbán , on behalf of the Spanish Socialists , I would like to greet the Hungarian Presidency , the third Presidency in the first trio of presidencies under the new dynamic established in the Treaty of Lisbon .
That requires consistency with the common script established by the three countries - Spain , Belgium and Hungary - but also , and most importantly , consistency with the principles , values and objectives established in the Treaty of Lisbon itself , because the absolute priority is to implement it and fulfil it .
Some of these common values and principles are established in Article 2 of the Treaty of Lisbon : respect for freedoms , protection for minors and pluralism , which includes pluralism of information .
I therefore share the concern that you expressed that such important objectives for the Hungarian Presidency may be distorted by national debates or peculiarities rather than by what unites us .
The Hungarian media law absolutely cannot and must not be approached as an internal market issue in the national transposition of the Audiovisual Services Directive .
It is a debate that does not affect just the internal market or only Hungary .
It affects fundamental rights and the whole of the Union , and I therefore join those who are convinced that the only way that we will come out of this crisis is through greater integration , not through competitive nationalism .
The Presidency will be judged based on its willingness to take the lead in fulfilling the values and objectives of the Treaty of Lisbon , remaining loyal to the commitments made in belonging to the European Union .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( ES ) Madam President , I listened very carefully to what Mr López Aguilar said , and I would like to remind him that the Spanish Government - run by his party - is currently preparing to create a State Media Council and a law against unequal treatment and discrimination , which hang over any possible political adversaries like the Sword of Damocles , and could interfere with media content .
Therefore , Mr López Aguilar , before you criticise others - and I am not going to go into detail on the issue of the Hungarian law - give some thought to the fact that it is not good to use two different yardsticks and have double standards .
Do not forget that you were Minister for Justice .


( ES ) Madam President , it is not the first time that we have heard entirely inappropriate comparisons being made here between a law that has caused concern across the European Union and also among very distinguished representatives of your own political family , Mr Vidal-Quadras , and laws that respect the rights to freedom of expression , free formation of public opinion in a pluralist society and , of course , pluralism in the media .
The latter establish audiovisual councils , whose task is not in any way to interfere with pluralism in the media and absolutely not to predetermine media content .
That is the case in Spain , just like many other examples that have been given in this House , which have nothing to do with the subject that has caused so much concern during this discussion .
Madam President , the Hungarian Presidency has a unique opportunity to put into practice energy security for Europe .
There will be two consecutive presidencies - Hungarian and Polish - with strong political determination to use all the possibilities at hand .
The issues we face so far are a consolidation or monopoly of supply and transit , lack of an interconnected single market and particular vulnerability on the Union 's eastern flank .
What we expect from the Hungarian Presidency is that it will utilise the geometry of the Union in the form of a triangle : a north-south Baltic-Adriatic axis or corridor , with energy ports in Poland and Croatia , complemented by the Caspian gas pipeline supplying the EU directly , separately and independently , initially from Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan .
The Southern Corridor should obviously include the Nabucco project .
So a new source of energy security for Europe is the ultimate challenge for the Hungarian Presidency .
The three imperative aims are to build interconnectors , to ensure adequate funding and to boost the external dimension of EU energy policy because energy is a public good for the Union , it needs to be Europeanised , the policy must be based on solidarity , and our political will should guarantee its implementation .


Madam President , this is a time when we should be discussing issues of economic governance , employment rights and the environment , all high on our agenda ; a time when we should be celebrating the fantastic achievement of Hungary which , for the first time , has the honour of the Presidency , and it saddens me that the Hungarian people - who stood up against oppression and fought for so long for democracy - are now having that democracy challenged by the new media laws in Hungary and the protectionist policies used to attack foreign companies , casting a shadow on what should be a proud period for the Hungarian people .
This is a critical time for our citizens and we must carry on with our programme of reform .
However , we must also be vigilant to ensure that Europe does not slip back into the dark days of the past .
We must continue to oppose and highlight any forms of state censorship and protectionist policies .
We must reach out to the Hungarian people , but our future democracy cannot be compromised .
( HU ) Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the launch of a European Roma strategy was first put forward by the European Parliament in early 2008 and , in the three years that have passed since then , a whole array of EU actions and documents have proven the importance of combating the segregation and poverty afflicting the 12 million Roma of Europe .
As a Member of Fidesz and the only Roma Member of the European Parliament , I am proud that the new Hungarian Government was the first among the Council presidencies to fully embrace the commitment and mission of providing a solution at European level .
The social inclusion of the Roma is one of the most serious challenges in Europe today and , at the same time , one of the most promising opportunities for our ageing societies .
In fact , the integration of the Roma is not only a human rights obligation , but also an economic necessity .
As the European Parliament 's rapporteur on this subject , I sincerely hope that , based on Parliament 's report and the Commission 's upcoming communication , the Hungarian Presidency will manage to draw up a strategy which is truly in the spirit of the Community , and which will define this target group on economic , rather than ethnic grounds , while reinforcing the implementation of the directives on equal opportunities , taking account of the territorial nature of segregation and mitigating the disadvantage of citizens living in micro-regions .
Prime Minister , this process is about much more than European Roma strategy : it is about mutual trust , and about Europe 's ability to build a community of values and overcome the challenges lying before us .
I wish you best of luck for these tremendous tasks .
Taves bahtalo !
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the press in Europe is under no obligation to take a balanced approach .
In Europe , we have freedom of the press .
If a body is established in Europe which aims to bring about a so-called balance by means of penalties which cannot be followed up , by ending the protection of sources and by creating an atmosphere of fear , I expect the Commission , which is the guardian of European law , to react .
However , it should not respond hesitantly , half-heartedly and defensively .
Instead it should take rapid , decisive and effective action .
It has not yet done this .
Mr Orbán , I have not been convinced by the aggressive and unreasonable defence mounted by your allies .
We thought you were a liberal .
I can imagine that this does not always feel good .
However , I would like to ask you how you feel now , when you are seen as someone who is leading a country away from democracy and towards totalitarianism ?
( Heckling )
How do you feel as someone who has to be defended by the people sitting up there , Mr Orbán ?
That is what I would like to ask you .
( PT ) Madam President , first and foremost , I would like to say that on this day , when we are discussing the Hungarian Presidency , without prejudice to our ability to debate all the intended topics , Parliament should be focusing on the problems of the European Union , and this is something that is not being done here .
Moreover , in order to concentrate on the problems of the EU , it is necessary to read this carefully and discuss whether it agrees with the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency or not , instead of discussing points or issues pertaining to life within Hungary , which can be regulated as part of a normal , healthy relationship between the Commission and the Hungarian Government and Parliament , if at all .
I would therefore like to say here that , quite apart from the priority that the Hungarian Presidency is , naturally , going to give to topical economic and financial issues , I am very pleased to see that the Hungarian plan for the next six months is very clear and ambitious , putting the focus and priority on three matters that will be vital to the future of Europe : food , which is entering a phase of serious global crisis ; energy , which is crucial for our security and economic sustainability ; and water , of which little has been said here , but which is the next challenge that Europeans will have to face after food .


I hope that you will succeed in your objectives .
( BG ) Madam President , Prime Minister , 2011 will be the first year in which the European Union will be headed by two countries from Central and Eastern Europe , Hungary and Poland .
These two countries have made a special contribution to the development of democracy , to the integration of Europe , and it seems to me that these merits these two countries possess should not be frittered away in the way demonstrated today .
Mr Orbán , I implore you to free yourself from the shadow that has fallen over your Presidency .
Then we will be able to say at the end of it that you fulfilled your priorities .
They are what I want us to concentrate on , and not the resolutions and actions of the Hungarian parliament , which fall short of the basic principles of democracy .
You will have the full support of the socialists and the democrats in the completion of negotiations with Croatia during your Presidency .
In your submission I heard nothing about a review of neighbourhood policy .
I hope that you will show the necessary initiative , and hope that in this period , you will be able to put Belarus back on track for democratic development .
I take the liberty of disagreeing with Mr Cohn-Bendit .


I do not believe that Mr Orbán can be compared with Mr Chávez ; there are other premiers in Europe who are far more suited to that role .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Orbán , it is true that your country has suffered a great deal and that your country , you yourself and your party have made a major contribution to peace and to a united Europe .
As a good neighbour and as an Austrian , I would like to make this clear with genuine respect in what is an historic hour for you .
Creating jobs , promoting growth and increasing security are the priorities of your Presidency and we are happy to support them .
Other priorities include strengthening the internal market , making progress on energy policy , the Danube strategy and concluding the negotiations with Croatia .
These are all areas where we want to and intend to support you .
I would like to thank you specifically for your defence of freedom of religion .
Christianity is one of the cornerstones of European action and European thought and we very much respect the fact that you have reformed the communist media legislation in Hungary which dates back to 1986 .
This is important and it is also the right thing to do .
We think that many of the opinions which we have heard in this context , including in this House , are wrong .
A number of the voices remind me of the sanctions which were unjustly imposed on the Austrian Government in 2000 .
I think that you are being treated just as unfairly now as the Austrian Government was then .
I would like to thank you for what you have done and wish the new Hungarian Presidency every success .
( Applause )
( RO ) Madam President , Prime Minister , as a European citizen and socialist , I welcome your commitment to implement a Danube strategy , a coherent EU-level Roma strategy and , as a Romanian citizen , I welcome your Presidency 's support for my country and Bulgaria in joining the Schengen area .
However , the start of the Hungarian Presidency has been overshadowed by the heated debates about a shameful law which tarnishes the Union 's fundamental values .
This law seems to have been drafted under the political influence of Horthy , Kádár , Antonescu or Ceauşescu .
It undermines Hungary 's credibility and prestige as an EU Member State and is a humiliation to the Hungarian people who are valued for their commitment to freedom .
This law has been sharply criticised by two major EU governments , in Germany and France , which belong to your political family .
Honourable MEPs from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have criticised this law and presume that they will not be excluded soon from the PPE Group .
We cannot accept things moving in this direction . We cannot allow it to continue .
( NL ) Madam President , as a result of the debate on the Hungarian media law , everyone in Europe knows who the current holder of the Presidency of the European Union is .
That has not always been the case previously .
I think it is a positive development that the Prime Minister has submitted the law to the European Commission and it is with confidence that we await the European Commission 's opinion .
Next , moving to the four priorities of the Hungarian Presidency . Growth and jobs .
First of all , the administrative burden on small and medium-sized enterprises ( SEMs ) . What specific action are you going to take on that ?
The digital agenda : China is not going to wait for Europe to catch up .
The second priority is a stronger Europe . We in Europe are currently up to our necks in water .
I am not talking about the rise in the sea level , but about the rise in the water level of the Rhine , the Po and the Moselle .
I would be grateful if you could pay attention to this issue , too .
Next , friendliness towards citizens : what are we going to do about Schengen , Romania and Bulgaria , and the admission of Croatia ?
Finally , Madam President , Hungary has imposed an emergency tax on businesses from other countries . This tax is contrary to the internal market .
When will it be abolished ?

( HU ) Mr President , please allow me to draw the following parallel in connection with the media law : in 1956 , the majority of western communist parties , as well as a large number of western left-wing liberal intellectuals , condemned the Hungarian revolutionaries , and spoke against them in defence of the Soviet Bolsheviks .
Mutatis mutandis , something similar is taking place today .
Many of our western socialist and liberal colleagues are siding with a party of ex-communists and pseudo-liberals against the true force behind the change of regime , the followers of the late József Antall , the freedom fighters of Viktor Orbán .
This is apparent in the context of the media law .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us by no means mistake the once-champions and heirs of the past , these post-communists , with a true and credible left wing .
The two are not the same .
Back in his day , Albert Camus also had to realise who the Soviet Stalinists truly were , and took the side of the Hungarian revolution .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Orbán , I agree with you on three points .
The first is the Croatia question .
We are taking the same approach and we hope to find a solution together with your foreign minister .
The second concerns the importance of integrating the Roma and the third is the European significance of the Hungarian revolution .
I come from Austria and I was born close to the Hungarian border .
I was aware of what was going on , admittedly from the better side of that border .
I was assigned to teach two of my classmates German .
I know all about the significance of the revolution .
However , it was a revolution against the claim to power , against the monopoly of power .
Its aim was to bring about freedom , including freedom of the press .
Mr Orbán , please think again about whether this law is really in accordance with the meaning , the spirit and the aims of the Hungarian revolution .
When you compare it with these aims , you will be able to draw up a better law .
Therefore , I am calling on you once again to consider for yourself how you can draft a better media law , which is in line with the Hungarian revolution and the spirit of that revolution .
( Applause )
( SL ) Mr President , I would like to address a few words of encouragement to , and support for , the Hungarian Presidency and Hungary , a country which is a good neighbour of Slovenia 's and one with which we have many things in common .
I would also like to support the main priorities which you , Mr Orbán , have today outlined for your Presidency .
Hungary can make a significant contribution to a further consolidation of the stability of the region in which we all live and , in particular , to ensuring that the region as a whole embraces modern values and its future .
That is why I am going to tell you something that you might not like to hear : I think it would be best if you let the story of Trianon remain in the past .
Do not use it as a reason to disturb your neighbours or open up old wounds .
Everyone must learn to live with their history .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to comment on a matter that has already received quite a lot of attention here this morning .
That is Hungary 's media law .
This issue , Mr Orbán , is not about Hungary or Hungarian domestic policy ; we are talking about the EU 's fundamental rights and our credibility from the point of view of the rest of the world .
Freedom of the press will be jeopardised throughout the EU if Hungary gets a politically appointed media council and has to pay millions in fines .
Mr Orbán , I belong to a young European generation that has perhaps taken freedom of the press for granted , but today I can see that it is not a foregone conclusion .
I am pleased that you have promised to revise the law if it contravenes EU legislation and treaties , and I believe that even now , you are able to go back home and carry out revisions .
You owe that to all those who have fought for fundamental rights and freedom of the press , and you owe it to my generation , which has never known anything different .
I believe that we have to build up democracy in the EU , not dismantle it .
( DE ) Mr President , strengthening Europe also means strengthening the Commission and extending the safety net , both from the perspective of its finances and its content .
It means reinforcing democracy in Europe and it means a community of Europe .
The process of making Europe stronger begins at home .
Help us to make progress with ' europeanising ' internal policy and to ensure that Europe does not become weakened by nationalism .
If we want to strengthen Europe , Mr Orbán , we must strengthen our common ground and reduce our weaknesses .
Our strengths include the same legal systems , the same values , the same freedoms , the community method , the internal market with its four freedoms and the common currency .
Parties are simply the instruments of democracy and not the other way around .
Our weaknesses are nationalism , egoism , polarisation and protectionism .
Let us use these six months to make Europe and the community of Europe stronger .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Prime Minister Orbán for his presentation of a very ambitious programme .
I would also like to thank the Members for a lovely debate and an intense exchange of views .
I think that democratic debate is the best way to find the best solutions for Europe .
However , there is one condition , and that is that the interlocutors must have a common goal .
I believe that we have such a goal because most of us in this House want a stronger Europe .
The motto chosen by the Hungarian Presidency is thus a very appropriate and good one .
On behalf of the Commission , I would therefore emphasise that we must support the goals of the Hungarian Presidency .
As the debate made clear , there is a tall order for this semester .
We have to introduce economic governance , find solutions to the sovereign debt crisis , and implement the EU 2020 strategy much more quickly - to name but a few of the aims in the economic field .
However , we very much welcome the Hungarian Presidency 's focus on seeking a better solution regarding the integration of Roma , and on the Danube strategy .
I should like to comment on the issue of how to integrate Roma in the European Union more effectively .
As you know , we engaged in a very broad programme to raise awareness and promote coordinated dialogue in the Member States on opportunities offered by EU funds .
Following on from Hungary in 2009 and Romania in 2010 , Slovakia and Bulgaria will be the focus this year .
I believe that , together with you and with the Hungarian Presidency , we will be able in April to deliver the new EU framework for national Roma integration strategies .
I would like to comment on Mr Cohn-Bendit 's remarks because I consider it very important to demonstrate clearly at this time that the EU stands by Tunisia and its people .
I would like , in particular , to pay tribute to the courage that all Tunisians have shown in recent days .
I am sure that the EU will support Tunisians as they pursue their peaceful and democratic aspirations .
The new unity government should truly represent the wishes of Tunisian society .
It should conduct the country through a peaceful and democratic transition and organise early elections .
I would like to assure this Parliament that we stand ready to provide immediate assistance in preparing and organising the electoral process and to offer lasting support for a genuine democratic transition .
If requested , we are also prepared to deploy the necessary assistance to help the Tunisian authorities with urgent needs .
In answer to the calls for swift action from the Commission on the question of media law , I would like to inform the honourable Members that our discussion with the Hungarian authorities at political level and at expert level is intense and ongoing .
The Commission will send a clarification letter to Budapest this week seeking further explanations .
I should like to emphasise once again that we are acting very swiftly , given the complexity of the issue .
I must also repeat what President Barroso said : that we are much encouraged by Prime Minister Orbán 's political commitment to correcting the law if necessary .
We are fully confident that Hungary will take all the necessary steps to ensure that the new media law is implemented with full respect for European values on media freedom and for the relevant EU legislation as well as the European Convention on Human Rights .
The Commission will , in this regard , act in full accordance with its role as guardian of the Treaties .
I should like to conclude by saying that we have full trust in the commitment and enthusiasm of the Hungarian Presidency .
We have seen the solid preparation made by the Hungarian authorities for this task , with a view to being a very energetic Presidency in this important semester .
We believe that together , we can further the European project .
I am sure that the European Parliament will support this work and will play its role in a spirit of loyal cooperation .
We clearly need to make very substantive progress on our top priorities in this semester .
I wish the Presidency all the best for the next six months .
We are looking forward to working together for the benefit of Europe .
[ Applause ]
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the Members of Parliament who honoured us with their speeches in today 's exciting and valuable debate .
This debate was far too valuable for us to address the arguments put forward in a brief , one-minute reply .
I will adhere to the time limit , but I cannot help but respond to some questions .
First , I will don the hat of Hungarian Prime Minister .
Allow me to express my surprise that so many serious and respectable people , like those who have added their comments , are in factual error .
It would be undeserved and embarrassing , not just for you but for me as well , if I gave a complete list of all the factual errors people , starting with Mr Schulz , have made here regarding the Hungarian media law and Hungarian democracy .
Just to make the extent of your factual errors clear , let me give you one example : the Hungarian media law cannot sanction unbalanced reporting and cannot impose any financial penalties for it .
So what are you protesting against ?
And the list could go on and on and on .
I would therefore like to make it clear that I am sorry to see you have been so badly misled and deceived .
I can now see clearly that in this debate , I cannot even hope to be treated fairly , and instead have to trust that the European Parliament will be able to form an unbiased , objective opinion , which , as a matter of fact , I personally will gladly accept , and will proceed according to the stated procedure .
Nevertheless , I wish to remind you that I believe that Mr Schulz 's idea that the Hungarian Presidency will be gauged not on the basis of the programme presented , but the performance delivered , is a valuable one .
I can only recommend you to follow the same principle in respect of the Hungarian media law , which has been in force for weeks now .
I will gladly send you German language excerpts from Hungarian newspapers and you will see that the fervent speeches of Mr Cohn-Bendit are but innocent baby sounds compared to what the Hungarian press is publishing .
So much for factual accuracy .
On the other hand , I would like to remind the critics of the media law that we are living in the 21st century .
How can you possibly believe that anyone in Hungary , or in any other European country , would be capable of suppressing the freedom of opinion in the age of the Internet ?
During the Hungarian electoral campaign , we largely won the elections through an uncontrolled Internet and Facebook .
How can you believe that , in the 21st century , one could restrict the free flow of opinions ?
I am shocked to see how much you are living in the past .
Similarly , I would only like to note as a matter of interest that the media law you are objecting to repealed the press act adopted in 1986 , during the communist regime , which , until the adoption of the new media law , allowed newspapers to be terminated simply by deleting them from the register .
Nobody ever complained about this in the past twenty years , even though it was most anti-democratic .
I therefore suggest that we continue this media law debate in the spirit of reason and rational arguments .
At the same time , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to inform you that , contrary to some of the opinions that were expressed here , Hungary is in the process of rebuilding the rule of law .
I would like to point out that , although it was not the subject of your debates in the past years , the Hungarian secret services had been used for political purposes over those past years , and this is now the subject of court proceedings .
In Hungary , the police had been ordered to use force against peaceful masses , and this is now the subject of criminal proceedings .
In Hungary , information of public interest was falsified , and this is what resulted in the current state of our economy .
Today , the rule of law is being reinforced in Hungary , after a policy of dismantling the rule of law , which , for some reason , never drew any criticism from you .
Listening to the debate about the media law , I unfortunately had to conclude that it is not really the media law you are having a problem with , but with the fact that , in an act of solidarity unprecedented in Europe , the Hungarian people voted a two-thirds majority to a political force in Hungary .
This is , without doubt , a very exciting and interesting question and I am convinced that this can be used for the benefit of Europe .
Since Mr Lambsdorff also made a personal observation , allow me to respond to that as well .
Mr Lambsdorff , I address you as a European addresses a European , as a Hungarian addresses a German .
Your media law is not one iota more democratic than its Hungarian counterpart , and if you dispute this claim , please do so in an objective debate .
And I will not accept , either from the Germans or from anyone else , that just because we have been living under a dictatorship for forty years , anyone could call into question the Hungarian people 's commitment to democracy .
Of course the media law can and should be criticised , and I accept this as natural , but a nation should not be insulted .
And I would like to make it clear that calling into question the commitment of the Hungarian people and the Hungarian Government to democracy is an insult to the Hungarian people ... ( interruption , applause ) .
Please allow me to refer to the statement accusing Hungary of taking steps towards becoming a dictatorship .
I was here and heard it with my own ears .
What are you protesting against ?
I was here and heard it with my own ears !
You threatened me , claiming that Hungary was moving towards becoming a dictatorship .
What is this if not an insult to the Hungarian people ?
And , I must make this clear , I will always stand up to protect my home country , Hungary .
This is not a matter of media laws !
As regards European issues , if you will allow me , I will now put on my other hat as well .
I consider the issue of the bond market , as referred to by Mr Verhofstadt , to be an important one , and I would like to state that the Hungarian Presidency believes that the formation of a bond market is necessary and inevitable in the long term .
We therefore support the European policies that guide Hungary and EU Member States within the euro area , and the whole European Union , in this direction .
I would like to point out one thing , namely , that we should convince our own governments , the national governments , that they must not use the creation of a euro bond market as an excuse for saving on structural reforms .
We must therefore first undertake the necessary structural reforms , and after that I believe the introduction of the bond market will be possible .
As regards the matter of Tunisia , I would like to point out that we are in continuous consultations with the foreign representation , and we support all democratic efforts and movements outside the borders of Europe as well and , together with the foreign representative , we will demonstrate this with sufficient emphasis .
However , we must not contrast this issue with the global trends in the persecution of Christians .
Both problems need to be addressed .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , there have been a number of comments expressing concern about the turbulent beginnings of the Hungarian Presidency , and that this could be detrimental to our EU Presidency .
Let me tell you that this will all depend on you .
We , for our part , are ready , as am I personally , to follow and nurture both threads of this twofold debate during the Hungarian Presidency .
So if you feel that during the Hungarian Presidency , you wish to debate both Hungary and EU policies , I would like to state that we are ready for that , and will not consider this situation uncomfortable in the least .
Not that we are happy about it , of course .
We are not happy that critical opinions directed at Hungary are being jumbled up with matters of European policy , but we do not regard this situation as unnatural .
Europe , too , is governed by democracy , and we are having democratic debates .
I never expected the Hungarian Presidency to be a simple victory procession , like a beauty pageant where the models parade themselves and everyone simply applauds .
I was never under that assumption ! I am well aware that we will be having serious political debates .
I am ready for this , whatever the subject may be , and let me assure you that Hungary and the Hungarian Presidency possess enough strength to see the debate on both Hungary and European matters through with the necessary seriousness and strength , and that no attacks concerning internal politics or Hungarian affairs will dissuade us from following through with our EU programmes and priorities and making this a successful Presidency .
My goal is to turn this half-year , which promises to be the most difficult one for the European Union as yet , into one of the most successful ones .
Thank you for honouring me with your attention .
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , personal statements may be made at the end of a debate .
Mr Schulz has asked to make such a personal statement .
( Murmurs of dissent )
Ladies and gentlemen , we are acting pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , which we adopted together .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Orbán , you have addressed me personally .
You have also spoken directly to some other Members of this House .
I would like to give you some thoughts to take with you for the next six months relating to the remarks about the Hungarian people and about you as the representative of the Hungarian people .
Mr Cohn-Bendit has described in his biography his relationship with the Hungarian people .
In my group there are Members of the European Parliament who have been locked up in communist prisons .
In my group , there is one Member , Mr Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez , who was subjected to torture in Spain because of his opposition to the Franco regime .
We all have a joint task , you and all of us who are sitting here , and that is to defend democracy , for example , against the sort of people who are heckling us here today .
No one who criticises a law is insulting the Hungarian people .
You can be sure of one thing .
The Members on the left of this House and , in particular , my group , will promise you that values such as freedom , democracy and justice are our common values .
If we believe that a law does not live up to these values , then we will criticise the law , but this does not mean that we are criticising the Hungarian people .
( Applause )
If we all take that to heart , Mr Orbán , then something will happen which we and you both need .
We cannot create a successful Europe by dismembering it .
Europe will only succeed if the sovereign Member States and the Union with its community work together .
Do not play one off against the other .
For the next six months , you have taken on the role of President-in-Office of the Council .
We want you to join with us in defending the values of Europe and not in playing off Hungary against the European Union .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Schulz .
Prime Minister , thank you for your speech and for your presence .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , do you wish to make a personal statement as well ?
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are times in history - I can tell you this in any language - when one simply must not go beyond a certain point .
Prime Minister Orbán , you are proud of the Hungarian people and you are right to be so , but democracy tells us one thing , from Tocqueville to all theorists of democracy : ' truth is not always on the side of the majority ' .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Cohn-Bendit , it must be a personal statement .
( FR ) Are you going to be quiet up there ?
When Mr Orbán claims in this House ...
( Noise in the Chamber )
Are you mobilising the extreme right ?
You are right to do so .
When he claims in this House that we have said something against the Hungarian people , it is national populism ; that is to say , it is wanting not to discuss the content of something but rather to set people against each other .
This is unworthy of the European Union , Mr Orbán .
You invited us to dine with you .
I have lost my appetite now ; I will not dine with you .
What you have done is disgraceful !
Mr President , I rise to speak under the same rule , whichever one it was , that Mr Cohn-Bendit just used .
I would like some enlightenment , and you are far more expert in the Rules of Procedure than I am , sir .
The only rule that I can see on personal statements is Rule 151 which says that speakers must confine themselves to statements made about themselves .
Under what rule was Mr Schulz allowed to give a speech ?
Under what rule is Mr Cohn-Bendit allowed to give a speech in these circumstances ?
Are all MEPs equal or are some MEPs more equal than others ?
( Applause )

Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Orbán was , in fact , addressing Mr Schulz directly - these are the facts - to express his concern that this may offend the Hungarian nation .
These were his words .
The issues which have been raised in the Chamber have been clarified .
Let us retain our dignity .
The Hungarian Presidency has made an important presentation .
We adopted the Hungarian Presidency 's programme , we approved it and we heard some very positive speeches about what Hungary will do over the next six months .
This is extremely important for all of us .
Let us show our approval once again , and calmly go our separate ways after the debate , for this was a very serious debate .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , I gave the floor to the Members who asked to make personal statements .
I should like to thank Mr Orbán for his speech and for taking part in our sitting , and for presenting the Hungarian Presidency 's programme .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
For the next six months , you will hold the Presidency of the Council , and many challenges await you .
You are making the exit from the crisis your top priority .
I am convinced that under your Presidency , the institutions and the Member States will continue to work well together .
It is our duty to ensure the long-term survival of the solidarity and stabilisation mechanisms , which have already shown their worth .
In order to achieve our aims , we will also have to focus on reforming the international financial system .
We , in Europe , have been the forerunners of the regulation and supervision of the financial markets .
The French Presidency of the G20 is an opportunity that must be grasped .
A united Europe should set an example to its foreign partners .
The European Neighbourhood Policy is a key instrument in the Union 's foreign policy .
Thanks to it , we maintain stable relationships with our closest neighbours .
The Eastern Partnership , which is one of your priorities , should not be promoted at the expense of the Mediterranean Partnership .
The Union for the Mediterranean is losing momentum and is equally deserving of our attention .
Europe remains its firm supporter .
What do you intend to do to revive it ?
in writing . - ( NL ) It is a positive thing that the Hungarian Prime Minister has clearly emphasised his willingness to adjust the new media law , should the EU so request .
The European Commission must now be able to do its work in complete independence .
That is the only way to break free of party political games .
Media pluralism and freedom of the press are fundamental European values .
All EU Member States , not just Hungary , have made a formal commitment to respect them .
That is enshrined in the EU Treaty and the Council of Europe has formal agreements on the matter .
We are confident that the Hungarian Government will leave no room for ambiguity there .
I would like to welcome Hungary which has begun its first Presidency in the European Union .
Hungary , which has taken over the helm of the Presidency from the old Member State Belgium , begins its Presidency at a rather difficult time , because not all European Union Member States are enjoying an equally successful economic recovery following the economic and financial crisis .
Furthermore , even more efforts will need to be made for the crisis to be overcome fully , and therefore I agree with the priorities set by Hungary on European economic stabilisation and the issues of EU enlargement , energy and Roma integration .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the directive on maternity leave , which was rejected by the Member States , ought to be reviewed as a matter of urgency , not to mention the uncertain outlook for the Anti-Discrimination Directive , which is still blocked in the Council .
These laws are very relevant to European citizens , and therefore their future must be decided as quickly as possible .
Furthermore , I would urge the country holding the Presidency to pay more attention to the modernisation of higher education , which has an impact on youth employment .
I am pleased that in its programme , Hungary lists combating child poverty as one of its priorities , but I would urge the country holding the Presidency to take concrete measures in this area and to cooperate with the European Commission by initiating a strategy or legislation on child poverty .
So I wish Hungary a successful Presidency in the coming six months , improving the situation for European citizens and safeguarding their rights and freedoms .
in writing . - The media law adopted by Hungary 's Parliament is clearly at odds with Article 11 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights that guarantees freedom of expression and information .
The watchdog established under this Hungarian law has been given the job of ensuring that journalistic reporting is ' balanced ' .
This could seriously inhibit press freedom and leave the way clear for arbitrary rulings .
Moreover , this same watchdog is made up of elected members of the sole party in government .
Such a composition does nothing to ensure either the objectivity of the watchdog 's decisions or its independence as an authority from Hungary 's government .
I urge the European Commission to proceed immediately with a legal examination of this law and its implementation and , if necessary , to take action in relation to Hungary to ensure that this law is amended and brought into line with the fundamental values on which the European Union is based .

Unfortunately , Prime Minister Orbán has started off this debate in the worst possible way , beginning his speech with an anti-communist diatribe , seeking to distract attention from his own serious culpability in exacerbating Hungary 's economic situation , and in the exponential increase of unemployment and poverty which the country is currently experiencing , whilst shying away from acknowledging the violations of democracy , freedom of expression , trade union rights and other work and social rights , along with violations of the freedom of the press and fundamental human rights .
We view the way things are developing in the European Union with great concern .
The Hungarian Presidency has not given any credible responses to these problems , which also exist in other EU countries .
Quite the contrary , President Orbán has reaffirmed authoritarian positions , insisting on the liberalisation of the financial markets , and on the structural reforms necessary to fully achieve the objectives of capitalism which the EU serves .
In 2011 , we will be working on many important subjects , such as the directive on consumer rights , legislation in the field of financial services and intellectual property and preparations for the future 2014-2020 financial perspective .
With this in mind , I hope that the Hungarian Presidency , and the Polish Presidency which follows immediately after it , will contribute to the realisation of these specific projects , by turning our age-old friendship into fruitful cooperation within the framework of the EU .
Unfortunately , the start of the Hungarian Presidency has been decidedly spoiled and dominated by the controversial media law recently adopted by the country .
The EU institutions could not ignore this matter following the letter addressed to Brussels by a large number of European intellectuals .
From the information available today , it appears that certain provisions of the Hungarian law , for example , those regarding the procedures for appointing and dismissing the National Media and Telecommunications Authority , and also those regarding the scope of competences of this body , may raise doubts as to the independence of the Hungarian media .
The strong reaction of my political group , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , is not , however , meant as criticism of the Hungarian nation , but of the state holding the EU Presidency .
The matter is urgent .
It is in the interests of both Hungary and the EU as a whole that it should be cleared up without delay , so that we can concentrate first and foremost on the issues of the utmost urgency with which the entire EU is having to contend .
Mr Orbán claims to be a democrat .
Any self-respecting democrat must accept criticism of his or her political actions .
However , when the Hungarian Prime Minister describes any criticism of his policy as an attack against the Hungarian people , he is making a serious error .
With this nationalist attempt to hijack the debate , he shows that his credentials as a democrat are suspect .
Nobody can deny that the Hungarian Presidency took a turbulent start .
I was hoping that a convincing introduction by the Hungarian Prime Minister in Strasbourg would dispel the concerns .
I note with regret that this was not the case .
Mr Viktor Orbán did not introduce himself to the Groups of the European Parliament as a European politician who seeks consensus and compromise , but as a ' fighter , ' striking populist and nationalist tones , who is ' protecting the Hungarian people ' from ' attacks ' .
However , neither the Hungarian people nor the Hungarian Government had been insulted by the Members of Parliament , but a great deal of criticism has been voiced against the troubling steps taken by Fidesz , including the media law .
It was mostly the Eurosceptics and far-right speakers who adopted insulting tones as they lashed out in conspicuous concert against those criticising the Hungarian Government .
It saddens me that the implementation of the Hungarian Presidency programme could be jeopardised by the government 's attacks on the rule of law .
How events will play out after such a turbulent start will , contrary to Mr Viktor Orbán 's warning , not depend on the European Parliament , but instead on whether Fidesz and its leader will be willing and able to engage in politics that respect European values both at home and on the European stage .
In fact , the Prime Minister cannot have two hats - one for use at home as head of the government , and one worn in Europe as the President-in-Office - but only one : that of the politician who keeps our shared principles and values equally in mind regardless of where he is .
in writing . - I feel proud that my country is the current President of the Council .
What I would like to mention , rather than the lack of democratic commitment on the part of the Orbán government , is the total absence of gender issues among the Presidency priorities .
There is only one plausible reference to the problem , and - at a time when women in Europe are threatened by the aftermath of a devastating economic crisis , as their unemployment is skyrocketing , as conservative governments cut back on social services and introduce disadvantageous taxation systems - that is not much .
Social inclusion , demographic challenges , etc. are all important issues but the situation of women needs to be assessed separately because their problems and needs are different from those of men : on the labour market , and in relation to pension and healthcare schemes , taxation systems , etc .
I am asking Hungary not to be afraid to use the influence of the rotating Council Presidency for the benefit of women .
Make sure that the Council adopts the Maternity Leave Directive as Parliament voted for it ; step up sexual and reproductive health rights ( starting in Hungary , of course ) ; work towards a gender-sensitive realisation of the EU 2020 strategy ; and lobby for a gender-sensitive EU budget .
I would like to congratulate Mr Orbán on the beginning of the Hungarian Presidency of the EU .
We all wish you a successful Presidency .
It is understandable that this desire is particularly strong among the new Member States .
One of the Hungarian Presidency 's stated priorities is the expansion of the Schengen area .
This issue is exceptionally important to the Bulgarian socialists and all Bulgarian citizens .
Since the first day of EU membership on 1 January 2007 , the Bulgarian authorities have been working to make Bulgaria a reliable external border of the EU .
Now , at the beginning of 2011 , this mission has almost been accomplished .
I expect the Hungarian Presidency to secure a European Council resolution in favour of Bulgaria and Romania 's membership of the Schengen area by the middle of 2011 .
When the last outstanding technical requirements have been met in the coming weeks , the European Council will have to resolve to include Bulgaria and Romania in the Schengen area without imposing any more political conditions .
in writing . - I urge the Hungarian Presidency to look into problems of freedom of movement in the field of education and the job market .
Today , mutual recognition of qualifications obtained in educational institutions of different Member States , as well as experiences in various job markets , is facing numerous obstacles .
The existing situation : While the Commission is doing an assessment of the progress on education , I call upon the Hungarian Presidency to ensure that this problem will be addressed seriously also in the Council .
There is a need to convince the Member States to agree on easier procedures in recognising educational qualifications regardless of the country where they have been obtained .
I welcome the will of the Hungarian Presidency to energise the creation of an integrated European gas pipeline system that should end the isolation of some Member States , including Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
I would like to remind the new Presidency that the European Parliament has adopted two important documents about energy solidarity and safety which need to be implemented by the Council .
I hope that the February European Council will agree on a new European energy strategy .
This should also include a plan for the Baltic Sea energy connections network .
I fully support the Hungarian Presidency 's priorities on account of their pro-European nature and similarity to the interests of the EU as a whole .
I represent the country which will take over the Presidency next , and I should like to make it known that we will cooperate closely with the Hungarian Presidency .
Good cooperation will facilitate smooth hand-overs of the Presidency between the Polish-Cypriot-Danish trio .
I am particularly pleased at Hungary 's declaration regarding its commitment to the development of the Eastern Partnership and the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Similarly , I would like to express my delight at the fact that EU enlargement is one of the Hungarian Presidency 's priorities .
The fact that Hungary and Poland hold such similar positions on EU enlargement should help ensure continuity during the Polish Presidency as far as this issue is concerned .
I hope that the Eastern Partnership summit to be held in May will not merely summarise the implementation of this initiative over the two years of its existence , but that it will bring tangible results with regard to visa-free travel , trade and energy .
Similarly to the Hungarian Presidency , Poland believes that there is a need for a joint approach to freedom and justice , by strengthening the protection of personal data and promoting civil rights and common values throughout the EU .
One of the priorities calls for the sustainable use of resources , thus acting as a continuation of the goals of the previous Spanish and Belgian Presidencies , and reflecting the Commission 's extensive efforts in this area .
It is vital for planned measures to take into account the diverse conditions and potentials which exist in the Member States .
I congratulate Hungary on its programme which gives priority to economic growth and Europe 's position globally .
One of the important dossiers on the Presidency 's agenda relates to the expansion of the Schengen area through the admission of Romania and Bulgaria .
Accession to the Schengen area is a commitment which Romania has also assumed with full responsibility .
We have made considerable efforts to make the EU 's external border secure and , as is confirmed by the reports on my country 's accession to the Schengen area , Romania is ready to implement the Schengen acquis .
Romania should be assessed fairly according to the same criteria which were applied to the states which joined the Schengen area before us .
I am confident of the Hungarian Presidency 's support on this matter .
I thank you for declaring your support for extending the Schengen area to Bulgaria and Romania .
It is true what you were saying about the huge efforts that have been made .
Romania has made major financial and human efforts .
The systems implemented with the support of the Franco-German group EADS are the most state-of-the-art in the European Union .
I firmly believe that Romania 's maritime border , for instance , is incomparably better protected than similar borders for other Schengen Member States .
All the evaluation reports for Romania are positive .
It has met all the Schengen acquis requirements .
It is normal to expect a reply in line with EU rules .
The support of the Hungarian Presidency is required in this process .
Another important item on the Presidency 's agenda relates to the promotion of the Danube strategy .
The Danube strategy is a common project where all the partners must fulfil their commitments to ensure it works and achieves the adopted objectives .
A programme must be put into action for implementing the strategic priorities without increasing the allocation of funds from the existing budget lines .
The earmarked resources must be supplemented both by the contribution from the states involved and by the possibility of reallocating unused funds from other segments .
I welcome that the Hungarian Presidency of the Council of the European Union has included in its six-monthly programme support for the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen area as a real achievement of European integration for the Union 's citizens .
According to the document presented by Prime Minister Victor Orbán , the Hungarian Presidency declares : ' We would like to admit these two Member States to the Schengen area as soon as they fulfil all the necessary conditions ' .
This statement is being made at a time when the discussion about accession to the Schengen area by both countries , which joined the EU in 2007 , appears to be switching from a strictly technical to a political tone .
There is talk already about postponing it , even if the technical requirements were met in full .
This is why I think that an effort needs to be made to build up trust .
Therefore , dialogue remains an essential tool .
Without it , Europeans from Bulgaria or Romania will still feel excluded and discriminated against .
Do we really need second-class European citizens ?
Sport is one of the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
This is very important news for the sporting world and , above all , for the millions of Europeans who are involved in sport and recreational physical activity at grassroots level .
Despite the new legal framework , there has been little progress in creating better funding conditions for sporting ventures in Europe .
Amateur sport is passed over in public debate and social research , and the role it plays in preventing disease and improving Europeans ' living conditions and quality of life is underestimated .
The benefits of regular exercise can be grouped under four headings : health benefits , social benefits , economic benefits and political benefits .
Amateur sport makes it possible for many political goals to be achieved , including the promotion of health and culture , education , social integration , combating discrimination , reducing crime and fighting drug addition .
Sport also means lower healthcare costs .
I would therefore like to draw the Hungarian Presidency 's attention to the European Parliament 's written declaration 62 / 2010 on increased European Union support for grassroots sport , of which I am a co-author .
The declaration is proof of our commitment to sport and to improving the quality of life of the people living in Europe .
In it , we call for grassroots sport to be given due attention in the communication on sport and for a guarantee of sufficient funding for the EU sports programme .
Greater EU support for amateur sport means support for a healthier lifestyle for millions of Europeans .
The central motto of the Presidency as a whole is ' Strong Europe ' .
The crisis and the decisions that have been made to date at Member State level have shown that we need more Europe , not less , in order to meet the challenges we currently face .
Combating the crisis , overcoming the problem of the Member States ' public debt and continuing measures aimed at ensuring the stability of the euro area and strengthening economic governance should be priorities .
The Hungarian Presidency is counting on the ' human touch ' and , above all , on a rise in employment levels .
Europe is aiming to achieve sustainable growth , which should be secured by means of job creation and social inclusion .
In view of the need for increased security of gas supplies , we should take steps to establish a common energy policy as soon as possible .
The regional aspect that can be seen in the programme of activities is to be welcomed .
This includes , inter alia , the Danube strategy , a strategy on the Roma and issues relating to the Eastern Partnership .
There are also plans to extend the Schengen area to include Romania and Bulgaria .
This is a matter of vital importance , since all the Member States should enjoy the same rights .
There is also talk of concluding accession negotiations with Croatia during the Hungarian Presidency .
A responsible enlargement policy should bring stability , peace and cohesion to the continent of Europe .
The point of reference for the work undertaken by the Belgian Presidency was Europe , in the full meaning of the term .
This does not mean that the national approach , which is likely to be the one chosen by Hungary , cannot harmonise or even contrast with the Community approach .
In connection with the Hungarian Presidency , many people have criticised the carpet used as part of the image of the Presidency , especially its part that depicts a map of the events of 1848 . The map in question is that of Europe in 1848 .
Among other things , this is meant to symbolise that , already in 1848 , Hungary was fighting for the freedom of the people living in Europe , including for the freedom of the press .
As a Hungarian of Transylvanian descent , I am today a citizen of Romania .
As a citizen of this country , I would like to comment on the process of the expansion of the Schengen area .
The twelve newest Member States undertook to participate in building a common Europe in the hope that the same rights and obligations would apply to them as to the old Member States .
Romania , too , believed that , after fulfilling the relevant technical criteria , it could become part of the Schengen area , an area free of internal boundaries , at the pre-defined date .
Yet now we can hear talk about some Member States intending to impose further conditions on Romania in addition to the pre-determined criteria .
I ask the Hungarian Presidency to do everything within its power to ensure adherence to the common rules and to remind those who express their disagreement of the immeasurable negative consequences of such a decision , because maintaining the credibility of the EU is in the interest of all of us , of all 27 governments .
Lastly , one final thought about the carpet : the carpet is a useful accessory , and does us a service : people can even wipe their feet on it .
It signifies that the motto of the Hungarian Presidency , ' Strong Europe ' , represents service .
We , the minorities of Romania , Slovakia and of Europe , will be partners in this .
The Hungarian Presidency has come at a crucial time for Europe , when certain Member States are still facing a serious economic and social crisis .
The stability of the euro has to be one of the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency , and I have no doubts that the Council will do its utmost to combat monetary speculation and will make considerable progress in European economic governance .
Secondly , I am looking to the Hungarian Presidency to do its utmost to define , in collaboration with the other European institutions , a genuine European strategy for Roma inclusion .
The implementation of a strategy of this nature is particularly dear to my heart , and I should like to see the Hungarian Presidency addressing this issue .
Finally , I should like to express my solidarity with the Hungarian Government in the face of the controversy that has surrounded the first few days of the Hungarian Presidency , in particular , concerning the law on the media .
Nobody is in any doubt that Hungary is a democracy , and Mr Orbán pointed out that he would be prepared to change that law if the Commission identified any inconsistencies with European law .
I call on everyone to be responsible and to put a stop to this unnecessary controversy .
Hungary is taking up the Presidency of the EU at a time when the economic and financial crisis is continuing .
The basic themes of the programme of the last country in the trio of presidencies , shared with Spain and Belgium , are economic recovery , the integration of the Roma people , an energy strategy , the enlargement process , and public involvement in the European project .
In terms of economic recovery , the programme views the institutionalisation of the financial stabilisation mechanism and the European Semester as essential .
I believe that strengthening cooperation and coordination at economic level is extremely important as a tool for promoting European competitiveness and innovation , and therefore for preventing and / or foreseeing future crises .
The new 2011-2020 strategy for transport will be adopted , along with the amendments to the directive on the transport network that are essential in order to achieve the internal market and social , economic and territorial cohesion .
Road transport , the navigation of EU rivers and the implementation of the Galileo system are other topics that will be debated .
Once again , regional policy appears to be the lynchpin of the entire Hungarian strategy , capable of providing integrated responses to the economic crisis and regional imbalances .
The allocation of the post-2014 multiannual financial framework seems to be the essential matter of debate for the Hungarian Presidency .
The Hungarian Presidency of the EU Council has adopted as its broad objective the strengthening of the European Union 's institutional , economic , social and political aspects .
The Council 's Hungarian Presidency has also committed itself to adopting and launching the implementation of the EU Danube strategy .
This will play a particularly important role in all the states bordering the Danube and will help consolidate the European integration process in the Western Balkans region .
We await with interest the release of the ' White Paper on European Union Transport Policy for 2011-2020 ' , a key area for economic development and the Union 's economic and social cohesion .
Bearing in mind that the debates on the future financial outlook have started , we call on the Hungarian Presidency to speed up the debates within the Council relating to this document so that the TEN-T revision process can take into account the outcome of these debates .
Given that one person in six living in the EU is exposed to the risk of poverty , we call on the Council to consider poverty reduction as a main priority and to adopt specific measures to this end .
I also welcome the Hungarian Presidency 's intention to produce a political agreement on establishing a European framework for Roma integration , as well as its intention to launch the implementation of the European Disability strategy .
A strong Europe , the establishment of effective economic management in the EU , rapprochement with the EU 's neighbours ; we wish to support the Hungarian Presidency in its work towards these priorities .
It is also particularly important for us that the Hungarian Presidency is counting on a close partnership with the European Parliament .
There is one more issue I would like to highlight , as a Member dealing with institutional matters and , at the same time , a representative of the country which will take the helm of the European Union from Hungary .
The Hungarian Presidency is extremely important , not only because of its priorities , which coincide with those of Poland , but also because it is still a transitional Presidency .
The Treaty of Lisbon weakened the role of the Presidency , but this role has not yet been fully delineated , and now is the last chance to do so .
The range of instruments subsequently available to the Poles will depend on the place the Hungarian Presidency succeeds in finding for itself within the institutional jigsaw puzzle that is the EU .
I shall watch its work with all the more interest for this reason .
Hungary is taking over the Council Presidency from Belgium .
These two Member States could not be more different .
One is the epitome of a traditional European state and the other is a country which is still looking for a way into Europe .
I hope that the Hungarian Presidency will follow the route taken by Belgium with a focus on the overall interests of Europe .
The Hungarian Presidency has presented a comprehensive list of priorities .
As one means of bringing the EU closer to its citizens , Hungary has set itself the objective of implementing the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This should be interesting when you consider that Hungary is currently subject to a barrage of international criticism because of its new media law and this law is clearly in conflict with Article 11 of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
As a full member of the Committee on Budgets , I am particularly interested in developments in the area of increased financial supervision and the permanent crisis mechanism .
Belgium has set a good example and has led the way in putting the focus on social issues .
Let us hope that Hungary will follow .
1 .
Patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare (
2 .
FLEGT voluntary partnership agreements ( vote )
3 .
EU-Cameroon forest law agreement (
4 .
EU-Republic of Congo forest law agreement (
5 .
Interim Partnership Agreement between the EC and the Pacific States ( vote )
6 .
Interim Partnership Agreement between the EC and the Pacific States (
7 .
International adoption in the European Union ( vote )
8 .
Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EC and Serbia (
Before the vote on Amendment 4 :
Madam President , I would like to table an oral amendment to this Amendment No 4 by Ms Brantner and me , deleting the latter part .
It should read : ' Calls on Serbia to enter into dialogue with Kosovo without any longer referring to new negotiations on its status ' .
I hope I have your support for that .
( DE ) Madam President , I would just like to recommend under these circumstances that we vote in favour of this .
Madam President , in view of the importance of human rights , I would like to have a roll-call vote on Amendment 8 .
It addresses the surprising and unfortunate decision by the Serbian Government not to attend the Nobel Peace Prize award ceremony in Oslo .
At the same time , the amendment praises the Serbian Ombudsman 's decision to attend the ceremony on behalf of the Serbian people .
It is a message to Serbia and all future candidate states that bargaining with human rights is not acceptable .
In order to have broader support for this amendment , I also want to submit a very short oral - basically compromise - amendment , originally prepared by Mrs Maria Eleni Koppa .
I want to add the word ' initial ' between ' the government 's ' and ' decision ' , so the wording will be ' Regrets the government 's initial decision not to attend the Nobel Peace Prize award ceremony in Oslo on 10 December ; welcomes , on the other hand , the Ombudsman 's initiative to attend the ceremony as a responsible and praiseworthy decision ' .
I urge all my colleagues to support this amendment .
9 .
EC-Serbia Stabilisation and Association Agreement (
10 .
European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias (
11 .
Asthma inhalers ( vote )
12 .
Situation in Haiti one year after the earthquake : humanitarian aid and reconstruction (
13 .
Violation of freedom of expression and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Lithuania ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
We now come to the explanations of vote .
Oral explanations of vote
( DA ) Madam President , we have today achieved an historic compromise with this directive on patient 's rights .
I believe this is the most historic agreement that we have concluded since I have been in Parliament .
A historic compromise that has been cemented between two parties that have been a great distance apart for far too long , namely Parliament , on the one hand , and the Council , on the other .
Through hard work , we have now succeeded in securing a compromise that will benefit patients , who will be protected against unreasonably long waiting times , and , at the same time , we have found a balance that will ensure that the Member States will be able to monitor what is happening from both a medical and a financial point of view .
The result that we have achieved here today is an extremely good one that will benefit patients and the Member States .
I believe there is reason firstly to congratulate the negotiators , and then , of course , most importantly , to congratulate the European citizens on this result that has been voted through here today .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , up to now , there has been too much doubt and uncertainty surrounding access to treatment and reimbursement for cross-border healthcare .
The directive we have approved today will finally enable all patients to enjoy a series of rights and healthcare services throughout Europe .
The aim is absolutely not to encourage cross-border healthcare as such , but to ensure its availability , safety and quality when it is of use or necessary .
We need better information and more clarity regarding the legal rules applicable to healthcare given in a Member State other than the Member State of affiliation .
The current situation is unsatisfactory .
The directive will offer patients an important choice which is based on their needs , not their means , and which is informed , not made under duress .
( ES ) Madam President , the Spanish delegation from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament voted in favour , like the rest of our group , but I would not be happy to leave here without making clear my concern regarding the issue of organ transplants being included in this directive .
They have been included , against the judgment of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , as a result of the Council 's stubborn determination to include transplants in this directive .
I hope that their inclusion does not undermine the effectiveness of the sound legislation that we adopted in this House , in other words , the directive on transplants or the action plan that was adopted very recently almost unanimously .
I would like to say that we will be vigilant in ensuring that the inclusion of transplants does not undermine the excellent work done by such successful organisations as the Spanish National Transplants Organisation , and , of course , the aspiration to save 20 000 lives that we had both in the directive on transplants and in the action plan which , I repeat , we adopted here .
I would therefore like to make this clear and say that we will continue to ensure that the directive is complied with in this respect .
( DA ) Madam President , we are here again today with something that has been pushed through by people who have not been elected , namely , the European Court of Justice , which , by means of a series of rulings , has put pressure on the genuinely elected institutions to also draw up this directive that has been voted through today .
I would say that there is clearly something fundamentally appealing about improving the chances for Europeans to be able to receive proper healthcare .
However , the problems that this directive will create clearly overshadow the benefits that it contains .
What will we do , for example , if there is so much pressure on any particular country 's health system that the waiting lists become unmanageable ?
What will we do if doctors start to send people en masse to a particular country - with prior authorisation of course , but nevertheless ?
It could be Denmark , where I come from , Germany , the Netherlands or another country in the EU where healthcare is known to be of a high quality .
It will mean that the citizens of the country in question will be at the back of the queue and , in any case , that they must not be put at a disadvantage in spite of the fact that they are the ones who , via their taxes , have paid to have a proper healthcare system .
I would therefore like to make it clear that the drawbacks and the potential disasters that this directive may cause in the national healthcare systems clearly overshadow the benefits that my fellow Members here have mentioned .
Madam President , Mr Messerschmidt is right .
This was dumped on us by the Court of Justice but I welcome it , and I want to compliment Ms Grossetête for producing an excellent report , because with this directive , patients will benefit from complete and transparent information when they resort to healthcare abroad .
It is very clear what is in this .
Patients with rare diseases will be able to benefit from cross-border expertise and diagnosis so long as the treatment is unavailable in their Member States .
The directive is intended to offer patients a choice which is based on their needs , not their means , and which is informed and not made under duress , so I think it is very positive indeed .
Finally , it allows cooperation between Member States .
I welcome the fact that it outlaws completely something which could be abused and that is the whole area of medical tourism .
So to me it is another step in the right direction ; it is another step in strengthening cooperation between the Member States and bringing about greater cohesion within the Union .
I think that it is a good day for the patients of Europe .
( FR ) Madam President , I also wished to vote for the report by my colleague , Mrs Grossetête , on the directive on access to cross-border healthcare .
Indeed , I welcome the progress that this text represents for the mobility of patients throughout Europe .
After many years of uncertainty , particularly legal uncertainty , and considerable work on the part of the European Parliament , this text offers a simplification , clarification and codification of the conditions under which European citizens can benefit from healthcare in a European State other than their State of residence , in terms of both access and reimbursement .
I am thinking , especially , of all those patients suffering from rare diseases who are finally going to be able to have access to appropriate specific treatments to meet their needs .
I should like to stress that this directive is a concrete European measure that is geared towards the Europe of the people and which grants new rights to Europeans .
Therefore , it is absolutely crucial for the mobility of citizens within the Union .
( PL ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the directive presented by Mrs Grossetête , so that the principle of cross-border treatment in the European Union can finally be put into practice after many years of negotiations .
I regard the directive in its current form as a good compromise , based predominantly on patients ' rights , but also protecting the interests of the national health funds of the Member States .
For citizens of countries such as Poland , the opportunity to receive treatment abroad means equal opportunities when it comes to benefiting from modern healthcare .
Patients are often deprived of access to rapid and appropriate healthcare as a result of overcrowded hospitals , long queues and waiting lists for certain key procedures .
Time is a huge factor in some cases .
The directive will make it possible for citizens to decide for themselves whether to wait many months for the procedure to be carried out in their own country , or whether to choose somewhere else to receive treatment .
It will be easier for them to decide how to be treated if they are aware of the fact that the costs of the procedure will also be reimbursed - at least to a large extent , and sometimes even entirely - if it is carried out in another European Union Member State .
Simplifying the rules governing treatment abroad can , of course , also be seen as mobilising market forces in terms of general access to medical services .
In my opinion , therefore , these solutions will help increase the competitiveness of health services and , as a result , also have a significant impact in terms of speeding up improvements in such services .
Madam President , I welcome this healthcare directive , but I am cautious because the devil will be in the detail .
It is very important for our citizens to realise that this directive will not come into force for 30 months .
But , in the meantime , citizens can cross borders to get healthcare in another Member State and can be reimbursed for the care that they receive .
So let there be no doubt that , even as of today , there are citizens who are travelling across borders for healthcare .
That is very important .
For those who want details on this complex directive , I have spent some time writing a question-and-answer page , which is available on my website .
I urge those citizens who may be watching on the Internet or elsewhere to take a look and , if I have not asked the right questions , to prompt me because we need to spread the word about this very positive move towards cross-border healthcare for all .
( PL ) Madam President , European society is becoming ever more mobile .
We study , work , relax and travel outside the borders of our own country .
Citizens living in the European Union should have the right to benefit from free emergency medical care wherever they are in Europe .
It goes without saying that we should put in place instruments which prevent what is known as health tourism while , at the same time , making it easier for the patients who need it most to benefit from new opportunities .
I am thinking primarily of treatment for unusual and rare diseases carried out in specialist centres , often outside the borders of the country in which the patient lives .
We cannot , however , allow interference in the shape of the Member States ' health policies .
This is a domestic competence , and the Member States are free to take their own decisions in this respect .
This directive takes certain steps in this direction .
Naturally , I voted in favour .
( FI ) Madam President , it was high time we established common European rules to protect our citizens and patients .
It was also excellent that a separate directive was produced on this issue and that it was not incorporated into the Services Directive , because while this was in preparation , it was realised how many things were still completely ignored or undecided upon at the time the Services Directive was adopted .
This right of patients to crossborder healthcare will compel the Member States of the EU to ensure that there are no waiting lists in their own countries .
The prior authorisation system is necessary : without it , many Member States could have difficulties controlling the costs of their own healthcare system and planning and assessing the future .
It might also have resulted in a situation where wealth , rather than necessity , would have been the decisive factor .
Nevertheless , this will not , in fact , affect very many Europeans .
Most want to receive health services close to home and in their own language .
Nevertheless , such a system is what is needed , and if there are waiting lists , it will be possible to receive care in another country .
Madam President , I , too , am very pleased with the agreement we reached today which I think will ensure that patients will have access to cross-border healthcare in a proportionate way and an equitable way .
As several of the speakers have already said , the current proposal is here , of course , because a citizen from your own country , from the south of England , challenged the system and because the Court of Justice vindicated her rights .
I think what we are trying to do today and what we , along with the Council , have done is to ensure that citizens ' rights are vindicated and we are linking the needs and rights of citizens to legislation , and surely this is what this Parliament should be about .
There are still a few matters that need to be ironed out .
I think the mutual recognition of prescriptions between Member States is very important because this is not just about healthcare , it is about after-care as well , but we have a period of time in which that detail can be finalised .
I suppose the final comment I would make is that , in the current financial crisis , a lot of citizens are asking : is Europe working ? Is it delivering for its citizens ?
That is an open question , but I think today , we can say with some certainty that Europe is working .
Madam President , I voted against this measure on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare because it will only mean another massive burden on the British taxpayer and on the National Health Service .
The NHS is already used as an international health service and is subject to widespread abuse by non-British citizens at costs of hundreds of millions , if not billions , of pounds each year .
The burden falls chiefly on my constituents in London .
This will open up the NHS to yet more commitment to provide treatment for EU citizens who have never paid a penny in tax in Britain .
The supposed means of retrospectively obtaining payment from the patient 's Member State will prove unenforceable .
It is right that a foreign national in Britain should receive emergency treatment when necessary , but no foreign nationals should be admitted to Britain unless they have first taken out adequate travel and health insurance .
Such a policy is fair and just and is , of course , unenforceable while Britain remains a member of the European Union .
This is yet one more reason , if one were needed , why we should leave .
( FI ) Madam President , I think it is excellent that this historic compromise has at last been found between Parliament and the Council .
I might say that this regulation on crossborder healthcare could result in the waiting lists that have come into existence in many Member States being dissolved .
This would also be an opportunity to exchange best practices .
In this connection , it is also important to ensure that the interests or rights of patients are established .
Furthermore , it is just as important to remember that patient safety is essential when we engage in crossborder cooperation , and to ensure , at the same time , that there are proper standards of healthcare and treatment everywhere .
I therefore enthusiastically welcomed this report by Mrs Grossetête and I hope that it will promote public health in Europe and that , as a result , we can save a lot of people and speed up their recovery .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe it is important that we do not use the national tax systems to work against the internal market .
This is essential particularly in the case of cross-border services which is where equal treatment is needed .
There is currently a negative example of this in Hungary , where retrospective price limits are being used as a form of crisis tax .
This is not acceptable and it will have a serious impact on the financial , insurance and business sectors and also the energy industry .
I hope that the same thing will not happen in future in the field of healthcare services .
I would like to ask Mr Orbán to re-evaluate these regulations , because they are in complete opposition to the concept of the internal market .
Madam President , Happy New Year .
It is wonderful to see you in the chair .
One of the things on which we agree , on the whole , across this Parliament - though I know there are notable exceptions - is our belief in a functioning single market .
When my constituents write to me and say ' Look , I am not getting a good service in my constituency and I would like to travel abroad to another EU Member State to get better health services ' , they are uncertain of their legal position .
That is why I and many others will welcome this vote today on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
I hope that what we see in those jurisdictions where patients get a poor service will be patients voting with their feet , within their rights under this directive , and moving to another Member State , thereby pressurising healthcare systems to improve their service and to ensure that they meet their patients ' needs .
However , we have to make sure that we facilitate the procedure under which Member States can reclaim expenditure by any of their citizens who have travelled abroad or are offered services elsewhere .
Once we have sorted out those problems , this ought to be a directive of which we can all be proud .
( GA ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the resolution relating to the arrangement between the European Union and Cameroon and between the European Union and the Republic of Congo regarding forest law and trade in timber from those countries .
It is vital to preserve the tropical forests to maintain the balance of our ecosystems .
It is also vital to protect the indigenous peoples of the forest , who are under intense pressure from the exploitation of the environment by large multinationals and from the felling of the forests on which they depend for their livelihood , for the sake of those companies ' profits .
It is for that reason that I put forward an amendment which states that forests and forestry industries should be in public ownership and under the democratic direction of the workforce in those industries as well as of the indigenous people who inhabit the forests .
( DA ) Madam President , free trade is , in reality , the only way to achieve prosperity .
We have seen this in the internal market amongst the EU Member States , and there is no doubt that this will also be the case where the developing countries are concerned .
It is the only real development initiative that we can and should actually bring into the world .
If we take a look around the world at how the other large regions operate , conclude agreements and view their partners from a strategic point of view , we can certainly see that they are all moving quicker and quicker .
We have a large free trade area between North and South America , in the ASEAN countries , Asia and Mercosur , etc .
The only area which , in this regard , is standing back and is almost paralysed by the challenges of globalisation is the EU .
Even though I support the report that has been voted on today , I would like to say that a free trade initiative with Fiji and Papua New Guinea is scarcely the most impressive result that we could have expected after so many years of negotiations .
What about China ?
What about the United States ?
Or India ?
All of those that are currently taking all our jobs ?
Is the EU failing European workers in this regard too ?
It is a truism that the most prosperous societies are the freest and the freest societies are the most prosperous , and in that we should recognise the role that free trade plays .
Unfortunately , when it comes to international multilateral discussions on free trade , the WTO Doha round is stalled and , for that reason , the EU is now following the example of the US and others in signing more and more bilateral agreements .
We can bring the benefits of free trade to many of the citizens of poorer countries while recognising some of the transitional problems they will have to face in adjusting to increased competition .
However , at the end of the day , we should shift the focus from producer interests to consumers .
Many consumers , in many different developing countries , ask me why they do not have the same choice on access to goods and services that we enjoy in the West .
Well , one of the ways in which we can help them is through greater free trade , empowering our consumers to have greater choice .
Long may that continue .
Madam President , for a long time , the Pacific has been a Cinderella in the European Union 's overseas development initiatives .
I am very pleased to recognise now that the initiatives taken by Fiji and Papua New Guinea on creating an Economic Partnership Agreement will not only help us to trade more liberally with them , but will also enable them to trade intra-regionally with each other .
One of the greatest things to have come out of this agreement so far is the fact that the rules of origin on fishing should finally enable the people in the Pacific Region to actually add value to their fishing .
Some of these Pacific countries import fish when their seas are teeming with fish !
What has been achieved now is that they could actually process the fish that they catch and should be able to add value and export that fish to the EU .
This is the way forward in development and this is the way forward in reducing poverty .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today , I voted in favour of the oral question on international adoption in the European Union .
International adoption has proved to be the procedure most likely to offer the chance of a permanent family to those children for whom a suitable family cannot be found in their country of origin .
Cooperation among the Member State authorities with responsibility for international adoptions is important for ensuring that adoption is carried out in the child 's best interests and with respect for his or her fundamental rights , as well as for preventing the selling and trafficking of children .
The international adoption procedure also needs to be simplified , because all too often there is too much red tape , which deters families from trying to adopt .
Lastly , Romania gives cause for concern , since it is the only country in the European Union to have a law banning international adoptions .
There are currently about 70 000 orphans in the country , 40 000 of whom are in orphanages and 30 000 in foster care .
The Commission should cast some light on the case of Romania , so that those abandoned children can be welcomed into families through international adoption .
( CS ) Madam President , as I was unable , due to childcare responsibilities , to participate in what was clearly an interesting debate on Monday , I would at least like to express my full support now to this assembly , which I have also expressed through my vote .
I very much hope that the steps following this resolution will lead , on the one hand , to a reduction in bureaucratic procedures for the international adoption of children while , at the same time , making it possible to monitor what happens to them in a better way and to help combat child trafficking .
Madam President , many Members of this Parliament may not be aware of a very nasty war of words raging on this issue of adoption , which is most unhelpful and unwelcome .
If we are truly to put the rights of the child at the centre of this debate , which we did in this House and which this resolution also does , then we will do the right thing for all children , no matter which Member State they were born in .
It is important not to pick on any particular Member State but to recognise that all countries have children who are abandoned or not cared for within the nuclear family as we know it and who need other forms of caring .
Yes , there are many families willing to give loving homes to children .
While perhaps we need to look at the bureaucracy , let us not diminish the scrutiny .
Can I finally say that to some extent , those who adopt and are successful are put through much more rigour than those who simply give birth .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my thoughts at this time are with the thousands of couples around the world who every day face the necessary difficulties involved in adopting a child .
Adoption is a value , a genuine display of love which opens the door to a new family for a child who unfortunately can no longer count on the affection of his or her own dear ones .
Those who carry inside them the hurt of having been abandoned are entitled to grow up in a happy environment with people who can offer them a new life .
It is therefore our duty to help orphans so that a bright future is no longer an unattainable dream for them .
The adoption of this joint resolution today should send out a strong and urgent message .
We need to promote Union policies designed to overcome difficult family situations .
Bureaucratic lethargy and legislative delays cannot and must not crush a child 's dreams and hopes of having a family and a happy future .
I welcome the motion for a resolution voted on today on international adoption .
I know of several people in my own constituency who have gone , or who are right now going , through this process and it is a delight to watch the joy in parents ' and children 's faces alike at the conclusion .
To get to this point , however , is too often a long road , in many instances taking many years .
It can , as the motion states , be an overly bureaucratic process and we are right as a Parliament to look for ways that such bureaucracy can be reduced with a more streamlined process .
Paramount in all of this , however , are the needs and safety of the children , many of whom are in great need .
It is right that all safeguards are in place to protect children from being placed where they may be vulnerable .
But what often appears the case is that potential loving , caring parents are put through too much and simply leave the process .
In this case , both parent and child lose out .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have been facing the problem of international adoption in Europe for many years , and today 's resolution finally attempts to bring a ray of hope to a situation that is becoming increasingly complex and difficult .
Instead of stimulating international adoption , the accession of new countries has made it even more difficult for many couples to be able to offer a new home and family to children who have experienced great suffering and deprivation in their own countries .
While growing bureaucracy prevents the adoption of children , on the one hand , the traffic in organs and child prostitution are increasing , on the other .
That is why we are in favour of this motion for a resolution .
We believe international adoption procedures need to be streamlined , and we must ensure that a European adoption scheme is eventually set up to give all children in need a future .
Madam President , from your fan club in this corner , may I thank you for your efficient chairing .
There is a big issue here . International adoption is , of course , vitally important .
It is important that we get it right . I very much welcome this resolution , which includes , as do many of the resolutions that we pass in this House , lots of very sensible , clever and well set out words .
What I really want to say here - and I have learned a lot through helping a constituent , and I am currently helping a constituent - is that it is not sufficient to lay all this out in a resolution .
We in the European Parliament are no shining lights when it comes to simplifying matters and making sure that citizens get their organisations to work for them .
Can I please ask that the good words in this resolution be acted upon ; that we do actually simplify matters ; that we get rid of the bureaucracy and that we effect improvement .
Otherwise , we will simply be trying to reinvent the wheel for Europe , and will end up making the process even more difficult .
( FI ) Madam President , I also want to say how happy I am with this resolution on international adoption .
I have had the chance to follow a few such cases at close quarters .
I know that adoption at present involves a lot of bureaucracy , and it is good that the bureaucracy can be eased in this way .
As a result , the processes can be speeded up and made more transparent .
It is in the interests of everyone that adoption does not involve anything that is unethical or linked to human trafficking or child trafficking .
It is very important to ensure that a child is not a means to an end , but one who , through adoption , finds a loving home and who will be treated as a unique , precious individual .
It is important that the child should have the chance to have a father and mother , to have that right , and that is why , when decisions on adoption are taken , it is important to take the overall situation in a family into consideration .
These are very sensitive issues .
We know that some studies have shown that we carry our cultural genotype in our DNA , but we need to ensure that a child can benefit from a good , loving home and a cultural environment where he or she can grow and develop into a wellbalanced person and citizen .
( DA ) Madam President , Serbia is probably the European country that , over the last thousand years of history , has been besieged the most , first by the Turks , then by the Germans and then the Russians .
Now we have the chance to turn what , both from a long-term historical perspective and in terms of recent history , have been bad times into a bright future .
There is no doubt that , seen from Belgrade , both NATO , with its massacre in the capital city , and the EU , with its barbaric support for tearing out a key part of Serbia , namely Kosovo , from the country , are not particularly appealing allies .
However , they are nevertheless allies .
They are friends , and everyone is well aware of that .
Therefore , it is important to enter into a rational relationship so that we can put the past behind us and look to the future .
For that reason , my party supports the continuation of this dialogue .
( SK ) Madam President , the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and Serbia creates a basis for close and lasting relations based on reciprocity and common interests , and contributes to political , economic and institutional stabilisation both in Serbia and throughout the Balkans .
It also represents for Serbia a new opportunity to transform and prosper through the overall restructuring and modernisation of the economy .
I firmly believe , however , that Serbia must continue to strengthen democracy and the legal state , put greater effort into reforming the judiciary and public administration , applying the principles of justice , while strengthening administrative and judicial structures overall .
I consider a basic condition for the integration of Serbia into the Union to be the resolution of serious cases of human rights violations and the related issue of close cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
Madam President , thanks to your staff and all the interpreters for your patience during this unusually long session .
Faced with a choice between democracy and supra-nationalism , the European Union almost always opts for supra-nationalism and nowhere is this clearer than in its policy in the Western Balkans .
We are maintaining to all intents and purposes protectorates in Bosnia , in Kosovo and arguably even in Macedonia , for the sole purpose of preventing ethnographic boundaries along the lines of what local people there would choose .
It is very difficult to have a functioning democracy unless people feel enough in common with one another to accept government from each other 's hands .
If you want government for and by the people , you have to have a people that everyone recognises some identity with , some allegiance to .
To put it in another way , democracy needs a ' demos ' , a unit with which we identify when we use the word ' we ' .
I am not saying it is simple .
People can sustain multiple loyalties , populations can be interspersed , but our prejudice , other things being equal , should be towards national self-determination .
If you take the ' demos ' out of democracy , you are left only with the ' kratos ' , with the power of a system that must compel by law what it dare not ask in the name of civic patriotism .
Madam President , this is very good news indeed .
When we recall how far Serbia has travelled in terms of the rule of law and international law , and given what Serbia was some 20 years ago compared with what it is today , I think we need to commend and praise the Serbian administration for the steps they have taken to make Serbia a country subject to the Rule of Law .
Even with regard to its relationship with Kosovo , the Rule of Law is now apparently paramount .
In its relationship with the International Criminal Court , the Rule of Law is paramount .
The reforms of the judiciary are based on international precedents and international best practice .
Even the independent civil service they are creating is of a high quality and they expect a correspondingly high performance from it .
The Copenhagen criteria are being adhered to .
So , in all these different respects , a country which went through a very difficult war has now emerged as a nation that is fit and suited to be a good partner to other Member States of the European Union .
I congratulate them on that .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to say one more thing on the subject of Serbia .
The agreement we voted on today between the European Union and Serbia is a milestone on the way to the association of this country with European structures .
Twelve Member States have already ratified the treaty , the aim of which is to open the door to Serbia 's membership in the European Union .
The agreement has my full approval , and I would like to call on the remaining Member States to ratify it as quickly as possible .
Of course , Serbia 's integration into European structures requires full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia with regard to accountability for war crimes , and also continued dialogue on Kosovo and the undertaking of all necessary measures to prevent discrimination against the Roma .
Nevertheless , all measures aimed at extending democracy and strengthening the protection of human rights in Serbia or , in other words , measures which lead to political , economic and social stabilisation in the country , are a source of great satisfaction to me , and they have my support .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of this report because I believe the Commission communication on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias is a fundamental step towards linking up the various existing health policies in Europe in order to tackle this type of disease .
I speak from experience , because my father suffered from Alzheimer 's , as did my grandmother , and I hope to end the genetic line .
We therefore intend to renew our commitment to fight the fragmented action , the uneven responses that exist in Europe and the prevailing unequal conditions regarding access and treatment for the disease .
We intend instead to promote early diagnosis and quality of life , improve epidemiological knowledge of the disease and coordinate existing research , while supporting solidarity between the Member States through sharing best practices .
In this report , we call for improved coordination between the Member States and a more effective and solidarity-based response geared to prevention and the treatment of people living with dementias , particularly Alzheimer 's , as well as the people around them , whether they be healthcare professionals , service providers or relatives .
For any European strategy in this area to work , it is crucial - I am finishing - that the various countries give priority to drawing up national action plans .
( GA ) Madam President , I voted for this report and am pleased that it was accepted almost unanimously .
I must say that I attended the entire debate in Parliament but I did not get a chance to speak .
Therefore , I am using this minute to make a few points .
The most important point is that there is an urgent need for research to discover the cause of this disease .
What part does the food we eat play in the disease ? What part does the stress of life play in the disease ?
What part do our genes play in the disease ? Why do twice as many women as men contract the disease ?
Those are very important questions .
Those questions can not be answered without research , and I urge the Commission to select one renowned medical centre to carry out that research and to answer those questions .
( PL ) Madam President , Alzheimer 's disease is an affliction for which humankind has not yet found a remedy .
Data from medical services show an alarming rise in the number of diagnosed cases , and the trend towards an ageing Europe will have drastic consequences in the near future .
The problem of dementia affects not only those suffering from the disease , but also their immediate family and friends , who are often forced to devote their lives to caring for their loved ones .
We urgently need reports of this kind , in which a problem is highlighted and proposals are made for initiatives to improve the quality of our health and life .
It goes without saying that combining the efforts of the EU Member States , creating preventive programmes and providing social support for entire families are all projects which merit our support in every respect .
We must do all that is in our power to help sufferers and to minimise the number of those who fall prey to the disease in future .
Madam President , what I like about this report is that it is dealing in a multifaceted fashion with a startling challenge and that is the whole area of Alzheimer 's .
You are talking about prevention , diagnosis , treatment and cure .
The reality is that the big dreads in terms of diseases are cancer and Alzheimer 's .
We have done a huge amount in coming to terms with , first of all , diagnosing the causes of cancer , secondly , the prevention of cancer , and thirdly , dealing with cures .
We have come a long way down the road .
Even though Alzheimer 's was discovered in 1906 , there has been a special phenomenon within the whole area of dementia : we still do not know the cause and we still do not have any cure .
However , this report is very welcome .
At the same time , there are big challenges : what are we going to do in terms of diagnosing the causes so that we can bring about prevention and , secondly , introduce some kind of definitive cure ?
Madam President , those of us who have either visited Haiti or saw the terrible devastation that was wrought there some time ago and looked at what happened will agree that it was absolutely right that the NGOs and aid community got together and tackled the problem on the ground in terms of shelter , food , blankets and all of those sort of issues .
But now let us look at the situation a year on .
We look at some of the problems that are highlighted in this resolution - the fact that Haitians only have shovels , pickaxes and wheelbarrows for clearing rather than the sort of large-scale equipment that they need .
Also , the resolution deplores the serious housing crisis in Haiti and talks about the need for a land register and ownership , but also calls on the Commission , in the spirit of consensus , to ensure that a significant effort is made in conjunction with government to sort out the problem .
The one issue that seems to be missing here is the role of the private sector .
If , in the longer term , we are going to tackle some of the problems that we are facing , in the short term , it is absolutely right that we work with NGOs and aid organisations but , in the long term , there has to be a role for private industry .
Madam President , one year after the earthquake in Haiti , 5 % of the rubble has been removed , a million people are homeless , 230 000 are dead , 300 000 are injured , and 15 % of possible resettlement in habitable areas has taken place .
Why ?
Why has only 5 % of the rubble been taken away ?
When you have an earthquake , huge chunks of masonry fall .
Who can pick them up ?
NGOs with shovels ?
European Commissioners with buckets ?
No !
These things can be picked up only by heavy lifting equipment and only one set of people has that : namely , the military - air forces , navies and armies .
But what happened ?
When the air forces , the navies and the armies came to help , the left wing of this Parliament and the left wing around the world screamed for them to get out of Haiti .
So they did !
And now the whole place has been left as it was for a full year .
It is politically astounding that responsibility for this situation has not been accepted , but I place ownership of the disaster firmly in the lap of the left wing of this Parliament and the international community .
( FI ) Madam President , I would like to say a few words about the situation in Haiti .
It is very important to realise , now an update on the situation is being carried out , that levels of coordination have been unsatisfactory .
We need better coordination , as shown by the fact that things have progressed slowly .
It is quite true , as Mr Deva said previously , that the situation has also become partly politicised . It is in nobody 's interests if the situation is politicised .
Haiti needs help and the basic essentials a lot more quickly than was the case last year .
Aid needs to reach its appropriate destination .
When we look at the work at grassroots level , the various aid organisations have done well .
When we examine Europe 's contribution in Haiti , many Christian aid organisations have done excellent work at grassroots level - that is , they have helped people to survive .
We should , furthermore , acknowledge these efforts and support them for what they are , but in the crisis in Haiti , there is also a need for larger-scale and better coordinated action at European and , obviously , at UN level .
( NL ) Mr President , Lithuania is a sovereign Member State .
The country 's parliament has been debating new proposals concerning expressions of sexuality in the media and in public .
Lithuania 's democracy is hard at work .
The country 's president has blocked similar proposals twice already .
The political debate on the new proposals has begun and what the end result will be is , as yet , impossible to predict .
Yet , the majority of the European Parliament have seized on this matter .
Indeed , it would appear that the majority of this House have an enlightened moral compass which gives them superior knowledge of what is and what is not morally permissible .
Even before it is clear whether or not the new act will be passed and what it will be like , the all-seeing eye of our Parliament 's high priests is keenly trained on Lithuania .
There is no way I can support such arrogance .
( SK ) Madam President , the right to pass national laws belongs to the lawmaking body of the relevant state .
This right of a sovereign state cannot be interfered with from outside .
Lithuania , too , has its sovereign right .
In the context of the European Union , it is also necessary to state that the definition of marriage and the family belongs to the family law of individual Member States , and the EU should not interfere in this area .
Protection of the family , the institution which raises children and prepares them for life , cannot therefore be seen negatively or as a kind of discrimination .
As far as the protection of minors from the harmful effects of public information is concerned , the European Parliament , too , decided recently that the various types of advertising that have been spreading via the new communications media in recent years have become a social phenomenon .
This phenomenon brings with it deliberately misleading and confusing information , and the risk of abuse of trust , and the state must find an adequate response to this .
Research shows that minors deserve special protection from certain kinds of information which can have far-reaching consequences for the healthy development of the individual .
I say this as a doctor .
Madam President , here are my remarks on the resolution condemning Lithuania , because nothing happened .
The text adopted lacks the most important point of view .
What I wished to propose , unsuccessfully , as an oral amendment to the recital part , would be : ' whereas the intervention of the European Parliament in the proceedings of national parliaments at the earliest stage of work on any proposed legislation is contrary to the fundamental principle of sovereignty and subsidiarity of Member States and therefore compromises the European Parliament as ever more linked to former Soviet practices ' , etc. as adopted .
The pretext for such a resolution was just one draft amendment introduced by one Member of the national parliament .
I stress , one amendment .
Nevertheless , in the Parliament text just adopted , this fact was stubbornly and unreasonably presented in the plural , and it was even mentioned six times that allegedly there were many bad amendments .
The title of the resolution includes an absurdity as well .
It states ' on violation ' .
There was no violation , only a proposal by one parliamentarian ; there was no decision by parliament which could be blamed as a violation that happened .
Statements such as these reflect an extremely low quality of drafting work , not to say a lack of responsibility by those who drafted and presented for a vote this text , which required far more intelligent elaboration at least , if it was not simply discarded for trash .
Therefore , I voted against the whole thing .

Madam President , for decades now , the Member States of the European Union have been making broad and benign progress towards the principles of equality of treatment before the law , of privacy and of personal freedom , so I hope that there will not be a retrograde step in any of the Member States on this issue of equality on the basis of sexual orientation .
I do not think there will be .
A point that has been missed in this debate , as Mr Landsbergis has just reminded us and as Mr van Dalen reminded us earlier , is that this is a proposal .
It is not a legislative resolution .
As you will remember , we went through our own debates on this in Britain .
We had our own arguments over Section 28 .
I was very unusual in my party in those days in being against it . I was against it even in the very earliest days when it was still called Section 27 .
It seemed to me utterly invidious to use the law as a mechanism to signal approval or disapproval .
When we did that , we put an incredibly powerful weapon into the hands of the state that was later used in the bans on pistols and hunting and so on .
But the point is I am not a Lithuanian legislator .
We might in this House have very strong views about abortion law in Poland or euthanasia law in the Netherlands .
These are , for our constituents , sensitive issues that ought to be properly determined through the national mechanisms of each Member State .
We should have the humility to recognise the right of democracy and parliamentary supremacy within the 27 Member States .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of this document , which aims to strengthen patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
It must be said that today , there is too much uncertainty surrounding the issues of access to care , reimbursements and responsibility for clinical follow-up in relation to cross-border healthcare .
This directive is intended to allow all patients - and not only the best informed or richest - to enjoy a series of healthcare rights which have already been recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
It should be stressed that the aim of this document is absolutely not to encourage cross-border healthcare as such , but to ensure its availability , safety and quality when it is of use or necessary .
European Union citizens must receive better information and more clarity regarding the legal rules applicable to travel to a Member State other than the Member State of affiliation for the purpose of receiving healthcare .
I agree that we must combat ' medical tourism ' , but in order to protect patients ' rights , we must introduce a simplified prior authorisation system for patients which will nevertheless ensure that healthcare managers are given advance warning of any exceptional costs related to travel to healthcare institutions in other EU Member States .
This recommendation to the Council was vital for giving patients the greatest possible legal certainty so that they can exercise their rights in practice , as pointed out by the European Court of Justice .
This approach , however , does not interfere with the Member States ' exclusive competences over the management of their domestic health systems or their national health policy choices , as laid down in the Treaty .
The main points covered are : rare diseases ; quality and safety standards ; reimbursement and prior authorisation procedures and up-front payments ; the role of contact points as ' one-stop shops ' ; the exclusive competence of Member States with regard to ' health service shopping baskets ' and ethical choices in the health field ; and e-health and cooperation between Member States .
The recommendation also clarifies patients ' rights as specified by the European Court of Justice and the improvement in overall legal certainty regarding cross-border healthcare .
The aim is to facilitate access to safe , high quality cross-border healthcare with reimbursement , and to promote cooperation between Member States on healthcare .
I voted in favour of this report because it is true that there is a particular uncertainty at present about issues regarding access to care , medicine and reimbursements in the area of cross-border healthcare .
While it is crucial not to increase the pressure on national health systems or add to the inequality in those systems , patients must have the right and the freedom to seek cross-border healthcare and must be informed about those same rights .
The legal uncertainty that exists concerning eligibility for cross-border healthcare and refunds must be removed , and accurate and clear information about when and how medical treatment in other Member States is covered must be available to patients .
I welcome what the report contains about providing contact points in all Member States to inform patients of the medical treatments available , how to apply for cross-border healthcare , and how to lodge a complaint or appeal .
I voted in favour of this important document .
European Union citizens expect their Member States to provide safe , high quality , and efficient healthcare services .
The Member States themselves have competence for their own healthcare systems , and therefore accessibility and quality varies somewhat .
Patients are not always able to obtain appropriate treatment in their own Member State , and this is essentially contrary to the freedoms guaranteed by the EU Treaty .
The issue of the recognition of prescriptions in the Union has also yet to be resolved , which causes great problems for people who travel .
I do not feel that the free movement of patients and the right to choose treatment in another Member State will encourage medical tourism .
I believe that it may be a positive sign to Member States to undertake appropriate reforms in the area of healthcare services and ensure that the healthcare services provided are as diverse and of as high a quality as possible , so that , if necessary , patients can obtain treatment in another Member State .
The directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare is a vital step towards patient mobility within the European Union .
It is aimed at clarifying and assisting access to cross-border and good quality healthcare , along with the patient 's right to reimbursement by the Member State of affiliation , thus also promoting cooperation between the Member States .
Moreover , there are clear advantages for patients , especially those suffering from rare and complex diseases , since it will be possible to diagnose and treat them in the most suitable Member State .
Such mobility will also enable patients to legitimately avoid national waiting lists , taking advantage of the medical services on offer in other EU countries .
This directive will enable all patients to benefit from a certain number of rights which have already been recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
This is undoubtedly a step forward in the process of European integration , in strengthening solidarity , and in a Europe which is focused on its citizens .
I voted in favour of this report for these reasons .
I voted for this report and would like to thank the rapporteur for the job she has done and for the suggestions .
I support the idea that patients should make choices based on their needs and not according to their finances , on a fully informed basis and not under duress .
Patient mobility instead of national waiting lists is a matter of urgency for European citizens , but especially for those from the new Member States , including Romania .
I also voted for the idea of setting up a simplified prior authorisation system for patients .
More and more Europeans are seeking healthcare in a Member State other than their own , but they often do so without having the first idea of what their rights are in this area .
People have to jump through hoops to be reimbursed for treatment received abroad , and it is very difficult for them to find the information they need .
During this , the first part-session of 2011 , we have adopted a directive clarifying the rights of European patients who choose to seek treatment abroad .
The text , which was adopted by a large majority , provides for patients to be reimbursed for the treatment they receive in another Member State .
This is good news for all those patients who are on long waiting lists and struggling to receive treatment in their own Member State .
To encourage mobility as a way of improving treatment for European patients : that is our aim !
There will also be closer cooperation on rare diseases in order to improve treatment for patients who require highly specialised healthcare .
I voted for this report because this proposal for a directive aims to give all patients the right and opportunity to obtain essential healthcare services in other Member States as quickly as possible .
Furthermore , it clearly lays out the cases in which these services can be used , because at present , the rules regarding reimbursement when using these services are not always clear and understandable .
I would like to stress that this directive must be aimed at all patients - and not only the best informed or richest - and should ensure the safety of all patients .
Already at first reading , Parliament came out in favour of this directive , but , unfortunately , the Council did not take all of Parliament 's amendments into account .
For instance , the Council ignored the very important issue of the treatment of rare diseases .
However , around 25 million Europeans suffer from rare diseases and they should therefore be given the opportunity to receive healthcare in other Member States .
Furthermore , I agree with Parliament 's position that , in order to avoid discrimination against people on lower incomes , the Member State of origin must pay the hospital in the other Member State that is providing the treatment directly , without requiring citizens to settle an account in advance , or any costs incurred by the patient should at least be reimbursed immediately .
It is also very important for every Member State to maintain national contact points to provide patients with all the necessary information , i.e. about the availability of healthcare , procedures and the required documentation .
I voted for the Grossetête report because it eliminates the uncertainty that has persisted for many years over the issue of the payment of costs and the related issue of access to cross-border healthcare .
While it has , so far , been the better informed or more motivated patients that have made use of the advantages of cross-border healthcare , this possibility is now opening up for everyone else .
I agree with the conditional payment of costs based on prior consent in justified and precisely defined cases , when the cross-border healthcare includes a patient stay of at least one night in hospital , and requires highly specialised and costly medical equipment , or there is a particular risk for the patient or the general population .
In these cases , I consider prior consent to be an instrument for preventing excessive health tourism .
The increase in health tourism does not reflect well on many European health systems .
If a patient is facing an unreasonably long waiting time in his home country , however , we should not be surprised if he wants to travel to a place where he will receive more rapid and also perhaps better quality healthcare .
In countries to which foreigners travel in greater numbers for medical treatment and operations , however , there is a risk that domestic patients will be treated only after the demand from foreign patients has been met .
This directive establishes rules for facilitating access to cross-border healthcare that is safe and of high quality , and which promotes healthcare cooperation between the Member States , while fully respecting national jurisdictions .
It includes the fundamental common values of universality , of access to good quality healthcare , of equity and of solidarity .
There are clear advantages for patients , especially those suffering from rare and chronic diseases , since they will be able to benefit from and access centres of expertise in the area of the disease from which they suffer .
This directive is another example of Europe being put at the service of Europeans , as it allows them to choose the institution that will provide suitable healthcare , irrespective of the European country in which it is located .
The Member States are responsible for providing safe , high quality and effective healthcare as needed by their citizens .
This directive must not , therefore , jeopardise the freedom of the Member State to decide upon the most suitable form of healthcare .
We live in an area of freedom , security and justice , where European citizens enjoy freedom of movement .
This means that the creation of clear rules on the provision of cross-border healthcare is essential , especially as regards the issue of costs of healthcare incurred in another Member State .
In accordance with the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union , this directive allows the European public the greater security of enabling them to benefit from the healthcare they need in a different Member State and to be reimbursed up to the amount set out by their national system .
It is important to create a system of prior authorisation for hospital care which is simplified and does not act as an obstacle to patients receiving safe and good quality medical care .
This directive is a crucial first step towards ensuring patient mobility within the EU , as the existence of standardised minimum rules is preferable to recourse to case-by-case judicial decisions .
I welcome the adoption of the directive aiming to introduce new rules governing cross-border healthcare .
The European Union is taking an important step with the new legislation .
This will not only facilitate the provision of healthcare , particularly in border regions , and increase treatment opportunities for EU citizens ; it will also foster general advances in healthcare thanks to research incentives resulting from cooperation between Member States .
I particularly welcome the introduction of legislation to strengthen cooperation in the case of rare diseases .
This will enable those who suffer from them to benefit from the advantages of closer cooperation in healthcare between Member States .
Moreover , the requirements for reimbursement to be conditional on the treatment and costs being covered by the healthcare system in the patient 's own country , and for the prior authorisation of treatment requiring hospitalisation , are safeguards which will help guarantee the stability of national health services .
The directive therefore allows for significant progress to be made in improving health services , by striking the right balance between the needs of the Member States , which are responsible for providing healthcare services , and those of the citizens , who are the principal beneficiaries of such services .
The draft legislative resolution on the Council position at first reading with a view to adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare is an important document , and adopting this resolution would mark a significant step forward from a social perspective .
The possibility for EU citizens to be treated anywhere in the EU will force states whose healthcare systems are in a precarious state to change their priorities and devote the proper attention to this area .
Similarly , this opportunity will put the different systems in direct competition with each other , forcing them to develop and give the appropriate attention to patients ' expectations and needs .
At the same time , it will encourage the emergence of cross-border centres of medical excellence , which will also act as hubs for providing instruction and specialist training to students and doctors .
I regard as useful the introduction , in the directive concerning payment for healthcare services provided abroad , of the requirement to draw up a list of specific criteria and conditions for a national authority to justify its refusal to give treatment to a patient abroad .
These conditions must take into account the possible risk to the patient or general public in the situation where a number of such requests are made .
I hope that the directive will receive the green light from the Council as well so that it can come into force as soon as possible for the good of patients .
in writing . - I support this proposal on cross-border healthcare .
Healthcare should never be treated as a commercial market service .
This initiative aims to ensure that there are no unnecessary obstacles for patients seeking healthcare in a Member State other than their home country .
It seeks to implement what the European Court of Justice has laid down in many rulings .
Moreover , it sets out to provide clarity about a patient 's right to be reimbursed by their home state .
While ensuring high quality , safe and efficient cross-border healthcare , it is important to ensure a proper balance between the right of EU patients to seek treatment abroad and the capacity of national health systems and national healthcare priorities .
This directive will clarify the reimbursement of costs for treatments that patients have received in another Member State and will ensure the good functioning and the financial balance of national health systems .
It is important that Member States can decide to establish a well-defined system of prior authorisation for reimbursement of costs of hospital or specialised care .
It is a strong signal that we are sending out to our fellow citizens by proposing a system in which patients ' needs will have priority .
The European Parliament has maintained a united and firm position with regard to this genuine recognition of patients ' needs in Europe , which represents a first step towards strengthening their right to access safe and high quality healthcare in Europe .
Under the new rules , European citizens will be able to be reimbursed for treatment received in another Member State , insofar as the type and cost of treatment would normally be covered in their own country .
The authorities will have the power to demand that patients request prior authorisation for treatment requiring an overnight hospital stay or specialised healthcare , and any refusal will have to be clearly justified .
Seeking healthcare abroad could , in particular , benefit patients who are on long waiting lists , or those who are unable to find specialised healthcare .
We must now ensure that the implementation of this directive is overseen properly and that it yields real healthcare results for patients in Europe .
The cross-border healthcare issue has been under negotiation for a long time , and it caused an outcry when , in a previous draft , the risk emerged of creating two-speed healthcare specifically promoting medical tourism for better-off patients and harming those Member States which could not have planned their healthcare provision on the basis of a demand that depended on the quality offered ...
The text that we adopted on Wednesday is more consensual .
It allows European patients to benefit from treatments that are not available in their own countries or for which there are very long waiting lists .
The cost of treatments received in another Member State is reimbursed in the country in which the patient is registered , but it is limited to the amount that would have been paid for similar treatments ...
Patients will have to request prior authorisation for some specialised treatments or those requiring an overnight stay in hospital .
However , any refusal to grant authorisation will have to be justified .
This is one more step towards a more concrete Europe of health .
We can only be pleased about that .
There is a general lack of awareness and an a priori attitude of rejection prevailing in the area of access to cross-border healthcare .
Within the framework of EU freedoms , every citizen should be able to make use of healthcare services in another Member State as a matter of principle , if the therapy or treatment there is of a better quality or quicker , and where he pays for this treatment or therapy himself .
Enabling people to access healthcare in another Member State is therefore a priority issue .
This debate has been going on for years without us achieving any meaningful progress .
You can receive treatment in another Member State only in emergencies .
It is therefore not possible to plan healthcare or medical treatment in another Member State .
There is always a requirement to have health insurance in the state in question , which can be obtained , of course , only by EU citizens permanently residing in that state .
This is simply nonsensical , because no citizen can join health insurance schemes in two or more EU countries , since he can have only one main permanent address , and that will be in the country in which he permanently resides .
We are therefore legislatively preventing EU citizens from investing in their health and treatment to a greater extent , if they try to do this .
The recommendation represents at least a small step in the right direction , and I will therefore vote for its adoption .
This proposal clarifies and facilitates access to cross-border healthcare and the exercise of the right to reimbursement by the Member State of affiliation , enabling all patients in the EU to benefit from healthcare in other Member States .
In fact , these rights were already recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
It is a step forward in the European integration process and in strengthening solidarity , with reduced waiting lists , improved quality of healthcare and an incentive towards scientific research .
Rare diseases are a priority , and diagnosis and treatment can now be carried out in the Member State most suited to that end .
This directive is for all Europeans who need healthcare .
The Portuguese Minister for Health is therefore quite wrong when she says that this option is for better educated people and those with greater financial resources : that is what happens now , without the directive .
Portugal has excellent healthcare and cannot remain on the sidelines of this important project : the country must take advantage of this directive to modernise even further and must compete in terms of being able to provide services in this area to all Europeans in need of them .
I welcome the new legislation governing patients ' rights to medical treatment in another EU Member State .
The work of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , in close conjunction with the other political groups , was once again fundamental .
Approval of our French colleague Mrs Grossetête 's report comes after long negotiations with the Council , and will allow for significant progress to be made in an area in which existing legislation was not sufficient .
The new legislation , which only affects people choosing to be treated abroad , establishes that EU citizens may be reimbursed for medical treatment they receive in another Member State , providing the health system in their Member State of affiliation covers the treatment and associated costs .
All of this is particularly significant when we consider that seeking healthcare abroad could be of most benefit to patients who are on long waiting lists , or who cannot find specialist care .
We voted against the directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare , even though there have been some amendments to the initial text .
This final text is the result of a compromise with the majority of the Council , allowing 30 months for its transposition by the Member States .
Our vote against is due to the application of the principle of free movement to health services , without taking account of their specificities , including the need for a public national health service whose primary purpose in each country is to respond to the needs of its citizens .
We should bear in mind that this proposal by the Commission has come about following Parliament 's refusal in 2007 to allow the inclusion of health services in the directive on services in the internal market , because of the crucial struggle of the workers and the public , which defeated that part of the infamous draft Bolkestein Directive .
However , Parliament 's final decision , against which we have always fought , includes a number of concessions enabling any Member State that so wishes to use certain mechanisms to protect their public services .
Therefore , although it may make it more difficult to access health services , particularly for people who are not in a position to make use of private healthcare or who cannot afford to travel abroad , the practical consequences of its implementation will still depend on the decision of the Portuguese Parliament and Government .
It is crucial to improve the situation regarding the right of citizens to receive healthcare when they are in another Member State .
I hope that the fears of excessive interference by European legislation in that of the Member States will not be confirmed .
However , I believe it is a good thing for patients to be able to enjoy the right to medical treatment in another Member State and be reimbursed up to the maximum amount allowed by their own healthcare system .
Therefore , I have decided to support Mrs Grossetête 's recommendation .
I support a patient 's right to seek necessary medical treatment in a European country that is not the patient 's home country .
Every Irish citizen and , indeed , every European citizen , has the right to travel to another European Union country to receive medical treatment .
I would not be in favour of ' medical tourism ' , but I would favour a system that would help retired people who are living abroad , and those with a rare or unusual disease .
During previous parliamentary committee debates , it has often been repeated that this directive is not intended to encourage ' healthcare tourism ' , but just to establish clear rules on cross-border healthcare .
It is important for medical treatment received in a Member State other than a patient 's Member State of affiliation to be based on a proven , objective need , in order to avoid burdening national health systems with excessive costs which would inevitably compromise their efficiency .
A step forward has been taken with regard to rare diseases : patients will find it easier to access highly specialised treatment and will have the option of asking to see a specialist in another Member State .
I therefore believe that the establishment of national contact points to ensure that patients are fully informed about treatment available in other countries and about how to access and be reimbursed for cross-border treatment is important .
Finally , I would like to emphasise that Member States ' exclusive jurisdiction over available treatments and ethical choices in the field of health should not , under any circumstances , be called into question .
The directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare is an absolutely vital new legal instrument which can bring significant improvements to the situation of patients in the European Union .
Patients today wishing to avail themselves of medical services in a country other than their own come up against many administrative and financial obstacles .
As a result , only the most affluent can afford the luxury of treatment abroad .
In response to these problems , the proposal for a directive provides for administrative procedures to be simplified as much as possible , for example , by limiting the obligation for prior authorisation of treatment by the national healthcare body , and by ensuring better exchange of information on medical services in other countries by setting up national contact points .
This does not mean promoting ' health tourism ' , as some are claiming , but ensuring the right to reliable , high quality care when it is needed .
I also believe that the directive can , in the long term , help to approximate the level of medical services in the individual EU Member States .
The good of the patient should be at the forefront of our thoughts while examining the proposal for a directive .
The legislators ' role is to adopt a law that will minimise the formalities involved in accessing doctors and allow citizens suffering from ill health to have a wide choice of medical services .
I am therefore wholeheartedly in favour of the proposal for a directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare and hope that the negotiations , which have already gone on for seven years , will result in an agreement with the Council .
In the end , I voted for the directive on cross-border healthcare .
The compromise between Parliament and the Council is acceptable , in particular , because it recognises the right of States to take measures to safeguard the financial equilibrium of their social security systems , not least through a prior authorisation system for the financial reimbursement of hospital treatment received in another Member State .
This will prevent any kind of health tourism .
The former Commission was misguided in thinking that healthcare was just another commercial service .
Some MEPs are mistaken when they proclaim that ' the Europe of health is now a reality ' .
The very best treatments will never be available to the common citizen , but will depend on relationships and especially on a hefty wallet .
That , unfortunately , is the reality that cannot be glossed over by the directive .
in writing . - I welcome the Grossetête report on the adoption of a directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
Today 's vote has brought us one step closer to codifying patients ' rights into European law .
It is imperative that once this directive comes into force , patients are not left to shoulder the economic burden of cross-border healthcare and that reimbursement is carried out in a timely , expedient and smooth manner .
High quality , equity , solidarity and universality in healthcare must remain the guiding principles during the transposition and implementation phases in the various Member States .
In addition to this , governments should make public timelines and action plans on how best to monitor and ensure this kind of implementation .
Finally , for this directive to be truly effective , the Commission must monitor and supervise the coordination between the Member State of affiliation and that of treatment and ensure that any inequalities and disparities in access to cross-border care and treatment by patients are averted .
As someone who hails from the only region in France to share a border with three other EU Member States and who represents a constituency that is particularly affected by cross-border issues , I am very sensitive to these problems .
Indeed , borders are still too often obstacles in areas of everyday cross-border life .
Europe is founded on the principle of free movement of persons ; this freedom , this mobility of citizens must apply to patients , too .
Hence , the issue of cross-border healthcare is clearly a crucial one .
That is why I voted resolutely in favour of this report on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
This text will enable patients to seek treatment more easily in another Member State .
Above all , it clarifies the rules that will apply ; patients will be able to access more information ( in particular , via contact points ) about their rights or about reimbursement .
This is therefore a decisive and a very concrete step that will bring real added value to the construction of a social Europe and of a true Europe of health .
I welcome the directive on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
The provision of healthcare services in the shortest possible time and with a clear patient focus , which can also be used by other Member States , is an essential requirement in order to bring Europe closer together .
Cross-border healthcare is a day-to-day reality in border areas like the one which I come from .
Against this background , I am very pleased that it will be easier to access reliable , high quality cross-border healthcare and to have treatment costs reimbursed .
I am particularly in favour of providing added value for patients who are on waiting lists .
These new regulations will enable them to be treated more quickly in another Member State , rather than waiting a long time for treatment in their own country .
It is true that establishing the rules for the refusal of prior authorisation is sensible and makes the situation clearer .
However , some cross-border healthcare problems remain unresolved , in particular , for long-term cross-border commuters , who , after they have retired , will have no access or only restricted access to services which are important to them in the country where they previously worked .
I voted in favour of this text , which avoids , in the end , turning healthcare into just another commodity .
Furthermore , I should like to thank the Spanish Presidency for this and for having supported the re-establishment of the prior authorisation system for cross-border and specialised care .
Yes , the European Union promotes the mobility of its citizens and has a duty to legislate on healthcare services .
However , we must ensure that health remains a public good accessible to all and in the best possible conditions , and not a source of growth which pits national healthcare and social security systems against each other .
The directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare is a key step towards abolishing the barriers which patients have encountered in the EU Member States to date .
Its primary goal is to make it easier for Europeans to access healthcare in other EU Member States and , in particular , to access services which are not readily available in their own country .
This is particularly good news for those who live in cross-border areas and , above all , for individuals suffering from rare diseases who need specialist treatment which is not available in their own country .
I am also pleased to see a number of provisions which ensure certain benefits for patients , such as the mutual recognition of prescriptions , the removal of the need for additional insurance abroad and access to medical records .
The idea of creating national contact points , with the task of informing patients about their rights , is also key .
Patients should be comprehensively informed about the procedures for accessing treatment abroad .
They should be similarly informed about the procedures for obtaining reimbursements for the costs of such treatment , which will be reimbursed according to the current costs in the country in which the patient is insured .
I believe that the solutions which have been found will make it easier for patients to access safe , high quality medical care throughout the European Union .
in writing . - I voted for the removal of healthcare from the scope of the Services Directive some years ago , and I voted against the Cross-border Healthcare Directive at first reading .
At the time , it was apparent that there was a tendency within the Commission to treat healthcare as a tradeable commodity .
That is not how I regard healthcare - patients should not be treated as mere paying consumers .
The Council has , however , vastly improved the draft legislation and moved its legal basis away from being a purely internal market issue .
I accordingly voted in favour of the report and am confident that it will improve patients ' rights across Europe .
I voted in favour of this document , because it aims to strengthen patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
It is regrettable that today , there is too much uncertainty surrounding access to care , reimbursements and responsibility for clinical follow-up in relation to cross-border healthcare .
This directive is intended to allow all patients - and not only the best informed or richest - to enjoy a series of healthcare rights which have already been recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
The aim of this document is absolutely not to encourage cross-border healthcare as such , but to ensure its availability , safety and quality when it is of use or necessary .
The directive is intended to offer patients a choice which is based on their needs , not their means , and which is informed , not made under duress .
Furthermore , I agree with Parliament 's position that , in order to avoid discrimination against people on lower incomes , the Member State of origin must pay directly the hospital in the other Member State that is providing the treatment , without requiring citizens to settle an account in advance , or any costs incurred by the patient should at least be reimbursed immediately .
It is also very important for every Member State to establish national contact centres to provide patients with all the necessary information , i.e. about the availability of healthcare , procedures and the required documentation .
I voted in favour of adopting the Grossetête report for several key reasons .
The directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare has many positive features .
It abolishes barriers to treatment , ensures equal access for all to healthcare throughout the EU , marks an end to discrimination against patients , introduces the mutual recognition of prescriptions , reduces waiting times for doctors ' appointments and removes the need for additional insurance abroad .
The fact that the directive introduces wide-ranging access to medical care for individuals suffering from rare diseases , and higher rates of reimbursement for disabled people , are additional points in its favour .
The directive works to prevent medical tourism by stipulating that the costs of treatment will be reimbursed up to the level guaranteed in the insuring country , and if the costs actually incurred are lower than this , they will be reimbursed in full .
The issue of authorisation has given rise to much debate .
The prior agreement of the national health fund will only be required in the case of hospital treatment or expensive medical procedures , and it will not be required for any other form of treatment , provided that they are covered by what is known as the basket of guaranteed services .
If a Member State has not authorised patients to receive specialist treatment at national level , the directive does not create any new right for patients to receive such treatment abroad or for the costs of treatment to be reimbursed .
A key exception is the case of individuals with rare diseases .
in writing . - ( LV ) The directive on the right of European Union citizens to receive medical treatment in any of the 27 Member States is a significant step towards better healthcare in the European Union .
It is particularly timely given the widespread labour mobility within the EU .
When the directive comes into force , patients will be offered extensive information on the new rules so that citizens can come to know what opportunities they have and make full use of them .
Citizens will be able to receive initial treatment in any Member State , and doctors will not be able to withhold treatment .
The directive provides that , in future , citizens will be able to choose in which Member State to receive planned medical services .
They will , however , have to obtain an advance authorisation from their home state , as payment for the treatment will be made at the prices prevailing in the state where the patient is living .
Nevertheless , this is a step in the right direction , for it will boost the availability of medical services .
We should recall that citizens have the right to receive medical services in one of the Member States if such services are not available to them where they live .
This is particularly important in cases of complicated or rare health problems .
For this reason , both my group and I support this directive , because it represents an important step on the part of Parliament ; one that will have a beneficial effect on the lives of the people of Europe .
I supported Mrs Grossetête 's recommendation because this proposal for a directive will benefit European citizens .
The new regulations on medical treatment stipulate , in fact , that European citizens may be reimbursed for medical treatment received in another Member State , providing the treatment and costs would normally be covered in their own country .
This result will benefit patients and significantly cut waiting lists , which are sometimes excessively long .
Our society is increasingly mobile , and I think that , now more than ever , it is important to facilitate mobility among European Union citizens , including in a vitally important area such as healthcare .
I also believe that it is important to draw attention to the new legislation on the fight against rare diseases , as it aims to strengthen cooperation between Member States in order to ensure that European patients can fully exercise their right to receive treatment .
I regard the directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare as a success , and therefore I voted in favour of adopting its provisions .
Health is the most valuable asset we possess .
I would like Europeans to have access to the highest possible standard of medical care .
The directive is a source of opportunities and hope for patients , and it forces healthcare systems to undertake further reforms .
The directive opens up European hospitals and clinics , inter alia , for Polish patients .
It acts as confirmation that Europe is in the process of construction , and that our priority is to improve and promote cooperation between the EU Member States in the field of health protection .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the basis that it has now been clarified that British patients can receive abroad only the state-paid healthcare that they would be entitled to receive under the NHS .
I welcome the fact that amendments seeking to extend entitlements by giving access to ' all methods of treatment that are sufficiently tested by international medical science ' or ' equally effective healthcare ' were defeated .
The burden on the NHS of uncontrolled use of cross-border healthcare could have been enormous .
The submitted document goes back to a debate that took place in the European Parliament in the previous parliamentary term .
The actual Commission proposal contained some shortcomings and risks which might have a negative impact on consumer care , and thus on citizens .
I welcome the compromise contained in Amendment 107 , mainly because it improves the guarantee for patients in cross-border healthcare provision , and stresses the positive trend towards greater patient awareness .
Last but not least , I consider it positive that the amendment stresses the responsibility of Member States for providing safe , high quality , effective and accessible care on their territory .
I also consider it important to define the conditions under which a Member State may refuse to grant prior consent .
The amendment also includes positive steps on interoperability , and supports cooperation in the areas of prevention and diagnostics .
How can we guarantee the fundamental right of all European citizens to move freely within our common area without offering them the opportunity to be treated easily in a Member State other than the one in which they are resident ?
The adoption of this draft directive will finally allow patient mobility , an element intrinsic to citizen mobility , to be added to a legal text .
I should like to congratulate our rapporteur on having reached an agreement with the Council on this important text , the adoption of which has been held up for too long .
I very much hope that the transposition by our Member States of this legislation will enable European citizens , in the long term , to gain genuine access to quality cross-border healthcare .
The issues of access to healthcare , of reimbursements , and of responsibility for clinical follow-up in relation to cross-border healthcare , are currently unclear for the great majority of Europeans .
The aim of this directive is for all patients - not just the best informed ones - to benefit from a certain number of healthcare rights , which were , however , already recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
Nonetheless , this directive does not take responsibilities away from the Member States regarding their citizens ' healthcare .
It only concerns patients and their mobility within the EU , not the free movement of service providers .
If the waiting lists for operations in a patient 's own country are full , the guarantee that the cost of treatment abroad will be paid for by his health insurance company will come as a huge relief .
These regulations will allow mobility within the European Union for those with chronic illnesses .
However , the regulations will only be useful if they can also guarantee that there will be no health tourism , which would put even more pressure on the already hard-hit health insurance companies .
Apart from the fact that some areas of medicine in countries with high medical standards could rapidly be overwhelmed , there is also the risk that poorer EU Member States , which have invested less in healthcare , will be required to pay massive costs .
In this context , we must also not overlook the fact that the system which should allow the social security systems of EU countries to reimburse one another does not function and that debts of millions of euro have accrued over a number of years .
Although the Member States can , in theory , exclude certain types of treatment if they are concerned that the influx of patients from abroad will put their healthcare systems at risk , in practice , this will not be so simple .
We have not even managed to resolve the existing reimbursement problems and the measures for preventing health tourism are unlikely to be effective .
I have voted against this draft resolution in order to prevent social security costs from rocketing .
I voted for the report presented by Mrs Grossetête because providing access to cross-border healthcare is a definite achievement benefiting European citizens .
Many of our citizens do not have access to care in the Member State they live in for the conditions they suffer from .
This is why we must provide them with the opportunity to seek this care anywhere within the European Union , as well as the opportunity to have the cost of this treatment reimbursed .
in writing . - ( PL ) On 19 January 2011 , the European Parliament adopted a directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare , which is aimed at simplifying the rules governing treatment abroad .
I am pleased to note that the European Parliament , as colegislator , played a key role in formulating clear provisions that benefit patients , inter alia , with regard to the reimbursement of the costs of medical care in other countries .
Provisions concerning cross-border healthcare are all the more important as they affect every citizen of the European Union .
The new directive guarantees the mutual recognition of prescriptions and easier access to information on treatment abroad , as well as increasing the scope of treatment for individuals suffering from rare diseases and providing more opportunity for disabled people to obtain higher rates of reimbursement of the costs of medical care .
The European Parliament is also to play a role in establishing national contact points in each Member State , which will provide information on all aspects of treatment abroad .
These points will cooperate closely with each other .
Finally , I would like to say that there is an urgent need for the directive we have adopted , since the legislation on treatment abroad currently in force is unclear and overcomplicated , and it is imperative to simplify such matters for the sake of every EU Member State .
I voted in favour of the recommendation with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare because I believe it is fundamental to guarantee adequate healthcare meeting high quality and patient safety standards throughout the European Union .
Once the directive has been adopted , patients will have to request prior authorisation in order to seek healthcare in another Member State .
This will guarantee the quality and safety of the healthcare treatment and services .
Patients will then be able to apply to be reimbursed for the cost of their treatment , which will be based on the level of costs that would have been assumed for the same treatment in their Member State of affiliation .
They will also be protected , treated and reimbursed for all cases of rare diseases , the treatment of which will benefit as a result of cooperation between Member States in research .
Each Member State is responsible for providing its citizens with healthcare .
This directive establishes rules for facilitating access to cross-border healthcare that is safe and of high quality , and promotes healthcare cooperation between the Member States , while fully respecting national jurisdictions .
Highly specialised healthcare has evolved asymmetrically , with the development of centres of excellence in certain countries for rare or chronic diseases which are not common in that specific place but require specialisation .
That is undoubtedly one of the premises behind promoting free movement in this area .
This directive is another example of Europe being put at the service of Europeans , while promoting solidarity between its peoples and creating benefits for patients , especially those who suffer from rare or chronic diseases and could benefit from having access to centres of excellence in the area of the illness from which they suffer .
For all these reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
The directive will enable all patients to benefit from rights already recognised by the European Court of Justice , while leaving social security systems fully within the competence of the Member States , since it deals with patients and their mobility inside the European Union and not the free movement of service providers .
I am in favour of overhauling the current unsatisfactory situation with regard to healthcare , which is marked by the split between case-law and the national systems .
I would point out that this House took that same position at first and second reading , by codifying the Court 's case-law on cross-border treatment ( European citizens have the right to be treated in another country as if it were their own ) and sharing the Council 's desire to combat medical tourism .
The proposal includes a specific safeguard clause and a prior authorisation system that is flexible for patients but , at the same time , allows for possible exceptional costs to be flagged up .
The aim , therefore , is to strengthen patients ' rights by ensuring the provision of information and cooperation between Member States .
The Member State of affiliation must ensure that its nationals have access to information .
The recommendation for second reading goes further , by taking proper account of the potential of e-health .
I voted for this report in support of Europe 's citizens as it stipulates clearer rules regarding patients ' rights to seek treatment abroad and the opportunity to make a choice which is based on their needs , not their means , and which must be informed and not made under duress .
The directive stipulates the following principles : patients will be able to receive the non-hospital healthcare to which they are entitled in their own Member State in another Member State without prior approval and have their treatment costs reimbursed up to the ceiling established by their own healthcare system .
Information is also a key issue .
Therefore , each Member State will be obliged to maintain national contact points to inform patients about the availability of healthcare , administrative procedures , complaints , appeals and so on .
In the wake of cases tried in the Court of Justice of the European Union , this directive aims to clarify and reinforce users ' right of access to safe and high quality cross-border healthcare , by promoting patient mobility within the EU , and by reinforcing the Member States ' cooperation and solidarity in this area .
It therefore represents a significant step forward in European integration , which is why I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - The legislation adopted today is an important step forward for patients ' rights in the EU .
The Greens believe the final compromise adopted today strikes the right balance between guaranteeing patients ' rights to cross-border healthcare and safeguarding the provision of quality health services at national level .
Patients will have the right to get hospital treatment in other Member States and be reimbursed as they would for receiving the treatment at home .
However , this right should not be at the expense of the viability of national health systems .
The Greens believe the final compromise allows Member States to establish a reasonable system of prior authorisation for the reimbursement of treatment costs , with MEPs succeeding in limiting the list of reasons for which a patient can be refused cross-border treatment .
Importantly , Member States would no longer be able to refuse reimbursement after prior authorisation has been granted , which was a key concern .
The directive on cross-border healthcare that is due to be put to the vote today is a revolution , and I welcome that .
The European Union 's healthcare remit is a very sensitive issue , and it is only right that each Member State should establish its own system of social protection and health insurance according to its own particular culture .
However , why build Europe and guarantee freedom of movement if this is not accompanied by the opportunity to access healthcare throughout the European Union ?
For three years now , Parliament has been fighting to establish legal certainty for cross-border healthcare and to clarify the terms of reimbursement .
A major step is going to be taken , and I thank my colleague , Mrs Grossetête , for the work she has done .
This is an historic moment : the Europe of health is being built , and cross-border healthcare will no longer be a risk , but an opportunity .
Let us ensure that we put this into practice , so that every European citizen may benefit from high quality healthcare .
This is the price to be paid for health .
in writing . - I voted today to support improved legal clarity and patient mobility in cases where people need to travel abroad to receive healthcare .
Ideally , no patient should have to leave their home country to get medical treatment , but in those cases where it is necessary , they should be able to do so knowing what they are entitled to in terms of treatment and reimbursement .
It is also important that Member States ' health services know their obligations , and that they retain the right to choose , manage and provide their own healthcare services as they see fit .
The report addresses both of these key issues , as well as a number of other important ones , including the treatment of rare diseases and European Reference Networks to promote exchange of best practice .
The issue of cross-border healthcare has not always been easy , and I extend my thanks to the rapporteur and shadows for their hard work on this issue .
in writing . - I am in favour of this report as it deals with some of the current problems which have gone unaddressed by governments .
This is not a directive telling Member States how they should run their health systems as some suggest .
It is a report which the UK feels able to support largely because many of the problems relating to earlier reports have been ironed out .
The implication of the directive on patients ' rights is to enhance those already allowed ; in particular , those patients who cannot get adequate treatment within the UK may now travel elsewhere within the EU under provisions which already exist .
The fact that there are likely to be very few people still doing this is because of the nature of family support of those ill ; proximity here plays the most important part .
Costs in the UK should be met where there are reasonable grounds for treatment abroad .
This is not a blank cheque for health tourism ; it is the establishment of current UK rights for its citizens .
The Cross-border Healthcare Directive - which I support - confers on patients unambiguous rights to seek medical treatment abroad and receive reimbursement according to the rates applicable in their own countries .
This provides greater legal certainty to patients in frontier areas , people who are visiting another country , patients with rare diseases and patients facing long waiting times .
However , in the interests of protecting the quality of care and fair access to care , Member States may require that patients obtain prior permission for such treatment .
That will be a requirement in the case of hospitalisation or very expensive or high-risk treatments .
Reimbursement may also be refused in certain , very limited circumstances ( for example , if equivalent treatment is also available in the patient 's own country ) and Member States will be entitled to intervene if there is any evidence of over consumption .
The directive therefore preserves the balance between patients ' right to quality healthcare and Member States ' right to finance their own social security and organise their own healthcare .
Furthermore , I hope that the desire of patients to seek treatment elsewhere is not going to put any unnecessary pressure on high quality services which are the preferred choice of the vast majority of patients in the country where they are offered .
Patients , too , have the right to benefit from freedom of movement .
That is why I voted in favour of the report on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
In Alsace , and in all border regions , the question of cross-border healthcare is crucial , when , for example , healthcare provided abroad is closer to home than that provided in the Member State of residence .
This report will allow all European citizens to obtain information on cross-border healthcare and to learn about their rights in this area via new contact points which will be set up in each Member State .
The adoption of this text is the starting point for a genuine Europe of health which will benefit 500 million citizens .
Certain measures are required in order to achieve the goal of building an internal market based on free movement between the Member States .
The free movement of people and services draws particular attention to the healthcare that the nationals of a Member State can receive in another Member State .
The Court of Justice has recognised the rights of patients , specifically in terms of access to healthcare , ensuring that such healthcare is high quality and safe , and that patients should be reimbursed .
The demand for greater legal certainty in this area implies a commitment from the Member States to cooperate with one another , particularly by recognising medical prescriptions issued in other Member States and ensuring a quality service in their own territory .
I would stress the fact that the Commission is obliged to take measures in order to make it easier to understand information regarding prescriptions and instructions on the use of medicines , indicating the active substance and the dosage , which will clearly be beneficial to patients .
Given the specific nature of this issue , there needs to be a separate directive from the one on services .
I voted in favour of the report by my colleague from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Mrs Grossetête , as I believe that the affirmation of the right of patients to cross-border healthcare is relevant .
The directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare is an extremely important document for EU citizens , and so I have followed work on the issue very attentively .
I am pleased to note that the directive gives patients the right to choose the place where healthcare will be provided , thereby strengthening the common market , which is the main subject of my work in the European Parliament .
This also means that it introduces adaptations which take account of citizens ' freedom to travel and work in any EU Member State .
This directive , which could be called a Schengen for health , covers such issues as the mutual recognition of prescriptions , an end to discrimination against patients on the grounds of country of origin and the removal of the need for additional insurance abroad .
The issue of counterfeit drugs and medicinal products is another very important issue from the point of view of the common market .
The directive stresses that they are a serious problem , particularly in the context of cross-border healthcare , and the same is true for medical tourism .
The directive tackles this problem by ensuring that the costs of treatment are reimbursed to the level guaranteed in the country of origin , or , if the treatment or procedure cost less than this sum , that the actual costs incurred are reimbursed .
The solutions introduced will help to improve the situation of patients in the European Union and will strengthen the common market , and so I voted in favour of adoption of the directive .
I was pleased to be able to vote in favour of the report , which , following the agreement with the Council during the second reading , will bring significant improvements in the free movement of patients within the European Union .
Outpatient treatment now presents no problems for the citizens of the EU and inpatient treatment has become much simpler .
It is in areas like this that Europe can contribute significant added value .
The result is that the healthcare sector is gradually being transformed from a patchwork of individual services into a single entity .
It is very important for our citizens to have the opportunity to obtain necessary and high quality healthcare services whether they are at home or abroad .
I am pleased that this report also talks about patient mobility in the EU .
Lithuanians living and working abroad must be guaranteed the opportunity to obtain treatment if necessary , without paying absurd amounts of money or waiting for months in uncertainty .
Information is the key .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal that every Member State should maintain national contact points to inform patients about the availability of healthcare and administrative procedures .
Sometimes , however , treatment is not available for all illnesses in a citizen 's own country , and in such cases therefore , treatment should be provided in another country .
We must strive to ensure that cross-border healthcare services or ' medical tourism ' ( as the rapporteur observes in this case ) do not weaken our national healthcare systems .
There needs to be a perfect balance .
Low prices and easy travel are making Lithuania particularly attractive to other EU residents who may be looking abroad for opportunities of cheaper treatment and cheaper operations .
Unless it is strictly controlled , ' medical tourism ' could cause a surplus of services or unnecessary logistic costs , particularly for new EU Member States like Lithuania .
in writing . - Health service structures vary greatly across the EU , and I support this directive that outlines a coherent approach to funding cross-border healthcare .
Although cross-border healthcare affects only a small percentage of EU citizens , clarifying the existing rights of these patients in this single piece of legislation will ensure that citizens wishing to travel to another Member State for medical treatment are financially protected .
It is important that patients such as those living near national borders , as well as residents of smaller Member States who suffer from rare diseases , are provided with financial support when seeking medical care elsewhere in the EU .
The agreement will allow patients to be reimbursed for treatment they receive , up to the amount anticipated by their own national health system for similar treatment .
This directive on cross-border health will also ensure that Member States establish contact points to provide sufficient information to citizens wishing to travel abroad for treatment .
On 19 January , the European Parliament adopted European legislation on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
I can only support access to healthcare for all EU citizens irrespective of the State in which they reside .
However , that is not the main objective of this text , which aims , first and foremost , to strengthen the internal market rather than promote universal access to healthcare .
The text states that travelling abroad to receive treatment could , in particular , benefit patients who are on long waiting lists or those who are unable to find specialised healthcare .
The first right of patients is be treated promptly and appropriately , without any obstacles , in the place in which they reside .
It is obscene to present as a right the obligation for a sick person to have to move and fund a trip abroad in order to receive proper treatment .
Instead of supporting public healthcare systems to guarantee equal access to quality healthcare , patients are invited to choose their treatment throughout Europe just like any good put into free circulation within the European Union .
I cannot support such a concept of healthcare .
I agreed with this resolution on FLEGT Voluntary Partnership Agreements with the Republic of Cameroon and the Republic of Congo .
It needs to be stressed that these voluntary agreements on trade in timber cannot undermine the EU 's overall objective of combating climate change and must guarantee sustainable use of forests .
I hope that these voluntary agreements will help , rather than hinder , the idea of jointly stopping the trade in illegally harvested timber and contributing to efforts to stop deforestation and forest degradation , related carbon emissions and biodiversity loss globally .
I therefore support calls for the Commission to ensure that EU policy is consistent and to pay the utmost attention to ensuring that VPAs do not encourage the expansion of industrial logging activities into intact forest landscapes , and to work with all governments signing up to VPAs in the future to monitor and take steps to eliminate the negative effects , both direct and indirect , of commercial logging on wildlife .
I welcome the Voluntary Partnership Agreements ( VPAs ) because of what they represent in terms of combating the trade in illegally logged timber in the EU .
I would stress their importance in combating deforestation and the degradation of forests , as well as the resulting carbon emissions and loss of biodiversity at global level .
The aforementioned reports simultaneously promote economic growth , human development and sustainable food sources .
I call on the Commission to ensure that EU policy is coherent , with a view to making an effective contribution to the international commitments of all the parties involved in the VPAs .
According to the United Nations , 20-40 % of world timber production is the result of illegal logging .
What is more , each year , deforestation increases by 13 million hectares and causes an estimated 20 % of global CO2 emissions .
The Voluntary Partnership Agreements that Parliament has just adopted will help combat the trade in illegally harvested timber by improving the traceability of timber harvested in the Republic of Congo and in Cameroon thanks to independent audit procedures and good forest governance policies .
More generally , these agreements recall the responsibilities incumbent on the European Union when it negotiates trade agreements .
The European Commission must conduct a consistent trade policy and must ensure that trade agreements do not lead to large-scale deforestation so as to satisfy the demands for free trade in timber or biofuel production .
That is why Parliament insists that the European Commission present a regular report on the implementation of these agreements .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on Forest Law Enforcement Governance and Trade Voluntary Partnership Agreements ( VPAs ) , since negotiating these VPAs will allows us to define good practice for future negotiations with countries supplying wood , with a view to the eradication of illegal logging , and to the conservation and sustainable use of forest resources at global level .
Illegal logging is nothing short of the pillaging of the natural resources of countries that supply wood , normally developing countries , and it constitutes a clear attack on biodiversity and the quality of people 's lives and their future prospects .
If agreements such as those reached with the Republic of Congo and the Republic of Cameroon prove to be effective in combating this scourge , they may come to form a good basis for future agreements of the same kind .
I welcome Europe 's concern for the protection of other countries ' natural resources , but I must stress that despite the regulatory framework under the agreements , any victory in combating the trade in illegal timber greatly depends on the governments and institutions of the timber-producing countries .
Without their involvement and effective commitment , any instruments that they agree upon will be useless .
This model is therefore also a call for such countries ' EU counterparts to take responsibility so as to understand the need to protect the interests of their future generations , and act in everyone 's interests by resisting the appeal of instant profit .
The European Union has been struggling to combat illegal logging , while seeking to conserve forest resources and promote their sustainable use globally .
I therefore welcome the signing of the Voluntary Partnership Agreements with Cameroon and the Republic of Congo with the aim of improving forest governance and reforming existing legislation where necessary so as to ensure that activities in the forestry sector are transparent , respect indigenous peoples ' rights , and do not contribute to adverse environmental impacts .
These agreements are crucial to eradicating illegal logging , thereby bringing an end to deforestation and the degradation of forests , and to the resulting carbon emissions and loss of biodiversity at global level .
To this end , I would stress the importance of calling on the Commission to regularly produce and present to Parliament a progress report on the implementation of the various provisions of all current and future agreements .
This resolution rightly states that the large-scale industrial exploitation of tropical forests is unsustainable , as it leads to the degradation and destruction of ecosystems that are of great importance , both from a functional point of view and in terms of the natural assets that they protect .
We also believe that it is right and timely that the resolution points out the limitations and contradictions of the Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade Voluntary Partnership Agreements .
However , it still falls short of what is needed to tackle the causes of the problem of illegal or unsustainable logging .
In particular , it is important to mention that this problem cannot be separated from the enormous weaknesses in the economies of these countries and the significant levels of poverty amongst their peoples , and that , at times , this activity is the only source of income for many families .
This inevitably leads to the conclusion , included in our proposed amendment , which was unfortunately rejected , that it is only possible to put a stop to illegal or unsustainable logging if the terrible social and economic situation in these countries is addressed , reversing an economic model based on heavy dependence on exploiting and exporting a select number of raw materials to industrialised countries , which fosters neo-colonial relationships of dependence , and encourages the plundering of resources from developing countries and their subjugation .
Once again , I wish to use the forum of the European Parliament to remind everyone of the significance of forests for the climate , water management , agriculture and the culture of the country or region in question , particularly in rural areas .
The market value of goods made from timber is also considerable .
We must therefore be absolutely sure that timber from Cameroon , the Republic of Congo or any other third country has been obtained , transported and placed on the market legally , respecting the needs of local communities and forest management legislation .
Entering into a partnership with these countries will result in improved forest management and greater credibility and competitiveness for exporting countries in the international arena .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution which accompanies the consent procedures for the Voluntary Partnership Agreements on forest law and the trade in timber with Cameroon and the Congo .
The resolution rightly emphasises that sufficient funding , monitoring and NGO and civil society involvement will be vital if the VPAs are to achieve their aims .
In the fight against the pillaging of biodiversity , the issue of forest destruction is absolutely crucial .
It is primarily the result of the production-driven rationale of modern-day globalisation and is therefore still perfectly legal .
The implementation of bilateral Voluntary Partnership Agreements to combat the illegal exploitation of forests is a very partial step towards the necessary establishment of a mechanism for punishing all ecological crimes .
These agreements , which are still very rough and ready , nonetheless deserve to be encouraged and , most especially , improved .
Logging in African countries is often carried out illegally , which impacts very heavily on the protection of producer countries ' natural resources , as well as being an attack on biodiversity , and on the quality of people 's lives and their future prospects .
The signing of this type of agreement with the Republic of Congo and with Cameroon could help to reverse this trend , if they are effective and clearly succeed in bringing an end to illegal logging in these African countries .
The EU 's use of this type of agreement to defend the natural resources of others is noteworthy .
However , in order for these initiatives to be successful , it is very important for the governments and institutions of the producer states to aid in this fight too .
We cannot expect the partnership agreements on the worldwide sustainable use of forest resources to produce any miracles .
It will only be possible to combat illegal logging effectively if the local systems can be made more resistant to corruption , if the back doors which are currently being used to get around existing regulations can be closed and , finally , if significant penalties and sanctions can be imposed for failure to comply with the regulations .
With regard to the environmental damage caused by activities in the forestry sector , it is important not to forget the damage caused by transport .
Although we cannot expect miracles from the agreement , it is a step in the right direction , which is why I have voted in favour of this report .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on the Voluntary Partnership Agreements ( VPAs ) on forest law enforcement , governance and trade in timber and derived products to the European Union .
I voted in favour because I believe that the negotiation of these VPAs enables us to obtain guidelines on best practices that could serve as a precedent for the negotiations under way for other VPAs with timber-producing countries .
In this context , I welcome the EU 's acceptance of its share of the responsibility for eradicating illegal logging , as well as the related trade , and for strengthening efforts connected with the conservation and sustainable use of forest resources globally .
I welcome the fact that the commitments of the parties involved to improve forest governance are transparent and respectful of indigenous peoples ' rights , whilst ensuring forest biodiversity , the climate and sustainable human development .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on Voluntary Partnership Agreements with Cameroon and the Republic of Congo .
I would stress the need , when negotiating future agreements of this type , to provide for measures that secure the objectives of the eradication of illegal logging , the conservation and sustainable use of forest resources , and respect for the rights of the local populations .
in writing . - After a thorough scrutiny together with several NGOs , we have decided to support the signature of the two VPAs .
Greens ' recommendations were unanimously adopted in committee .
However , we demanded in our explanatory statement that the Commission explains some details more in depth .
Thus , to raise some additional concerns , an oral question with debate has been tabled , with the support of all political groups , underlining the need for the Commission to make sure some criteria are guaranteed , not only during the signature phase , but also during the most crucial implementation phase of the agreements .
For example , we ask the Commission to present , within six months of the entry into force of any VPA , a report on the measures undertaken to ensure that the dialogue between the stakeholders and civil society , including the local and indigenous population , continues and is maintained during the implementation phase .
Underlined in the text are the risk of large-scale exploitation of forests , and both the direct and indirect impact of commercial logging on wildlife , biodiversity , deforestation , degradation of forests , and local populations and indigenous people .
We have also tried to raise the crucial need to ensure freedom of speech and respect for human rights , so that any complaints are heard in any country concerned by VPAs .
Voluntary partnership agreements on forest law enforcement , governance and trade in timber and derived products to the European Union ( FLEGT ) represent the European model , currently at the draft stage , for combating the illegal international trade in timber .
The approved partnerships with the Republic of Cameroon and the Republic of Congo include good practice guidelines , which may form an important precedent for other ongoing negotiations with timber-producing countries .
Central to the approved text is the idea of jointly stopping the trade in illegally harvested timber and products made from such timber and contributing to efforts to stop deforestation and forest degradation , related carbon emissions and biodiversity loss globally .
At the same time , that would promote sustainable economic growth , sustainable human development and respect for indigenous and local peoples .
Whilst forests are the sovereign possessions of the states where they are located , the forest environment is a common heritage of humankind and must be protected , preserved and , where practicable , restored with the ultimate aim of maintaining global biodiversity and ecosystem functions , and protecting the world 's climate from the changes now occurring .
Under the framework of FLEGT , tropical timber exporting countries have begun drawing up Voluntary Partnership Agreements ( VPAs ) with the EU , in order to guarantee the traceability and legality of timber .
Independent verification procedures are also provided for by these agreements .
This enables them to set the standard for the management and exploitation of forests .
I can only welcome the fact that the Commission has concluded agreements with Cameroon and the Republic of Congo .
These agreements form a good basis for future VPAs : for example , with certain Asian countries and the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Another important consideration for the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is the fact that the Commission has committed itself to reporting , within six months of the start of the Voluntary Partnership Agreement , on measures taken to enable and maintain an ongoing dialogue between the stakeholders and civilian communities , including local and indigenous populations .
The overexploitation of forests threatens not just the local population but also the fauna and flora , and biodiversity .
The kind of mass deforestation which leads to increased global warming will be reduced by these agreements .
I agree with the goal of providing a legislative framework for identifying and ensuring the traceability of timber products , establishing independent governmental verification procedures which certify that all timber products exported by the Republic of Cameroon to European markets have been obtained , harvested , transported and exported legally , with the aim of establishing the foundations of legal management and use in Cameroon 's timber sector , and strengthening the enforcement of forestry regulation and governance .
I also believe that this agreement is of the utmost importance , as this country is the main African exporter of timber to Europe , and there are serious problems at several levels of governance , such as environmental degradation and corruption .
It is also necessary to ensure that international commitments made by the EU and Cameroon are fulfilled in terms of the environment , of the adoption of civil-society oversight , and of greater involvement from local and indigenous communities , ensuring that the latter can enjoy their fundamental rights .
I voted in favour of this recommendation .
Cameroon , 40 % of whose territory is covered in forest , is the largest African exporter of hardwoods to Europe .
It sells 80 % of sawn timber to the EU .
However , the industry is beset by serious problems of governance , leading to environmental degradation , inequalities , impoverishment and corruption .
Up to now , surveys by NGOs have shown that 20 % of the Congolese timber imported onto the European market is of illegal origin , whether it is for production , sale , processing or export .
This Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the European Union and Cameroon is a good example of how , by buying responsibly , we can have a positive influence on the quality of the environment in third countries or the world in general , reduce pollution and combat climate change , poverty and corruption .
I believe that the principle of responsible buying can significantly contribute towards reducing the volume of unfair and unlawful trade and contribute to safeguarding forests and biodiversity .
I welcome the commitments made between the EU and the Republic of Cameroon with the aim of improving forest governance and reforming existing legislation where necessary , so as to ensure that activities in the forestry sector are transparent , respect indigenous peoples ' rights , and do not contribute to adverse environmental impacts .
The forest environment is a shared piece of world heritage and must be protected , preserved and , if possible , restored , with the ultimate goals of maintaining global biodiversity and the functions of ecosystems , and of protecting the climate .
In order to achieve these goals , it is essential that partner governments in Africa and third countries draw up resource management and land use plans .
At the same time , they must identify the aid that will be necessary from foreign partners and from international organisations in order to move forward with these goals .
I voted for the conclusion of a Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Cameroon on forest law enforcement as it will provide a legal framework for the lawful management of the exploitation of timber in Cameroon and of its export to the EU .
The aim of this is to eliminate the corruption which the illegal timber trade stems from and to develop a set of good governance practices in this area .
The involvement of members of civil society in the conclusion of the agreement is a positive step and must continue in order to ensure external control over the progress of the process for eliminating fraud and developing sustainable trade .
I voted in favour of the recommendation on the Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the EU and the Republic of Cameroon as it sets out political and legislative reforms which will allow Cameroon 's timber sector to promote good governance and transparency , with a view to combating fraud and the trade in illegal timber .
The conclusion of a Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Cameroon on the implementation of legislation , governance and trade in the forestry sector with regard to timber products imported by the EU 's Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade ( FLEGT ) is of the utmost importance given the negative impact that the trade in illegal timber necessarily entails .
This agreement should allow the origin of the timber to be identified and encourage the implementation of independent verification procedures that can prove it .
I hope that binding Cameroon to the FLEGT will effectively reduce the resources available to traffickers and thus establish an effective and transparent system for checking whether timber is legal .
The European Union has been struggling to combat illegal logging , while seeking to conserve forest resources and promote their sustainable use globally .
I therefore welcome the signing of the Voluntary Partnership Agreements with Cameroon with the aim of improving forest governance and reforming existing legislation where necessary so as to ensure that activities in the forestry sector are transparent , respect indigenous peoples ' rights , and do not contribute to adverse environmental impacts .
These agreements are crucial to eradicating illegal logging , thereby bringing an end to deforestation and the degradation of forests , and to the resulting carbon emissions and loss of biodiversity at global level .
To this end , I would stress the importance of calling on the Commission to regularly produce and present to Parliament a progress report on the implementation of the various provisions of all current and future agreements .
While the objectives set out in this agreement , aimed at the traceability and certification of timber products originating in the Republic of Cameroon are apparently praiseworthy , they do not respond to the extent that we believe is necessary to the problem of forest destruction , and with it the threat to the integrity of resources of immense value from an ecological and conservation point of view , and which are vital to the existence and way of life of local communities and indigenous peoples .
The rapporteur himself realises the weaknesses of the agreement , setting out a long list of concerns that it does not explicitly address .
In particular , the agreement does not preclude the possibility that large-scale industrial logging may increase forest degradation and deforestation , including of virgin forest with high levels of biodiversity .
The rapporteur admits that the agreement will facilitate the importing of timber originating in Cameroon to the EU and that this may result in conflicts with the EU 's objective of combating climate change .
It is acknowledged that local communities and indigenous people have not been directly involved in discussing the agreement .
The lack of targeted funding is also acknowledged , as is the lack of technical support and human resources necessary to implement the agreement .
These , amongst others , are some of the reasons behind our abstention .
The fact that Cameroon is Africa 's leading exporter of hardwood to Europe makes it necessary to regulate the flow of goods through the partnership agreement on which we are voting today .
The corruption and illegality afflicting trade in Cameroon really must be tackled through the development of a system to check legality and independent audits of the whole system .
Although doubts remain as to the actual effectiveness of this agreement , I believe it is right to support Mr Jadot 's recommendation .
I agreed with this document , because the objective of the Cameroon-European Union Voluntary Partnership Agreement is to provide a legislative framework within which to detect and ensure the traceability of timber , put in place government and independent verification procedures to certify that all timber exports from Cameroon to European markets have been procured , felled , transported and exported legally , in order to provide a basis for the legal management and exploitation of the Cameroonian forests , and reinforce the application of forestry regulations and governance .
In my opinion , we must put an end to the illegal trade in timber and corruption , and establish an effective , transparent system for monitoring the legality of timber and derived products .
The Cameroon-EU Voluntary Partnership Agreement , which was concluded in accordance with WTO rules , provides for a series of political and regulatory reforms which will enable Cameroon 's timber industry to establish good governance and greater transparency .
The VPA establishes an innovative procedure for combating fraud and illegal practices in the timber trade , including a definition of what constitutes legal trade in timber , a system to check legality and independent audits of the whole system designed to achieve more sustainable trade in timber .
It must be stressed that these voluntary agreements on trade in timber must not run counter to the EU 's overall objective in terms of combating climate change and must guarantee sustainable forest use , stop deforestation and forest degradation , and related carbon emissions and biodiversity loss globally .
The draft resolution in question concerns the important partnership agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Cameroon .
The main aim of this partnership is to provide a legislative framework within which to ensure the traceability of timber , put in place procedures to certify the quantities of timber exported from Cameroon to European countries , and check that the trade complies with legal and , above all , environmental requirements .
Cameroon is the largest African exporter of hardwoods to Europe , which purchases 80 % of its production .
In the light of this fact , we must consider the need to adopt monitoring systems and procedures in this area of the market in order to avoid market activities being carried out using illegal procedures .
I decided to support this recommendation because I am convinced of the need to develop agreements with countries outside Europe .
However , I would emphasise that these partnerships must comply with the rules laid down to safeguard the environment and must be subject to stringent controls , in order to ensure that these activities become true opportunities for development and growth .
In the fight against the pillaging of biodiversity , forest destruction is an absolutely crucial issue .
It is primarily the result of the production-driven rationale of modern-day globalisation and is therefore still perfectly legal .
The implementation of the bilateral EU / Cameroon Voluntary Partnership Agreement to combat the illegal exploitation of forests is a very partial step towards the necessary establishment of a mechanism for punishing all ecological crimes .
The independence of decisions concerning the granting and verification of export licences should be guaranteed by public services , and the promotion of the timber trade as well as the development of forest industries should be limited to what is ecologically sustainable .
The absence of such measures is particularly regrettable .
Furthermore , serious reservations should be expressed concerning the reliability of the control system given the dereliction of duty on the part of the authorities in Cameroon .
Logging in African countries is often carried out illegally , which impacts very heavily on the protection of producer countries ' natural resources , as well as being an attack on biodiversity , on the quality of people 's lives and on their future prospects .
I am hopeful that the agreement negotiated with Cameroon will effectively combat illegal logging in the country , thus contributing to improving conditions for populations living off income from this economic sector , and that it will also contribute to improving biodiversity and protecting natural resources in Cameroon .
Although the partnership agreement with Cameroon in the forestry sector is commendable and , as it is being introduced during the International Year of Forests , is also a very convenient way for the EU to improve its image , it is doubtful whether the agreement is worth the paper it is written on .
Corruption is a fact of life in Cameroon .
In the world rankings produced by Transparency International in 2010 , it was in 146th place .
Environmental organisations claim that the government of Cameroon is aware of the environmental crimes being committed by the forestry industry , but that corruption is preventing the companies from being monitored and prosecuted .
Foreign companies are said to control more than 60 % of timber extraction and processing and three quarters of the timber exports .
Although we cannot expect miracles from the agreement , it is a step in the right direction , which is why I have voted in favour of this report .
Forty percent of Cameroon 's surface area is covered in forest - for the time being - because Cameroon is the largest exporter of tropical wood in Africa and in no other country are the forests being so extensively cleared .
Experts estimate that , in 10 to 15 years , the most ecologically important tree species in the Congo Basin will have disappeared if the logging continues in the same way as it has been done up to now - aimed at maximum yield .
This ultimately threatens the green lungs of Africa , which are vitally important for the global climate , and endangers the unique flora and fauna of Cameroon .
To protect Cameroon 's tropical forests , what is essential is the combating of corruption and bribery ( at the level of the officials and also of the community tenants of state-owned forests ) , effective criminal prosecutions , sustainable forestry , where the quantity felled is only as much as will regrow , and better training for loggers in order to prevent damage to the land during logging .
Above all , European companies must take some responsibility , because around 80 % of the yield is shipped to Europe .
The EU must act in this regard by taking direct and decisive measures .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report , as it is moving in the right direction .
I am voting for the signing of a Voluntary Partnership Agreement ( VPA ) between the European Union and the Republic of Cameroon , the goals of which are strengthening forest governance , promoting Cameroon 's timber products , and making the country more competitive on the international market .
These goals must respect the objectives and commitments of the Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade Agreement : strengthening community land tenure and access rights , ensuring the effective participation of civil society - with specific attention to indigenous peoples - in policy making on forest governance related issues , increasing transparency and reducing corruption .
Nothing will come of the aforementioned goals without the real and effective involvement of the authorities of the Republic of Cameroon .
I agree with the rapporteur when he highlights the need , given the new competences conferred by the Treaty of Lisbon , for the European Parliament to monitor the various stages of negotiating and implementing the VPA , and when he calls on the Commission to provide Parliament with studies of the agreement 's social , economic and environmental impact , amongst other documents for assessing its implementation .
The aims of the Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Cameroon ( the EU-Cameroon VPA , concluded on 6 May 2010 ) are to provide a legislative framework within which to detect and ensure the traceability of timber , to put in place government and independent verification procedures to certify that all timber exports from Cameroon to European markets have followed legal channels , and to reinforce the application of forestry regulations and governance .
Most of the criteria derived from VPA definitions have been met .
Cameroon is 40 % covered in forest and is the largest African exporter of hardwoods to Europe , with 80 % of sawn timber sold to the EU .
There are , however , serious problems of governance ( corruption ) , resulting in environmental degradation .
There is , therefore , an urgent need to establish procedures to combat illegal trade in timber by analysing and overseeing the trading patterns more effectively .
The EU-Cameroon VPA provides for a series of political and regulatory reforms and will come into effect as soon as the promised legislative changes have been implemented and the system to verify legality put in place .
For all these reasons , I am voting in favour of the proposal allowing Parliament to follow the Council 's position .
The Cameroon-EU Voluntary Partnership Agreement provides for a series of political and legislative reforms which will enable Cameroon 's timber sector to institute good governance practices and greater transparency .
It is important to guarantee that any timber and derived products originating in Cameroon that enter European markets do so completely legally , as well as that any reforms implemented ensure respect for the rights of local and indigenous communities , and have a real impact at the level of combating corruption and strengthening the role of local civil society .
I therefore voted for the signing of this agreement , and hope that the commitments made and the objectives of Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade are fully adhered to when it is being implemented .
I considered the report , which agrees with the conclusion of a Voluntary Partnership Agreement between Cameroon and the European Union , to be worthy of support during the vote .
I believe that it is very important for Cameroon , the largest exporter of hardwood from Africa to Europe , to apply strict regulations during its activities in this area .
We must not allow abuse and the destruction of the environment to continue .
An effective and transparent monitoring system needs to be established .
I am convinced that European politicians must pay particular attention to the protection of the environment , and must support all efforts aimed at or assisting in the protection of the wellbeing of our environment , not just in Europe , but on a global scale as well .
I agree with the goal of providing a legislative framework for identifying and ensuring the traceability of timber products , establishing independent governmental verification procedures which certify that all timber products exported by the Republic of Congo to European markets have been obtained , harvested , transported and exported legally , with the aim of establishing the foundations of legal management and use in the Congo 's timber sector , and strengthening the enforcement of forestry regulation and governance .
This agreement is crucial , as this country exports timber and derived products worth more than EUR 250 million every year , more than half of which is destined for the EU .
I also agree with the need to ensure that the international commitments that the Republic of Congo has taken on in terms of human and environmental rights are fulfilled .
I welcome the commitments made in the Voluntary Partnership Agreement ( VPA ) between the EU and the Republic of Congo with the goal of improving forest governance and reforming existing legislation in this area .
It is necessary to ensure that activities in the forestry sector are transparent , respect peoples ' rights , and do not contribute to adverse environmental impacts .
I would stress the role of independent national civil society organisations and of independent external observers in monitoring the proper implementation of VPAs by all parties involved .
I voted in favour of the recommendation on the Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the EU and the Republic of Congo as it sets out political and legislative reforms which will allow Congo 's timber sector to promote good governance and transparency , with a view to combating fraud and the trade in illegal timber .
The trade in illegal timber is a problem which seriously affects the producing countries , one of which is the Republic of Congo , and it jeopardises ecosystems , ways of life and the very economies of developing countries .
Unfortunately , the European Union continues to accept illegal timber , so the measures aimed at impeding its entry into the EU are to be welcomed .
In this sense , a partnership agreement aimed at identifying the origin and legality of the timber reaching the EU is clearly a positive measure .
As with other consumer goods , the consumer should be able to trace the timber back to its source and ensure that it meets the legal requirements that apply to it .
The European Union has been struggling to combat illegal logging , while seeking to conserve forest resources and promote their sustainable use globally .
I therefore welcome the signing of the Voluntary Partnership Agreement with the Republic of Congo with the aim of improving forest governance and reforming existing legislation where necessary so as to ensure that activities in the forestry sector are transparent , respect indigenous peoples ' rights , and do not contribute to adverse environmental impacts .
These agreements are crucial to eradicating illegal logging , thereby bringing an end to deforestation and the degradation of forests , and to the resulting carbon emissions and loss of biodiversity at global level .
To this end , I would stress the importance of calling on the Commission to regularly produce and present to Parliament a progress report on the implementation of the various provisions of all current and future agreements .
This agreement is aimed at ensuring the traceability and certification of timber products from the Republic of Congo .
These objectives are ostensibly praiseworthy , but they do not respond to the extent that we believe is necessary to the problem of forest destruction , and with it the threat to the integrity of resources of immense value from an ecological and conservation point of view , and which are vital to the existence and way of life of local communities and indigenous peoples .
The concerns expressed by the rapporteur himself are enough to prove the weakness of the agreement , justifying our abstention .
Specifically , the agreement does not , of itself , ensure that deforestation and the large-scale degradation of intact forests will be combated , and it may even promote them in the absence of additional or complementary measures , as it is aimed at encouraging the importing of timber products from the Republic of Congo to the EU .
This may throw up obvious conflicts with the EU 's stated objectives of combating climate change and protecting biodiversity .
It is also worth highlighting , as the rapporteur does , the lack of targeted funding or the technical support and human resources necessary to implement the agreement .
As with the provisions on Cameroon , and while I regret that the Treaty of Lisbon does not give the European Parliament the power of amendment , but only requires its consent , I have decided to support Mr Jadot 's recommendation .
Every year , the Congo exports over EUR 250 million worth of timber and derived products , half of which go to the European Union .
Despite the fact that , as in the case of Cameroon , there are still doubts as to the actual effectiveness of the agreement we are voting on , I have decided to support it , as it represents a first step towards fighting fraud and illegality in the timber trade .
I agreed with this document , because the objective of the Congo-European Union Voluntary Partnership Agreement is to provide a legislative framework within which to detect and ensure the traceability of timber , and put in place government and independent verification procedures to certify that all timber exports from the Congo to European markets have been procured , felled , transported and exported legally .
In my opinion , we must put an end to the illegal trade in timber and corruption , and establish an effective , transparent system for monitoring the legality of timber and derived products .
The Congo exports over EUR 250 million worth of timber and derived products , half of which go to the European Union .
Up to now , 20 % of the Congolese timber imported onto the European market is of illegal origin , whether it is for production , sale , processing or export .
The successive wars between 1993 and 1999 did nothing to improve the situation , and opened the floodgates to the scourge of corruption .
There was therefore an urgent need to establish procedures to combat illegal trade in timber by more effectively analysing and overseeing the often complex trading patterns .
It must be stressed that these voluntary agreements on trade in timber must not run counter to the EU 's overall objective in terms of combating climate change and must guarantee sustainable forest use , stop deforestation and forest degradation , and related carbon emissions and biodiversity loss globally .
As we are well aware , much of the timber used in the European Union comes from the Republic of Congo .
Surveys by NGOs working in the area have shown that at least 20 % of Congolese timber is of illegal origin .
The aim of this recommendation on the draft decision on forest law enforcement is to ensure that in the Congo , too , the European Union can do what has already been requested for Cameroon , which is to take steps to ensure that the timber market does not suffer any illegal and , hence , unacceptable , interference .
This can be achieved , as the recommendation proposes , through the adoption of measures which will allow the EU to ensure that the political reforms launched through the partnership agreements actually contribute to an economy which is clean , both legally and environmentally , in order to safeguard the country from criminal activities and the misuse of its resources .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The Congo exports more than EUR 250 million of timber and derived products , half of which go to the European Union .
Up to now , surveys by NGOs have shown that 20 % of the Congolese timber imported to the European market is of illegal origin , whether it is for production , sale , processing or export .
The successive wars between 1993 and 1999 did nothing to improve the situation , and opened the floodgates to the scourge of corruption .
There was therefore an urgent need to establish procedures to combat illegal trade in timber by more effectively analysing and overseeing the often complex trading patterns .
This Voluntary Partnership Agreement should help tackle corruption and significantly reduce the trade in illegal timber .
In the fight against the pillaging of biodiversity , destruction of the forest is an absolutely crucial issue .
It is primarily the result of the production-driven rationale of modern-day globalisation and is therefore still perfectly legal .
The implementation of the bilateral EU / Congo Voluntary Partnership Agreement to combat the illegal exploitation of forests is a very partial step towards the necessary establishment of a mechanism for punishing all ecological crimes .
The independence of decisions concerning the granting and verification of export licences should be guaranteed by public services , and aid should be made available for combating the improper legal exploitation of forests .
The absence of such measures is particularly regrettable .
Logging in African countries is often carried out illegally , which impacts very heavily on the protection of producer countries ' natural resources , as well as being an attack on biodiversity , and on the quality of people 's lives and their future prospects .
I am hopeful that the agreement negotiated with the Republic of Congo will effectively combat illegal logging in the country , thus contributing to improving conditions for populations living off income from this economic sector , and that it will also contribute to improving biodiversity and protecting natural resources in the Republic of Congo .
This sort of agreement will only have any meaning when we can be sure that foreign companies are no longer exploiting the local companies , which have no forestry and environmental expertise , and when the Republic of Congo clamps down on corruption .
The objective must be to establish a forestry sector which acts responsibly and plans for future generations .
While the local people remain unaware of these issues , the whole thing will continue to be a sham .
Until the failure to comply with regulations on felling incurs significant penalties and sanctions , the EU agreement will remain completely ineffectual .
Even if ' selective felling ' does take place , it is important to remember how many trees will be lost during the transport process , for example , in order to build roads out of the forests .
Although we cannot expect miracles from the agreement , it is a step in the right direction , which is why I have voted in favour of this report .
I also voted for the Voluntary Partnership Agreement ( VPA ) between the European Union and the Republic of Congo on forest law enforcement , governance and trade in timber and derived products to the EU .
I welcome the goal of creating a legislative framework that makes it possible , inter alia , to identify timber products and ensure their traceability ; to establish independent and governmental verification procedures certifying that all timber products exported by the Republic of Congo to European markets have been procured , felled , transported and exported legally , with the aim of establishing the foundations of legal management and exploitation in the Congo 's timber sector ; and to strengthen forest law enforcement and governance .
From the Congo-EU VPA concluded on 9 May 2009 , I would stress the fulfilment of the criteria derived from VPA definitions , including those applying to the negotiation process , which culminated in an innovative agreement , the aim of which is to combat effectively the bad governance practices from which illegal trade in timber , and corruption , stem , and to establish an effective , transparent system for monitoring the legality of timber and derived products .
The aims of the Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Congo ( the EU-Congo VPA ) are to provide a legislative framework within which to ensure the traceability of timber , to put in place government and independent verification procedures to certify that all timber exports from Cameroon to European markets have followed legal channels , and to reinforce the application of forestry regulations and governance ..
Surveys by non-governmental organisations have shown that 20 % of the Congolese timber imported onto the European market is of illegal origin , at whatever stage in the process .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is why there is an urgent need to establish procedures to combat the illegal trade in timber .
The EU-Congo VPA provides for a series of political and regulatory reforms which will enable the Congo 's timber industry to establish good governance practices and greater transparency .
It is important to ensure that the political and legislative reforms undertaken contribute to poverty reduction and a tangible improvement in people 's living conditions .
The VPA will come into effect as soon as the promised legislative changes have been implemented and the system to verify legality put in place .
For all the above reasons , I endorse the rapporteur 's proposal to follow the Council 's position .
The Congo-EU Voluntary Partnership Agreement provides for a series of political and legislative reforms which will enable the Republic of Congo 's timber sector to institute good governance practices and greater transparency .
It is important to guarantee that any timber and derived products originating in the Republic of Congo that enter European markets do so completely legally , as well as that any reforms implemented ensure respect for the rights of local and indigenous communities , contribute to improving populations ' living conditions and to environmental conservation , and have a real impact at the level of combating corruption and strengthening the capacities of local civil society .
I therefore voted for the signing of this agreement , and hope that the commitments made and the objectives of Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade are fully adhered to when it is being implemented .
I am in favour of this resolution because I believe we need to try to solve the serious problem of deforestation and degradation .
Maintaining the integrity of forests remains a priority .
The Commission and the Council must step up their efforts to ensure human rights are respected in the Republic of Congo .
Another problem on which preventive action is needed is corruption , which must be substantially reduced .
In order to ensure that corruption declines , it is important to support measures designed to guarantee the independence of the local judicial system and the creation of new judicial procedures .
It is also vital to update legal texts designed to improve social justice and respect for the rights of local and indigenous communities .
I should like to end by stressing the need for additional technical and financial resources to support the establishment of a system to verify the legality of timber .
The consent of the European Parliament to the Voluntary Partnership Agreements between the European Union and the Republic of Cameroon and the Republic of Congo has resulted in an important step being taken in the fight against illegal logging and the illegal trade in timber .
A certification system , which ensures clear traceability , will benefit not only the European economy and the European timber industry in particular , but also the economy and timber industry in Cameroon and Congo .
I am definitely in favour of these two agreements .
in writing . - As a part of FLEGT ( Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade ) , exporter countries of tropical hardwood have begun to sign Voluntary Partnership Agreements ( VPAs ) with the EU to ensure the traceability and legality of timber and verification procedures .
The objective of the two FLEGT VPAs with the Republic of Congo and Cameroon is to provide a legislative framework which aims to : ( i ) detect and ensure the traceability of timber , ( ii ) put in place independent verification procedures to certify all timber exports from the partner country to the European market , in order to provide a basis for the legal management and exploitation of the Congolese and Cameroonian forests , and ( iii ) reinforce the application of forestry regulations and governance . A VPA has already been signed between the EU and Ghana in 2009 .
With the Lisbon Treaty , the European Parliament has codecision and needs to give its formal assent to two VPAs relating to Cameroon and the Republic of Congo .
More VPAs are to come in the near future , especially with some Asian countries and also with the Democratic Republic of Congo .
I voted in favour of these resolutions because I believe it is important to preserve natural forests , the exploitation of which may lead to forest degradation and deforestation as well as destruction of the global environment .
Reform of the legal framework in the forestry sector is therefore necessary in order to have a Voluntary Partnership Agreement that is in keeping with the objectives of the action plan for forest law enforcement , governance and trade ( FLEGT ) and to ensure that social and environmental criteria are met .
Legal texts designed to improve social justice must be updated so as to respect the rights of local and indigenous communities , thus guaranteeing for these groups the principles of direct participation in the drafting of the new regulatory texts and in the implementation phase of the transparency agreement .
The Commission must ensure that the rights of local communities , who are often the first victims of climatic and environmental degradation , are respected .
The European Parliament has voted for several agreements to combat the illegal trade in timber between the European Union and the Congo and the European Union and Cameroon .
These international agreements are designed to ensure the traceability of timber exported to the EU , in order to fight against deforestation and to preserve biodiversity , as well as to safeguard the rights of indigenous peoples .
The rapporteur , Mr Jadot , of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , has included a number of amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
These reports remain to be implemented , and we must make sure that the Commission really does take the European Parliament 's views into consideration
These reports can , nonetheless , be a source of support for all those who are fighting for a different kind of relationship with the countries of the South and , in particular , with the countries of sub-Saharan Africa .
I have voted in favour of the EU signing a Voluntary Partnership Agreement with the Republic of Cameroon and with the Republic of Congo .
This year , 2011 , is the International Year of Forests .
Healthy forests are essential in order to maintain local biodiversity and they make an important contribution to the climate objectives we have set ourselves , because they act as natural CO2 sinks .
Vegetation and woodland is being destroyed throughout the world , including in central Africa .
Satellite pictures show that around 25 000 km ² of African forests and other vegetation have been lost in the last 30 years .
These new partnership agreements will promote the responsible management of the forestry sector in these two countries , which the EU has indirect responsibility for , as a result of its imports of timber .
The EU is now accepting this responsibility .
The introduction of traceability and legality verification systems for timber products will also ensure the necessary transparency .
in writing . - Although this resolution refers to working visas , it is highly unlikely that citizens of the Pacific States will select Malta , as opposed to the rest of the EU , as a place to seek employment .
That is why I voted in favour of the original text proposed .
The resolution explains Parliament 's doubts about the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement .
It points out the objectives of the agreement ( development , strengthening of trade links between the EU and the Pacific ) and underlines the problems raised by the derogation from the rules of origin for processed fishery products .
Nonetheless , in line with my refusal to accept the agreement , I voted against the resolution , which does not seem to me to highlight sufficiently the problems raised by the derogation from the rules of origin for processed fishery products , especially tuna .
I am looking forward to the European Commission supplying us with the impact assessment provided for by the agreement .
It analyses the consequences of this agreement for employment in the EU and also in the Pacific , as well as for the European fisheries and processing sector .
It is impossible to verify the origin of processed tuna that enters the European market .
I shall follow the negotiations on the final partnership agreement between the EU and the Pacific States , and I shall ensure that the agreement does not contain any derogations from the rules of origin for processed fishery products from Papua New Guinea .
I welcome the efforts made towards deepening trade relations between the Pacific and the EU , with the aim of supporting regional integration and promoting the progressive integration of the economies of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) states into the global economy .
The EU has an important role in fostering the sustainable social and economic development of the ACP countries and in contributing to the general efforts to eradicate poverty in those countries .
Trade relations between this region and the EU must , therefore , encourage and increase trade , sustainable development and regional integration , while simultaneously contributing to economic diversification and poverty reduction .
Trade policy is becoming more important than ever to the developing world because of the current economic and financial crisis , and I call for negotiations with all 14 ACP Pacific States on a comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement to be as swift as possible .
With regard to Amendment 6 , paragraph 23 ( 3 ) , we believe that it should always be up to the individual Member State to decide whether a visa is to be issued to a third-country national .
If it is a question of a work visa , the work should always be on the same terms as it would be if it was done by an EU citizen in the Member State in question .
We would also like a more precise definition of the phrase " carers ' or in similar professions ' .
The current financial and economic crisis highlights that trade policy is more important than ever to the developing countries .
The specific nature of the region , determined by fisheries and fisheries-related activities and industries , shows the best potential for future export growth , provided that fisheries activities are conducted in an environmentally sustainable manner .
As far as Aid for Trade is concerned , its objective is to improve developing countries ' ability to capitalise on new trade opportunities .
I voted for the resolution on the Interim Partnership Agreement between the EC and the Pacific States in view of the fact that it is only one step towards negotiating a new , more extensive Partnership Agreement .
At the same time , the European Commission has to bear in mind that the future agreement will have to be negotiated with a larger number of states in the region to avoid becoming a source of division within the region .
Furthermore , this agreement should not allow companies from third countries to enjoy the benefits of an exemption from EU customs duties to the detriment of local industries , workers and incomes .
I voted for this resolution because I believe that the partnership agreement will support regional integration and promote the progressive integration of the economies of the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States into the global economy , while also encouraging the sustainable social and economic development of these countries , thereby contributing to the eradication of poverty .
Although only Papua New Guinea and the Republic of the Fiji Islands have signed the interim partnership agreement with the EU , I believe that this merits our support because it allows European markets to be open to local products and , on the other hand , the gradual opening of those countries ' markets to European products .
I hope that trade relations between the Pacific States and the EU will grow and become stronger , while respecting different areas ' specificities and bearing in mind the particular needs of those who have least .
This trade mechanism should therefore be used , while keeping in mind the development needs of the countries which have signed the agreement , and employed as a tool for promoting those needs .
The comprehensive agreement that may be concluded should not overlook the key issues listed in the resolution : 1 ) negotiations on intellectual property rights ; 2 ) transparency of public procurement ; and 3 ) the granting of working visas .
in writing . - My resolution , which accompanies the granting of consent to the EU-Pacific States Interim Partnership Agreement , makes it clear that Parliament , while welcoming this interim EPA covering only Fiji and Papua New Guinea , believes that any move to a full EPA must cover all 14 Pacific island states .
This is important for regional solidarity , cohesion and integration .
The goal of Economic Partnership Agreements between the EU and Pacific States must be to increase trade , sustainable development and regional integration , while also promoting economic diversification and poverty reduction .
Although currently only Papua New Guinea and the Republic of the Fiji Islands have signed the agreement , this is an important step towards the future economic development of this region , which is made up of 14 states and is crucial to the development of international trade .
The widely held belief that the promotion of trade relations between this region and the EU should encourage and increase trade , sustainable development and regional integration , while also promoting economic diversification and poverty reduction , is a particularly important feature of this European Parliament resolution on the Interim Partnership Agreement between the EC and the Pacific States .
The Millennium Development Goals will be achieved through this interim agreement .
This point , along with the creation of a genuine regional market , constitutes a crucial basis for the successful implementation of the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) ; similarly , this is also true of a possible comprehensive EPA in the future .
Regional integration and cooperation are essential to the social and economic development of the Pacific States .
I voted in favour because I am convinced that this EPA can contribute to these regions ' economic development , and I share the concerns mentioned in the resolution that such development should be accompanied by policies on environmental sustainability and inclusion .
It falls to Parliament to monitor the implementation of this agreement , as part of the competences conferred by the Treaty of Lisbon .
I welcome the European Parliament 's decision to approve the interim agreement between the European Union and the Pacific States .
This agreement reflects the commitment of the European Union to this region of the world and sends a strong political signal to the States in the region .
I am pleased about that .
The political resolution that accompanies this decision to approve the agreement provides an opportunity to point out our demands .
We want to establish a balanced and fair relationship with the Pacific States ; one which allows for the development of these island States while protecting the interests of our own citizens .
While the interim agreement includes specific provisions on the rules of origin for fishery products , it was important to manage this derogation .
Indeed , in order to ensure that this derogation , which should allow for the creation of jobs and wealth , is of genuine benefit to local populations and does not harm the European fishery product processing and canning industries , it was vital to provide for an assessment of its impact as soon as possible and to allow for its suspension , where necessary .
Guarantees exist to ensure that the agreement is fair and that measures will be taken , if necessary , to protect our interests .
I voted for this resolution on the Interim Partnership Agreement between the EC and the Pacific States in the hope that this agreement - which is currently limited to two countries : Papua New Guinea and the Republic of the Fiji Islands - could prepare the ground for a wider-ranging agreement .
Such an agreement would be an instrument for promoting the Pacific Region 's sustainable social and economic development , for reducing poverty , and for strengthening regional integration and cooperation , in line with the Millennium Development Goals .
The Interim Partnership Agreement between Papua New Guinea , the Republic of the Fiji Islands and the European Community was initialled on 14 December 2007 .
These were the only countries of the Pacific Region to enter into the agreement as they were the most active in maintaining trade relations with the European Union , and mainly because they were interested in protecting their sugar and tuna industries .
The agreement should also guarantee these countries further gains , thanks to a new regulation on duty- and quota-free access to markets .
By having better access to the European market , these countries will also benefit from new investment opportunities , which will also have a positive impact on employment .
The economic partnership agreement provides for an ad hoc committee to be set up subsequently to monitor its implementation and to check its effects on local society and the local economy at regular intervals .
The resolution explains Parliament 's doubts about the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement .
It points out the objectives of the agreement ( development , strengthening of trade links between the EU and the Pacific ) and underlines the problems raised by the derogation from the rules of origin for processed fishery products .
That is why I voted for this resolution and why I supported the amendments tabled by the Greens , which are entirely consistent with our concerns .
I am looking forward to the European Commission supplying us with the impact assessment provided for by the agreement , and I shall be keeping a close eye on the negotiations on the final partnership agreement .
in writing . - I supported this Interim Economic Partnership Agreement with Papua New Guinea and Fiji as it is important to develop strong links with exporting countries in the Pacific Region .
Despite concerns from some Members , I believe that we need to foster closer cooperation with these countries as this allows the EU to monitor catches of tuna and other fish that are canned on Papua New Guinea .
This industry has also created hundreds of jobs for local people in the impoverished country .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that this helps to establish new trade arrangements that are compatible with World Trade Organisation rules with the Republic of the Fiji Islands and Papua New Guinea .
Interim Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) are agreements on the trade of goods that are intended to prevent a breakdown in trade between the countries of the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States and Europe .
Although interim agreements may be seen as a first step in the process , in legal terms , they are completely independent international agreements which do not necessarily lead to a full EPA .
I welcome the recommendations regarding the signing of definitive agreements , the origin of EU funds to finance these agreements , which should not come from the European Development Fund , the need for a parliamentary committee to monitor the implementation of the agreement , and a review clause envisaging a global impact assessment in three to five years .
Economic Partnership Agreements should promote trade between the EU and Papua New Guinea and Fiji and contribute to trade , development , sustainable growth and the reduction of poverty .
Regional integration is crucial in the development of these countries .
Therefore , the Commission should explain how these interim agreements will contribute to it .
It is important that we sign a final agreement with the countries in this region .
The relaxation of the rules of origin offer great opportunities for Papua New Guinea to promote the local economy .
However , it is important that we ensure that the poorest countries are not merely used as transit countries for products from other countries which do not qualify for this special access scheme .
The interests of the local economy are paramount here .
The Commission should monitor implementation and take appropriate action whenever its impact studies find serious distortions in the market .
This is an agreement that grants goods from the Pacific Region preferential conditions of access to the European market .
I am in favour of the development of this region but I consider the derogation from the rules of origin for processed fishery products to be unacceptable .
Indeed , this derogation gives rise to a situation of unfair competition for the European canning industry and does not truly benefit local populations .
Furthermore , imports of tuna from Papua New Guinea have doubled over the last two years , and we have reason to fear that this trend will become stronger in the future .
As Vice-Chair of the Committee on Fisheries , I decided to vote against this agreement because it ignores the opinion adopted by this committee , which proposed abolishing the derogation from the rules of origin for processed fishery products at the end of the negotiations on the Interim Partnership Agreement .
Despite the low number of countries that have accepted the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) , this demonstrates Europe 's commitment to supporting the development of Pacific countries by using a mechanism that goes beyond mere aid procedures and seeks to mobilise local economies , which hope to have the effect of creating businesses and jobs , and bringing about the greater movement of people and goods .
Although I agree in principle with such an instrument , I cannot ignore my doubts about the impact that the EPA may have on the fisheries industry .
I would therefore like the Commission to look at this issue with particular care , and I believe that the Commission 's presentation of a report to Parliament on fishing in the Pacific and the management of the region 's fish stocks is justified , as requested by the rapporteur .
I agree with this draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and two Pacific States - Papua New Guinea and the Republic of the Fiji Islands - for the following reasons : 1. these countries are the region 's largest economies and have signed Economic Partnership Agreements with the EU in the past ; 2. despite the potential benefit of extending this partnership to other countries in the region , it has not been possible to do so ; 3. this is an interim agreement which this House will need to reassess if we intend to convert it into a comprehensive one ; 4. the Republic of the Fiji Islands has made commitments to the EU regarding human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law ; 5. in spite of the criticisms made by members of civil society and politicians in the region , this partnership could contribute to these countries ' strategic development .









We have been criticising the signing of these Economic Partnership Agreements with the countries of the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States ( ACP ) for a long time .
Irrespective of their purpose and the rhetoric with which they are presented , these agreements are essentially aimed at free trade , with all the extremely negative consequences that result from it .
Recently , in the last ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , which took place in December 2010 , the Council of the ACP countries expressed their concern with the fact that the European Commission is not respecting its objections on matters relating to protecting its economies .
There is also a contradiction between the Commission 's much-vaunted flexibility and the inflexible stance that it has taken in the technical negotiations .
In this Interim Economic Partnership Agreement with the Republic of the Fiji Islands and Papua New Guinea , the EU has also been subjected to severe criticism by social and political organisations in the Pacific Region due to the pressures that have been put on these two countries to sign the agreement , under the threat of losing their privileged access to European markets .
Critics have also said that there has been a significant decline in solidarity between the Pacific States since the signing of this agreement , creating feelings of division , which has lead to the break-up of certain regional groups due to the pressures that they felt that they were under to sign the interim agreements .
There is nothing more important than children 's health and protecting the rights and welfare of children .
Children must also have the right to family life , and it must be ensured that children do not have to spend long periods living in orphanages .
The agreement between the EU and the Pacific States grants Papua New Guinea a general derogation from the rules of origin for fishery products , especially tuna .
This clause means that goods from that country can be considered to be Papuan , and consequently exempt from any customs duties or quotas , even if the fishermen , the fishing areas and the factories that produce the canned fish are not Papuan .
Now , the ones profiting from this are the Chinese , Australian , Thai and any other fishing fleets which unload their catch in Papuan ports .
They are the canning factories belonging to these countries , which have set up in Papua New Guinea but which employ foreign nationals in dubious conditions .
It is clearly the European , and most particularly the French , sector of the industry which is feeling the full force of this unfair and unlawful competition .
In the European Union , imports of tuna from Papua New Guinea increased by 76 % between 2008 and 2009 ; in France alone , they increased by 1 500 % over the same period .
The perverse economic and social effects of this derogation are well known , and fears for the region 's fish stock are well founded .
That is why I voted against this agreement .
The Pacific States form a unique area , made up mainly of island states which are , to a large extent , ethnically diverse and whose culture differs greatly from that of Europe .
They require different political and economic priorities .
By concluding an agreement with these states , we wish to facilitate the free flow of goods and services , which should bring commercial advantages to both sides .
However , we must also ensure that , while striving for market liberalisation , we are not perceived as interlopers wishing merely to secure access to resources and weakening regional solidarity in the process , as the critics would have us believe .
Let us conclude agreements , let us open up the markets and let us promote competitiveness , but let our actions be guided by common sense and mutual benefit in all instances , in particular , when helping regions such as the Pacific States , which are often hit by natural disasters .
The Interim Partnership Agreement between the European Community , of the one part , and two of the ACP countries , namely Papua New Guinea and Fiji , of the other part , should be regarded as a step towards a comprehensive agreement .
The Interim Partnership Agreement covers all of the important areas of a trade agreement , but could subsequently also cover intellectual property rights and developments in public procurement .
I support the agreement but , at the same time , I am very aware of the possible impact this could have on the European fishing sector and , in this regard , I expect the Commission to carry out the investigation into this impact called for in paragraph 15 of the resolution adopted by Parliament .
The initiative which has been approved today by Parliament has created an agreement that will undoubtedly strengthen trade between the European Union and some of the Pacific States .
In particular , the Interim Partnership Agreement has been concluded with Papua New Guinea and the Republic of the Fiji Islands , which hope to achieve the objective of protecting their sugar and tuna industries .
In my opinion this is a step forward for development and prosperity .
Thanks also to the rules of origin , it will provide real added value to the fishing industry and exports from these regions .
I must also emphasise that the agreement could have major implications for relations with the other Pacific States , including Australia and New Zealand .
in writing . - I am delighted that Parliament gave overwhelming support to my recommendation that we consent to the EU-Pacific interim EPA .
The interim agreement between Papua New Guinea , Fiji and the European Community was initialled on 14 December 2007 .
These two countries were the only ones in the Pacific Region to enter into the agreement , as the other members of the Pacific regional grouping - because of their low levels of trade in goods with the EU - chose not to sign .
Fiji and Papua New Guinea entered the agreement mainly with the hope of protecting their sugar and tuna industries , which would have suffered greatly under the Generalised System of Preferences .
The Interim Agreement covers rules of origin and market access issues .
Regarding rules of origin , it covers fisheries , textiles and agriculture , leading to investment and employment opportunities .
Regarding market access , duty-free and quota-free access to markets is to be granted , providing investment and employment opportunities .
Trade and development issues are to be dealt with within the wider regional framework .
The Interim Partnership Agreement signed between the EU and Papua New Guinea and the Fiji Islands is the result of shameful pressure .
This agreement provides for the gradual abolition of customs duties on a scale that is unsustainable for these States , the prohibition of any quantitative restrictions on exports and imports and the abolition of all subsidies for the export of agricultural produce to the Pacific States for Papua New Guinea and the Fiji Islands .
It includes a rendezvous clause for the ' successful conclusion of the currently ongoing negotiations for a comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) ' .
These agreements are further proof of the neo-colonialism of the European Union .
I voted against .
The goal of Economic Partnership Agreements between the EU and Pacific States must be to increase trade , sustainable development and regional integration , while also promoting economic diversification and poverty reduction .
Although currently only Papua New Guinea and the Republic of the Fiji Islands have signed the agreement , this is an important step towards the future economic development of this region , which is made up of 14 states and is crucial to the development of international trade .
This is the first step towards the extension of this agreement to other regional countries , and towards giving a significant boost to their economies and to the wellbeing of their populations .
I voted in favour of the interim partnership agreement between the European Community and the Pacific States , because I believe that it is important for Europe to have trade partnership agreements with third countries that are able to export products which European countries have difficulty in accessing .
The development of international trade is logically accompanied by agreements which facilitate trade and make the commercial network increasingly accessible .
Negotiations on the new Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) began in 2002 with the aim of building on and strengthening the regional integration processes in the ACP countries .
The agreement in question concerns rules of origin in relation to fisheries , textiles and agriculture , leading to investment and employment opportunities , and market access , with duty and quota free access to markets which would provide investment and employment opportunities .
The interim agreement has also brought about a reduction in governments ' policy space in the form of regulatory power .
I voted for the recommendation on the conclusion of the EU-Pacific States Interim Partnership Agreement for the following reasons .
The Fiji Islands and Papua New Guinea have decided to conclude the agreement mainly in the hope of protecting their sugar and tuna industries .
The interim agreement covers rules of origin in relation to fisheries , textiles and agriculture whilst , however , establishing derogations that could threaten the competitiveness of some EU industries .
As regards the tuna canning sector , the derogation granted enables countries like Papua New Guinea to operate as genuine hubs for the processing of huge quantities of tuna from a variety of sources : the Philippines , Thailand , China , the United States , Australia , etc .
This tuna is landed in Papua New Guinea 's ports and processed in factories that have been hastily set up by operators from the countries concerned for the sole purpose of benefiting from the total customs duty exemption granted by the EU under this interim agreement .
This has been damaging the European canning sector , which has been complaining of unfair competition .
I therefore join the rapporteur in calling for a report to be submitted to Parliament on the specific aspects of the Pacific States ' fisheries sector for assessment of the real impact that these measures could potentially have on the EU market .
Negotiations began in 2002 on new economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) between the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) States and the European Union to replace the previous unilateral regime of trade preferences in favour of the ACP countries .
Since specific issues of interest were the subject of individual negotiations at national level , and since partnership agreements were unlikely to be concluded straight away , it was decided to conclude interim EPAs focusing on trade in goods by the end of 2007 .
The aim of these was to avoid a disruption of trade , and they may not necessarily lead to comprehensive EPAs .
In the Pacific Region , only Fiji and Papua New Guinea concluded such an agreement .
The agreement covers rules of origin in relation to fisheries , textiles and agriculture , leading to investment and employment opportunities .
The European Commission hopes to conclude a comprehensive economic partnership agreement with the Pacific regional group , for which talks are ongoing .
I find it appropriate to support the Council 's position in favour of the Interim Partnership Agreement , because I consider guaranteeing supplies of resources a priority , especially in view of their scarcity and environmental degradation .
It is also essential to keep alive the decade-old agreements with the ACP countries , even if in a different form .
I welcome the European Parliament 's decision to approve the interim agreement between the European Community and the Pacific States .
This agreement reflects the commitment of the European Union to this region of the world and sends a strong political signal to the States in the region .
I am pleased about that .
The political resolution that accompanies this decision to approve the agreement provides an opportunity to point out our demands .
We want to establish a balanced and fair relationship with the States of the Pacific ; one which allows for the development of these island States while protecting the interests of our own citizens .
While the interim agreement includes specific provisions on the rules of origin for fishery products , it was important to manage this derogation .
Indeed , in order to ensure that this derogation , which should allow for the creation of jobs and wealth , is of genuine benefit to local populations and does not harm the European fishery product processing and canning industries , it was vital to provide for an assessment of its impact as soon as possible and to allow for its suspension , where necessary .
Guarantees exist to ensure that the agreement is fair and that measures will be taken if necessary to protect our interests .
I voted for this report because I believe that promoting trade relations between the Pacific States and the EU could contribute to promoting the region 's sustainable social and economic development , to reducing poverty , and to strengthening regional integration and cooperation , in line with the Millennium Development Goals .
However , I share the concerns expressed by the rapporteur about the exceptions to the rules of origin and their negative impact on the EU 's fish processing and canning industries , which must be adequately evaluated by the Commission .
in writing . - Greens maintain their long-standing opposition to EPAs with any of the ACP regions , and consequently do not see the added value of the IEPA with two of the Pacific States .
In this specific case , Greens fear further de-integration of this region widely spread over the Pacific Ocean , as a consequence of IEPA preferential trade arrangements with the EU .
Furthermore , a predictable unfettered increase in traditional exports , concentrated in raw materials such as copper , sugar , copra , fish and palm oil ( agro-fuels ! ) is entirely at odds with sustainable development needs .
Hence , Greens supported the Pacific Trade Ministers ' ( unsuccessful ) request to revise critical elements of the IEPA , namely , the definition of ' substantially all trade ' , the ban on the use of export taxes and weak infant industry safeguards , and the Most Favoured Nation ( MNF ) clause .
On the global sourcing aspect , an alternative solution would have been to limit the provision to catches inside the 200-mile exclusive economic zone ( EEZ ) , rather than in any waters .
Last but not least , Fiji does not have a democratic regime .
Our shadow , José Bové , tabled 11 amendments in that regard .
The EC / Pacific Interim Economic Partnership Agreement grants goods from the Pacific Region preferential conditions of access to the European market .
I am in favour of the development of this region , but I feel that the derogation from the rules of origin for processed fishery products is unacceptable , as it allows for products manufactured in a country from raw materials which were not sourced from that country to be exempted from customs duties .
This derogation is proving to be an incentive to fish in the tropical area without any concern for the management of fish stocks .
Insofar as trade preferences do not only affect fishing zones in Papua New Guinea , it is difficult to monitor the origin of the catches , and this runs counter to the commitments made by the European Union to put a stop to illegal , undeclared and unregulated fishing .
I am also concerned about the traceability of products to be imported into Europe from this area .
By voting against , I wanted to show my disapproval of such a clause , which , in my view , should no longer figure in any trade agreement in the future .
I voted in favour of this resolution on international adoption in the European Union , which is striving for the welfare of every child and recognises the right of orphans or abandoned children to have a family and be protected .
I agree with the calls to explore the possibility of coordinating a strategy with measures related to international adoption , taking international conventions into account , but it should be stressed that , bearing in mind the interests of the child , if the opportunities exist , preference should be given to adoption in the child 's country of origin .
It is very important to develop a framework to ensure transparency and coordinate actions so as to prevent child trafficking for illegal adoption .
At the same time , we must improve , streamline and facilitate international adoption and eliminate unnecessary red tape , while safeguarding the protection of the rights of children from third countries .
The protection of children 's rights , enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , is one of the European Union 's objectives to which even greater attention will have to be paid following the entry into force of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
European Union policy must therefore guarantee and implement children 's right to the protection and care necessary for their welfare .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because I feel that there is a need to enhance policy on protecting children 's rights .
The number of children abandoned and institutionalised , which is very high in some Member States , is cause for concern .
Furthermore , violations of children 's rights , violence against them , child trafficking , enticement into prostitution , illegal work and other unlawful activities , remain a major problem in the European Union .
I agree that it is necessary to assess the functioning of national systems at European level , so that it is possible to clarify matters as regards the protection of children 's rights , and take measures , if necessary , that would ensure more effective protection of homeless children and give them opportunities to have a family and be safe .
I voted for this resolution as the severity of the problem of abandoned children has steadily grown in the European Union .
It is important to protect the right to carry out international adoptions to avoid these children being obliged to live in orphanages .
The Commission must inform us as to what measures have been taken or will be taken at EU level to protect minors due to be adopted by European citizens .
I think that adoption must be arranged in line with national legislation and international conventions .
The Commission must explain to us how these procedures will ensure that the child 's best interests will always be protected .
I voted in favour of the joint resolution on international adoption , because I strongly believe that European coordination of adoption strategies and tools would not only bring about an improvement in the procedure as such , but would also ensure greater protection for orphans and abandoned children and their right to have a family .
Synergy between international organisations , EU institutions and Member States would lead to a virtuous circle in which the central focus of children 's needs would be flanked by the guarantee of information , preparation and support services for adoptive families .
Finally , I believe that improved coordination can ensure greater certainty for adoptees in terms of correct adoption procedures and mutual recognition of documents , thus preventing child trafficking .
I voted in favour of the resolution on international adoption in the European Union .
The protection of children 's rights is one of the European Union 's most important objectives .
We must protect the welfare of each child and defend their interests .
At present , there are many conventions in force on child protection and parental responsibilities .
The 1967 European Convention on the adoption of minors aims to coordinate the laws of Member States relating to adoption .
All Member States are signatories to the 1993 Convention on the Protection of Children and Cooperation in Respect of Inter-Country Adoption ( the Hague Convention ) .
Although the area of adoption falls within the remit of the Member States , I believe that there is a need to explore the possibility of coordinating at European level a strategy with measures related to international adoption .
It is crucial to guarantee that international conventions are taken into account when drawing up such a strategy .
We must aim to improve information services , preparation for inter-country adoption , the processing of applications for international adoption , and post-adoption services , bearing in mind that all international conventions relating to the protection of the rights of the child recognise the right of orphaned or abandoned children to have a family and be protected .
For instance , the EU institutions and Member States must actively combat child trafficking for illegal adoption .
Romania is the European state which probably allowed the worst abuses to be committed regarding international adoption in the 1990s , immediately after the fall of Communism .
Indeed , this was due to the lack of experience in a state which lived through a dark period for almost half a century , but equally to those who were fully prepared to exploit these weaknesses .
This resulted in losing track of almost a thousand children involved in international adoptions .
With the support of the European Union , which we were preparing to join , Romania carried out far-reaching amendments to its adoption legislation , in spite of the huge international pressure not to resort to a drastic measure such as abandoning international adoptions .
In these circumstances , and judging by Romania 's sad experience with international adoptions , the reluctance to accept a body like the European Adoption Agency , which will result in the creation of an actual European adoption market , is understandable .
Any resolution on international adoptions can only have the safety of minors as its objective , regardless of the interests of the states or the adopters .
In addition , irrespective of any resolution or decision , in my personal view , domestic adoptions must take precedence in any legal system , present or future .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament Resolution on international adoption in the European Union , based on Romania 's experience in this area .
An analysis really needs to be carried out of all the national adoption systems to see what their strengths and weaknesses are and to recommend the best practices for adoption by Member States .
Proper progress would be made if a situation was reached for coordinating at EU level the policies and strategies for the international adoption instrument , with the aim of improving the assistance provided in areas such as information services , preparation for inter-country adoption , processing of international adoption applications and post-adoption services , because the right of orphans or abandoned children to have a family and be protected must become a reality .
I voted in favour of the resolution on international adoption within the European Union .
Although this is a matter for the Member States , I believe that protecting children 's rights should be one of the EU 's goals .
In this context , I advocate the need to consider the possibility of coordinating strategies for an instrument for international adoption and post-adoption services at a European level , bearing in mind that all the international conventions on the protection of children 's rights recognise the right of abandoned or orphaned minors to have a family and receive protection .
The adoption of children is a particularly sensitive issue .
Human dignity and , in this case , the special care required of minor 's best interests , make observance of and respect for international conventions on the matter recommended , along with a study of best practices and the exchange of experience between Member States .
The European Union will be able to monitor these efforts and help to address the scourge of child trafficking , which predominantly affects the poorest countries and the people who are the least well-off .
The European Union has always fought to protect the rights of children and to defend their best interests .
The intention of this resolution is for consideration to be given to the possibility of coordinating at European level strategies concerning the instrument of international adoption , in accordance with international conventions , in order to improve assistance in the areas of information services , preparation for inter-country adoption , the processing of applications for international adoption and post-adoption services , bearing in mind that all international conventions relating to the protection of the rights of the child recognise the right of orphaned or abandoned children to have a family and to be protected .
I voted in favour because I believe that , although the issue of adoption falls under the jurisdiction of the Member States , there is a need for a minimum level of European convergence , provided that children 's best interests are always respected .
We all agree with defending the wellbeing of children and guaranteeing their rights , as noted in this Parliamentary resolution .
However , it is not enough to make general statements : it is also necessary to recognise the causes that have led to a situation where children are being exploited under international adoption .
The major causes behind the abandonment of children are poverty , inadequate social welfare systems , the lack of a sufficient social infrastructure network or adequate public services , as well as conflicts and military interventions .
in writing . - To determine the increasing problem of abandoned children , European institutions and Member States should play a more active role in improving the instruments of international adoption by facilitating and coordinating international adoption procedures at European level , without jeopardising in any way the security and safety of the children 's rights and by respecting all international conventions protecting the rights of the child .
The Union and the Member States have to ensure stronger scrutiny in cases of international adoption , in order to prevent child exploitation , abuses , abduction and trafficking .
Member States should find a balance between high international safeguards and standards in order to safeguard the rights of the child and the reduction of bureaucracy and the facilitation of international adoption procedures .
Moreover , Member States should have more transparent rules with regard to international adoption procedures and should also retain a constant exchange of information on the conditions and surroundings of the adopted child in the new environment .
In conclusion , the primary concerns in the international adoption procedures should always be in the best interest of the child , with particular attention to children with special needs , in order to guarantee children 's and families ' rights .
I voted for this joint resolution , which allows us at one and the same time to defend the right of parents to adopt a child from another Member State , and to ensure the protection of minors at the time they are adopted and after they have been adopted .
Indeed , international adoption should have a framework of specific rules in order to avoid abuses , such as child trafficking for example .
in writing . - Our national legal systems all have their own ways of dealing with adoption and other childcare issues .
However , since issues such as people trafficking and the sexual exploitation of children have such an international dimension , EU-level action may be appropriate .
We must never lose sight of the fact that the best interests of the child are paramount , and accordingly , I voted in favour of this resolution .
I voted in favour of this important resolution on international adoption in the European Union , because the protection of children 's rights is one of the European Union 's key objectives .
At present , there are many conventions in force on child protection and parental responsibilities .
I believe that there is a need to explore the possibility of coordinating at European level issues related to international adoption , with a view to improving information services , preparation for inter-country adoption , processing of applications for international adoption and post-adoption services .
It is very important to establish a system that would ensure transparency and would stop the trafficking of children for the purpose of adoption .
I would also like to stress that adoption should primarily be encouraged , whenever possible , and in the child 's best interest , in the child 's country of origin .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution which calls for consideration to be given to the possibility of coordinating at European level strategies concerning the instrument of international adoption , in accordance with international conventions , in order to improve assistance in the areas of information services , preparation for inter-country adoption , the processing of applications for international adoption and post-adoption services , bearing in mind that all international conventions relating to the protection of the rights of the child recognise the right of orphaned or abandoned children to have a family and to be protected .
The number of abandoned children has steadily increased over recent years , and this phenomenon can be observed in all of our Member States .
These children - who are victims of conflicts and social exclusion , and who are exploited by criminal networks and used in all kinds of trafficking - are the victims of a failing international adoption mechanism .
Furthermore , it should be noted that the majority of these children are girls , easy prey for prostitution networks and other forms of modern slavery .
One of the responses that we can bring to this sad situation is to facilitate international adoption procedures .
We should devote a real law to international adoption .
All children should be guaranteed the right to be adopted .
Although responsibility for this matter today still lies with our Member States , we should nonetheless point out that the protection of the best interests of the child is a fundamental principle of the European Union and enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
In the absence of European legislation in this area , the European Union should do everything in its power to facilitate these adoptions , in particular , by allowing , in the months to come , mutual recognition of civil status documents and adoption decisions .
The adoption of children is an issue that has always been of concern to the EU and must be handled with the utmost care .
Children are the future of any society and must therefore be treated with the greatest dignity .
Their best interests must be taken into consideration , which means that compliance with relevant international conventions is required and recommended .
The EU is therefore obligated to make every effort to confront the scourge of child trafficking , which predominantly affects children in the poorest countries and those who are least well-off .
Children are the weakest link in our society .
Protecting their rights and subsequently ensuring that these rights are respected must be one of the major priorities throughout the EU .
However , children are still falling victim to human trafficking and exploitation within the European Union , often as a result of unregulated adoption .
Even though adoption is an effective way of ensuring that children do not spend their lives in orphanages , it is essential that strict inspections are carried out , in particular , of international organisations , in order to prevent abuse .
I am abstaining , because the resolution does not include sufficient measures to guarantee that children can be protected against exploitation as a result of adoption .
Adoption is always a very sensitive issue and one that deserves special attention , as children 's futures are being decided .
Adoption is often a useful way of ensuring that abandoned children and orphans do not have unhappy childhoods spent in orphanages , without the love and care that all children should enjoy .
Denying innocent children the opportunity of being loved and guided through life by loving parents who are there for them would be cruel and unjust .
This is why I voted in favour of the resolution , as I believe strongly in the power of adoption as a way of giving a better life to children who will be the world 's future .
At European level , we need to create a coordinated structure supported by transparent and effective procedures , post-adoption support and a control mechanism to supervise the activities of each Member State .
Adopting a child means ensuring they have a future which is better , protected and full of hope .
Therefore , I believe that it is fundamental to implement specific legislation on the subject in order to deal with international differences .
I voted today in favour of the joint resolution on international adoption in the EU , the aim of which is to improve the adoption system between Member States and establish guarantees to ensure that adoption is carried out in the interests of the child , with absolute respect for its fundamental rights .
We emphasise the need for the following in the resolution : to create a European adoption strategy that establishes adoption rules for the poorest to the most developed countries and which will enable the development of every child who has undergone international adoption to be monitored via periodic reports filed by the competent national authorities with the state of origin ; to streamline adoption procedures and eliminate bureaucracy ; to reduce the length of time that children remain in institutions and orphanages ; to give priority to national adoptions ; to put a stop to unaccountable action by gangs who exploit and trade in children for adoption .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution on international adoption in the EU .
This initiative is in fulfilment of the Union objective set out in Article 3 of the Treaty of Lisbon for ' protection of the rights of the child ' .
The economic development of the countries of the EU does not prevent there from still being serious failings in terms of children 's rights : specifically , the problem of precarious childhood , and , in particular , that of abandoned and institutionalised children , as well as of violence inflicted on them .
Another failing is in relation to the child trafficking for adoption , prostitution , illegal labour , forced marriage , and begging on the streets or for any other illegal purpose , all of which continue to represent a serious problem in the EU .
It is this context that defines the importance of this initiative , which calls on the Commission to consider the possibility of coordinating at European level strategies concerning the instrument of international adoption .
A strategy is needed that conforms to international conventions in order to improve assistance in the areas of information services , preparation and processing of applications and post-adoption services .
It must give consideration to the protection of children 's rights , and recognise the right of orphaned or abandoned children to have a family and to be protected .
Halting international adoptions was one of the conditions for Romania 's accession to the European Union .
Romania decided in 2001 to place a moratorium on international adoptions after the European Parliament rapporteur for Romania , Baroness Emma Nicholson , condemned child trafficking activities and criticised the Romanian state for neglecting its children .
I think that priority must be given , as far as possible and in the child 's interests , to adoption in the child 's country of origin , with possible alternative solutions including finding a foster family , personal or residential care or finding a family through the international adoption procedure , in keeping with the relevant national legislation and international conventions .
Indeed , placing the child in an institution ought to be used simply as a temporary solution .
At the same time , it is important for an EU-level methodology framework to be devised to carry out the assessment of the adopted children 's development in their new families , using regular post-adoption reports compiled by the social services in the country where the adopted children have gone and submitted to the competent authorities in the country from which they were adopted .
This mechanism ought to be implemented by coordinating actions between Member States and the European Commission , in cooperation with the Hague conference , the Council of Europe and child protection organisations which strive to prevent child trafficking for adoption .
Adoption is a particularly sensitive issue which should merit the EU Member States ' full attention .
Although there has been considerable progress made following the Hague Convention on the Protection of Children and Cooperation in Respect of Inter-Country Adoption , precarious childhood , violations of the rights of children , violence against them and child trafficking for adoption , prostitution , illegal labour , forced marriage , and begging on the streets or for any other illegal purpose , remain a problem in the EU .
Every effort must therefore be made to protect a child 's right to a family life .
In order to achieve this , it is important to consider the possibility of coordinating at European level strategies concerning the instrument of international adoption , in accordance with international conventions , in order to improve assistance in the areas of information services , the preparation and processing of applications , and post-adoption services .
in writing . - We Greens / EFA have abstained .
In the joint motion for a resolution , following negotiations among political groups , the negative points of the EPP resolution were replaced .
Nevertheless , the resolution was initiated by Italians in response to a very specific national need and in relation to a matter which does not fall under European competence .
We have succeeded in making the resolution merely ' a call for the possibility of coordinating at European level the strategies related to the instrument of international adoption ' , with no reference to specific national problems .
As we are already working on this matter in the JURI and LIBE Committees , there was no need for such a resolution .
A child 's right to grow up in a healthy family environment which is beneficial to its harmonious development is the key concept behind this resolution .
The growing number of children living in orphanages and the violations of their rights - particularly human trafficking , illegal adoption and work , and prostitution - that continue to take place in the European Union , has led to a stance of trying to reverse this situation .
At the same time , it is worth noting the growing number of illegal international adoptions involving third countries which do not comply with the conditions established by the Hague Convention .
The institutionalisation of children 's rights within the EU , in Article 3 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , as one of the EU 's objectives , and in Article 24 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , pave the way for coordinating policies and strategies between the Member States , in accordance with the international instruments which are already in force .
I believe that a mechanism urgently needs to be created at EU level which shows the functioning of the different national systems on this issue .
A transparent and effective mechanism monitoring the adoption of children both pre- and post-adoption and the involvement of international organisations does not only promote the rights of children but also allows their harmonious upbringing .
With new migration flows , the problem of abandoned children , which was gradually being resolved , is becoming increasingly serious and significant .
It is crucial to find a legal framework to cover child protection and parental responsibility , eliminate unnecessary bureaucracy from practical procedures , and harmonise the laws of Member States in line with the 1993 Convention on the Protection of Children and Cooperation in Respect of Inter-Country Adoption and with the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to mention Germany 's handling of adoptions as an example not to be emulated , in particular , regarding the placement of children with couples where one partner is German and the other is from another EU country .
The legislator 's ultimate aim must , of course , be to guarantee children the right to the protection and care they need for their wellbeing , while trying to avoid forcing them to live in orphanages .
International adoption should be permitted for the good of the child , but only if the opportunities for adoption in the Member State in question have been exhausted .
As a rule , a child should be brought up in the country of which he or she is a citizen .
Foreign adoptions also take place in my own country of Poland .
They usually involve children who have little hope of being adopted within Poland due to various illnesses .
In 2006 , for example , 202 foreign families decided to take care of 311 of our fellow citizens - 214 Polish children found Italian parents , 25 found French parents , 22 found American parents , 20 found Dutch parents , 15 found Swedish parents , seven found German parents , six found Swiss parents , one found Belgian parents and one found Canadian parents .
The problem of orphaned children is practically non-existent in Western Europe , hence the high level of interest in the possibility of adopting children from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
I believe that the European Commission should , first and foremost : 1 ) inform Parliament what measures have been or will be taken at European level in order to prevent international adoption becoming a front for child trafficking ; 2 ) provide an answer to the question of how the Commission intends to prevent children being adopted to fit in with the latest fashion .
Europeans are becoming ever more willing to adopt children from Africa because this has become a popular practice among film stars .
This is neither an adequate nor serious basis for adoptive parenthood , however .
I agreed with this resolution on the European integration process of Serbia , which reaffirms that Serbia 's future lies in the EU , and encourages the country to continue its efforts towards this aim .
Serbia has made progress implementing reforms , but further progress is required for the country to comply with the Copenhagen criteria .
The Kosovo issue is very important .
I therefore support the call in the resolution for the Serbian Government to dismantle Serbian parallel structures in Kosovo that undermine the decentralisation process and prevent the full integration of the Serbian community into the Kosovo institutions .
The EU must send a clear signal to the Serbian Government that we expect Serbia to adopt a constructive attitude towards the forthcoming general elections in Kosovo .
I agree with the opinion presented in the resolution that the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the electoral process is an indispensable element aimed at preventing the Kosovo Serbian community from being marginalised .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution .
The enlargement process in the European Union is based on political , legal and technical compliance with the EU 's demanding standards and norms .
As far back as 2003 , the countries of the Western Balkans were promised they could join the European Union when the countries fulfil set criteria .
The European Union 's objective is to ensure long-term stability and sustainable development in the Western Balkans .
As the speed of integration of the countries in this region varies , every country must make maximum effort , carry out the required reforms and take the necessary measures to ensure the security and stability of every country , as well as of the region as a whole .
Serbia is making significant progress in many areas and there has been successful and constructive cooperation with the European Union .
The abolition of EU visas since 2009 shows Serbia 's citizens that the EU has a favourable view of the reforms being undertaken in the country .
I agree with the observations expressed in the resolution that reforms concerning the protection of citizens ' and minority rights , media pluralism , the independence of the judiciary , prisons and many other areas must continue .
Efforts to uphold the rule of law , which would ensure the democratic functioning of government institutions and the effective protection of human rights and freedoms , must remain one of the Serbian authorities ' key priorities .
Serbia has received encouragement with the vote on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
I hope that the ratification process will be speeded up by the vote of approval given today in the European Parliament .
I should remark that one issue highlighted in the report on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement is linked to Serbia 's failure to recognise the authorities in Kosovo and to the maintenance of parallel structures .
Romania , for its part , has not recognised Kosovo 's independence , which was declared unilaterally , in breach of international law .
Serbia is an excellent neighbour to Romania , with centuries of history linking us .
Indeed , Romania understands and supports its friends .
Serbia 's future obviously lies in Europe and its cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia should demonstrate Belgrade 's commitment to European values , democracy and human rights .
Serbia will clearly have to follow the same path for joining the EU followed by all Member States . However , it must receive equal treatment with regard to this path .
Recent developments have shown that Serbia has understood the European community 's expectations of it .
Tangible progress has been made , but the EU must handle tactfully certain aspects of Belgrade 's recent history which weigh heavily on the Serbian people .
The European Union is based on principles such as reconciliation and peaceful coexistence , targeting the same objectives of improving relations between the peoples in the region .
In this context , I think that Serbia 's future lies alongside the countries of the EU and I believe that this country must step up its efforts towards achieving this .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I recognise that Serbia is in a position to become an important player in ensuring security and stability in the Balkans .
The future of Serbia is inevitably the EU .
I therefore feel that the country should continue towards achieving this goal .
The progress already made in the reform process is praiseworthy .
Anyone who looks at a map of the European Union will quickly realise that the Western Balkans are destined to become part of it .
I believe that those countries ' membership will eventually be achieved .
Serbia 's route towards it has been particularly difficult since the end of the former Yugoslavia following the collapse of Soviet power .
Its involvement as the aggressor in fratricidal wars , and the brutal impact that they have had on neighbouring countries and on the international community as a whole have had serious consequences for the country and its people .
The secession of Kosovo , which remains a deeply controversial subject , has heightened tensions in the region and continues to have an immense potential to cause instability .
I hope that Serbia persists with opting for the EU , and I must congratulate its people and their leaders for the progress that they have made in this regard .
Serbia 's future lies in the EU .
I therefore welcome Serbia 's application for membership of the European Union , submitted on 22 December 2009 , and the decision taken by the Council of Ministers on 25 October 2010 to ask the Commission to examine Serbia 's application .
I would congratulate Serbia on the progress achieved in the reform process .
I would stress that the development of regional cooperation remains a key priority for the EU and is intended as a catalyst for reconciliation , good neighbourliness and enhanced people-to-people contacts in the Western Balkans .
I therefore call on Serbia to adopt a constructive approach towards more inclusive regional cooperation .
I would point out that full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) is a fundamental condition for Serbia to progress on the path to EU membership .
It should be noted that Serbia continues to respond adequately to ICTY requests for assistance .
I call on the Serbian Government to continue working closely with the Tribunal , including swift transmission of all requested documents and timely completion of cases transferred back from the ICTY .
We voted against this resolution , chiefly because of the demands that are made on Serbia and the EU 's unacceptable position regarding Kosovo .
For instance , Parliament is calling upon the Serbian Government to dismantle parallel structures within Kosovo which it claims ' undermine the decentralisation process and prevent the full integration of the Serbian community into Kosovo 's institutions ' , as well as the demands that it continues to make regarding cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
This pressure on Serbia is unacceptable , and is all the more complicated given that equivalent measures have not been taken in relation to Kosovo , despite public complaints about the trafficking of human organs by Kosovo 's current leaders .
It is also unacceptable for Parliament to put pressure on Serbia to ' enter into dialogue with Kosovo without referring anymore to new negotiations neither on the status nor partition ' .
The ' European integration process of Serbia ' highlights something that we have long been pointing out .
Today , it is clear that the war perpetrated by NATO and the major EU powers , with Germany at their head , was aimed at dismantling Yugoslavia and dividing its territory into countries which could protect the economic interests of big business in the EU .
I did not vote for this resolution on the European integration process of Serbia .
This was not because of the process itself but because of the ambiguity of the text on the Kosovo issue .
The joint resolution between the European Union and Serbia , adopted by the United Nations General Assembly , is mentioned , but at no time is it spelt out that this cannot be regarded as an official recognition of the independence of Kosovo by Serbia , or by those Member States of the Union that have not recognised it .
Neither is there any mention of the Council of Europe 's very disturbing report on the trafficking by the Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) of organs removed from Serbian prisoners , which calls into question the current prime minister of Kosovo , while the surrender of the two most recent Serbian fugitives to the International Criminal Court is an essential condition for Serbia 's accession to Europe .
As was the case during the various wars which marked the break-up of the former Yugoslavia , the evil is attributed to only one side and repentance is demanded from only one camp .
In the long run , this is becoming difficult , even though the Serbian Government , blinded by the lure of the European Union , appears to be accepting it in the hope of accession .
in writing . - Serbia 's moves towards EU membership are to we welcomed and will hopefully strengthen peace and prosperity in that area .
Parliament 's resolution calls for full respect for minority culture and languages - issues which lie at the very core of the European Free Alliance group .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EC and the Republic of Serbia came into force on 1 February 2010 .
Despite the fact that 11 months have passed , not all the EU Member States have ratified the agreement as yet .
With this motion for a resolution , the European Parliament wanted , firstly , to emphasise the importance of Serbia 's role within the European Union and , secondly , to approve the social and political improvements that the Serbian Government has introduced in recent years .
It also wished to point out the steps that the country still needs to take in order to meet the European Union 's requests for democratisation , freedom , and the adoption of fair and sustainable policies .
While I believe that Serbia 's entry into the EU is a considerable step forward for both the EU and the Republic of Serbia , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution because I believe that the country will very soon manage to overcome all the limitations which have created such a wide gap between the two for so long .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which notes Serbia 's progress on reform and the Council 's recent request to the Commission to prepare the opinion on Serbia 's application for EU membership .
Nevertheless , the resolution rightly points out that ' full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ' , including delivering the last two fugitives to The Hague , ' is a fundamental condition for Serbia to progress on the path to EU membership ' .
I am voting against this text out of solidarity with the Serbian people .
To add the obligation to meet the Copenhagen economic criteria to the savage social cuts resulting from the austerity programmes imposed by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) since January 2009 is a social crime that I refuse to endorse .
This is without mentioning the multiple violations of the sovereign right of the Serbian state to refuse to deal with the representatives of the separatist province of Kosovo contained in this text .
We all agree that the countries of the Western Balkans region are destined to become part of the EU ; that will become a reality in the near future .
Serbia is part of that group , and is a country that has followed a difficult path since the former Yugoslavia came to an end after the collapse of the Soviet empire .
Moreover , the fratricidal wars in which it became involved and their brutal impact on neighbouring countries and on the entire international community had unfortunate consequences for the country and its people .
The so-called ' war ' in Kosovo , which remains unresolved and very controversial throughout the international community , has also contributed to the fact that peace is still not a reality in the region .
It will therefore be desirable for Serbia to continue to move towards the European option .
I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate Serbia 's leaders and people on their efforts and on the progress that they have been making .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the European integration process of Serbia , because the development of regional cooperation remains a key priority for the EU and is intended as a catalyst for the implementation of the policies of reconciliation and good neighbourliness in the Western Balkans .
As it aims to become an important player in guaranteeing security and stability in the region , Serbia 's future is closely linked to the European Union and therefore , it must make maximum effort to ensure that it becomes a full Member of the EU .
In order to achieve the status of an EU candidate country and begin negotiations with the EU , Serbia must open a dialogue with Kosovo , adopt a constructive attitude towards the forthcoming general elections in Kosovo and make every effort to prevent the Kosovo Serbian community from being marginalised .
I agree with the proposal that candidate status should only be granted to Serbia once it has begun to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) .
Furthermore , Serbia must continue with reforms under way and carry out new ones .
The Serbian authorities must make every effort to ensure that the principles of the rule of law and democracy are properly implemented in the country and be vigilant that there is a continuous decline in the level of corruption in Serbia , and that those in office who abuse their position are subject to severe penalties .
This proposal for a resolution on the process of Serbia 's integration into the EU merits my support for the following reasons .
A commitment was made to all the Western Balkan states in June 2003 , at the Thessaloniki European Council , that they would join the European Union once they met the entry criteria .
The pace of integration of the Western Balkan countries is individual and depends on the merits of each one of them with regard , in particular , to their determination to satisfy all the requirements , meet all the obligations , carry out all the reforms and adopt the necessary measures that EU membership implies .
Serbia 's role as guarantor of the region 's security and stability is crucial .
That is why this resolution reaffirms that Serbia 's future lies in the EU , and encourages the country to continue its efforts towards this aim .
It commends Serbia on the progress achieved in the reform process , and welcomes the decision to open the ratification procedure of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia taken by the Council on 14 June 2010 , and the fact that 10 Member States have already ratified the agreement .
I voted for this resolution , which reaffirms that Serbia 's future lies in the EU , whilst highlighting the progress made in terms of the reforms implemented , and urging the country to continue to make efforts to achieve compliance with the requirements and criteria that EU membership implies .
in writing . - Our group voted in favour , given that 16 out of the 17 amendments tabled were adopted or included in the compromise amendments drafted by the rapporteur , including the one asking that the candidacy be linked to closer cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) .
Other amendments dealt with Kosovo , gender equality , minority rights , civil society , public transport , environment and relations with Bosnia .
This report lowers the barriers to trade between the European Union and Serbia and is a step on the way towards the prospective accession of this Balkan country .
This Stabilisation and Association Agreement was signed back in 2008 , but since then it has only been ratified by 12 Member States , including Italy .
The important objective achieved today must , in any case , be a new starting point for Serbia , which submitted its application in December 2009 .
Indeed , it must continue to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , which has always been an essential condition for accession .
Serbia is showing serious lapses in the field of respect for human rights .
Residents of Hungarian nationality are considered second-rate citizens and instances of police brutality are frequent .
The case of the boys from Temerin has still not been investigated .
As long as there is no appreciable progress in the aforementioned areas , I cannot support Serbia 's process of European integration .
Furthermore , I believe that it is crucial that full territorial autonomy be granted to the indigenous Hungarian population of Vojvodina .
Given the interim decision of the Council and the Commission ( 15191 / 2007 ) and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and Serbia , I agree with the conclusion of the agreement .
I voted for this report , and it is not the first occasion when mentioning here the reasons for doing so that I include personal ones .
The Western Balkans and Serbia are more than just a region of strategic interest to the European Union , and not only do the citizens in this region need us , but we all need them .
The EU is Serbia 's main trading partner , which speaks volumes .
Serbia is in a unique position in Europe as it is the country with the most refugees and displaced persons .
I firmly believe that accelerating Serbia 's integration process is beneficial to the whole Western Balkans region .
I voted for the resolution on Serbia 's integration .
One significant reason for this is that Serbia can become an important player in terms of guaranteeing security and stability in the region .
At the same time , constructive strategies on regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations are key elements of the stabilisation and association process .
All these aspects are a key factor in the process of turning the Western Balkans into a region of long-term stability and sustainable development .
The process of Serbia 's integration into the EU is also favoured by the progress achieved in the reform process .
The efforts made by Serbia to protect minorities are commendable , although access to information and education in minority languages still needs to be improved , especially for the Romanian minority who were severely discriminated against throughout the last century .
Remarkable progress has also been made regarding the promotion of gender equality , especially the adoption of the gender equality law and the national action plan for improving the position of women and promoting gender equality .
Serbia 's pivotal role within the Western Balkans is clear : it will be difficult for the region to achieve stability unless Serbia is stable .
The reforms that have been enacted by this country merit praise , as they have been aimed at strengthening democracy , transparency and the mechanisms of the rule of law .
In addition to this , efforts have also been made to re-establish relations and partnerships with its neighbouring countries , its former enemies , a step I welcome as it is pressing in human terms .
The agreements that Serbia has been establishing with the EU and the recent mutual opening of borders indicates that the step by step policy to create de facto solidarity has not been neglected .
I hope that the EU will consider Serbia 's bid for membership with the appropriate rigour , but I hope that it does so while bearing in mind the important message that its accession , alongside that of Croatia , which is at a more advanced stage , will represent for the Serbian people , for the whole region , and for the EU itself .
Serbia 's future lies in the EU .
I therefore welcome Serbia 's application for membership of the European Union , submitted on 22 December 2009 , and the decision taken by the Council of Ministers on 25 October 2010 to ask the Commission to examine Serbia 's application .
I would congratulate Serbia on the progress achieved in the reform process .
I would stress that the development of regional cooperation remains a key priority for the EU and is intended as a catalyst for reconciliation , good neighbourliness and enhanced people-to-people contacts in the Western Balkans .
I therefore call on Serbia to adopt a constructive approach towards more inclusive regional cooperation .
I agree with this draft Council and Commission decision on the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Serbia , of the other part .
I welcome the Stabilisation Agreement between the EU and Serbia .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( SAA ) lowers the barriers to trade between the European Union and Serbia and is a step in the direction of that Balkan country 's possible accession to the EU .
The agreement was signed in 2008 , but since then , only 12 Member States , including Italy , have ratified it .
Today 's vote shows Parliament 's consent to the agreement , and sends a signal to the remaining 15 Member States that they , too , should ratify it .
Despite the fact that Serbia has been sorely tried by the events that have come to define its recent history , it has slowly begun to recover and to consolidate its democratic structure .
Serbia 's geographic location and strategic role undoubtedly place it at the heart of the Balkan countries ' EU integration process .
Serbia is also an important trading partner ; it plays a crucial role in the iron and steel industries , among others .
Today 's vote follows another important step forward in December 2009 , when visas were abolished throughout the Schengen area , enabling Serbian citizens to feel more European .
A new stabilisation and association agreement has been adopted today between the EU and Serbia which provides for the establishment of a free trade area and offers the prospect of the country 's accession to the EU .
Given our views on enlargement , we abstained from this report .
However , we disagreed with some of its aspects , specifically , the conditions imposed by the EU and , in particular , the demand for full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , which continues to be a prerequisite for Serbia 's future accession to the EU .
These issues have not been put to other countries in similar positions .
We should also remember that in order for the agreement to enter into force , it needs to be ratified by the 27 Member States .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement , signed in 2008 , provides for the establishment of a free trade area between the EU and Serbia and offers a prospect of this country 's accession to the EU .
Serbia submitted its bid for EU membership in December 2009 .
In October of last year , the Council asked the Commission to prepare an opinion on this country 's request for accession , which will be presented this autumn .
In terms of the enlargement process , the situation in the Western Balkans merits special attention .
A country such as Serbia undoubtedly presents problems , but the situation in Belgrade appears to be far better than that of other countries in the area .
This is why , while I hope that there will be a definite acceleration in the process of cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , I support the text , and hope that it will be interpreted as an incentive by the Serbian people and authorities .
in writing . - I voted to give consent to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia but note that so far , only 11 Member States have ratified the Agreement .
I urge the other 16 to do so as soon as possible .
The EU-Serbia Stabilisation and Association Agreement , like all agreements of this nature , condemns the people to extreme poverty for the sake of a rapid transition towards a market economy and the establishment of a free-trade area over the next five years .
The European Union is unworthy of its own citizens and of the citizens of the countries that wish to join it .
I am voting against this report out of solidarity with the people of the Republic of Serbia .
We all agree that the countries of the Western Balkans region are destined to become part of the EU ; that will become a reality in the near future .
Serbia is part of that group , and is a country that has followed a difficult path since the former Yugoslavia came to an end after the collapse of the Soviet empire .
Moreover , the fratricidal wars in which it became involved and their brutal impact on neighbouring countries and on the entire international community had unfortunate consequences for the country and its people .
The so-called ' war ' in Kosovo , which remains unresolved and very controversial throughout the international community , has also contributed to the fact that peace is still not a reality in the region .
It will therefore be desirable for Serbia to continue to move towards the European option .
I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate Serbia 's leaders and people on their efforts and on the progress that they have been making .
I would stress the role that Serbia has been playing in the stabilisation of the region of the Western Balkans as a whole and , in particular , in the stability and cohesion of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because I view favourably the progress made by Serbia in implementing reforms in the areas of public administration , the legal framework and the fight against corruption and organised crime .
I agree with the rapporteur 's call for all EU Member States to begin the process of ratifying the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia .
The fundamental condition for Serbia on which this report is based is full cooperation with the tribunal in The Hague in order to progress on the path to EU membership .
I would also like to urge Serbia to make a firmer commitment to employment policies and social cohesion .
I would also call on the country to continue to create an environment conducive to the development of democracy , the rule of law , a free market economy and respect for human rights .
Serbia has made progress in the field of the environment .
Nevertheless , the country should intensify efforts in the field of renewable energy and energy efficiency .
The main elements of the acquis on renewable energy remain to be transposed . The country needs to adopt a legislative framework on energy efficiency .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the European integration process of Serbia and on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Union because I believe that constructive approaches in regional cooperation and good relations with neighbouring countries are essential elements of the stabilisation and association process , and will play a decisive role in the process of transforming the Western Balkans into an area of long-term stability and sustainable development .
Serbia also plays an important role in terms of the security , stability and reconciliation of the peoples of the region .
The European Union condemns all the war crimes that destroyed the former Yugoslavia , and supports the work of the ICTY ( International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ) .
It also emphasises that Serbia 's future lies in membership of the European Union , and encourages the country to continue its efforts to achieve that goal .
There are no obstacles to the European Parliament giving its approval to the draft Council and Commission decision on the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Serbia , of the other part .
In the context of the European Parliament 's current competences regarding international agreements , the Council has tabled a request for the agreement to be adopted and the Committee on Foreign Affairs has given its opinion in the form of a recommendation that the agreement should be concluded .
I voted in favour , because I believe this agreement makes an extremely important contribution to a robust and effective neighbourhood policy , in which Serbia plays a role in terms of geopolitical balance in the Balkans .
Having regard to the draft Council and Commission decision , to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and Serbia , to the request for consent submitted by the Council in accordance with Articles 217 and 218 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , to Rules 81 and 90 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , and to the recommendation of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I consider it highly logical and necessary to endorse Parliament 's position .
I therefore approve the draft Council and Commission decision in question in order to favour , firstly , closer cooperation with Serbia and , more generally , stabilisation and cooperation actions within the European Union .
The reforms undertaken by Serbia will enable the country to make significant progress along the path to future EU membership .
I therefore believe that the conclusion of this Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Serbia , of the other part , should be supported .
Parliament 's consent for the EU-Serbia Stabilisation and Association Agreement , following the Council 's decision to initiate its ratification process , is an important step along the road towards integrating the Western Balkans in the EU .
I voted in favour based on my vision of the EU as a leading player that has an obligation to support the full stabilisation of the Western Balkans .
The EU 's international credibility is closely linked to its capacity to act among its neighbouring countries .
In the case of the Western Balkans , including Serbia , it seems that the only possible route is accession to the EU .
However , that accession is bound by a series of conditions .
Serbia is demonstrating an outstanding predisposition for moving towards becoming part of the EU .
However , despite the consent given today by Parliament , a resolution has also been adopted which , despite being the positive resolution adopted by this House in relation to Serbia , points out that Belgrade 's cooperation with the International Criminal Court and a full commitment to democracy and the rule of law continue to be imperative in its journey towards the EU .
in writing . - We have given our support to this text because most of the amendments we presented were adopted .
Those amendments dealt with Kosovo , gender equality , minority rights , civil society , public transport , environment and relations with Bosnia The one rejected will be re-tabled as it was lost on a tied vote ( 27 to 27 ) .
It is very important as it calls on Serbia to enter into dialogue with Kosovo without referring to new negotiations on either status or partition .
I have voted in favour of concluding a Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Serbia .
Serbia is of significance for the stability of the entire Balkan region and , therefore , it is important for us to have an ongoing dialogue with the country at an institutional level .
In recent years , Serbia has made major progress in moving towards Europe .
Following the ruling by the International Court of Justice that the unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo did not violate international law , Europe must play an active peacebuilding role .
We also need to support Serbia in every way possible in its efforts to cooperate with the International Criminal Court .
I was very pleased at the results of today 's vote on the proposal for a decision of the Council and of the Commission on the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States and the Republic of Serbia .
Since 2007 , Serbia has made visible progress in terms of cooperation with the European Union , which has made it possible for negotiations with the EU to be resumed .
They were completed on 10 September 2007 and , after consultations with the EU Member States , the Stabilisation and Association Agreement was initialled on 7 November 2007 in Brussels .
We must remember , however , that a precondition for full cooperation is that Serbia should meet the political condition set by the Council when adopting the negotiating directives , namely , full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
I voted in favour of this own-initiative report , which is aimed at further developing a range of measures , particularly as regards promoting early diagnosis and quality of life , improving epidemiological knowledge of the disease and the coordination of existing research , promoting the sharing of best practices between Member States , and respecting people living with dementia-related illnesses .
At present , around 14 million Europeans develop some form of dementia every year , and Alzheimer 's disease is responsible for half of all cases .
It is necessary to bring together the different policies that are currently in place so as to address this situation in a coordinated , objective and more effective way , supporting carers and families in areas such as strengthening different healthcare systems , training and counselling .
I believe it is important that the European strategy on dementia should put more emphasis on the social aspects of people living with dementia , with increasing focus on research and prevention , along with early diagnosis .
I voted in favour of this resolution on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias in which the basic approach is improved coordination between the Member States and a more effective and solidarity-based response geared to prevention and the treatment of people living with dementias , particularly Alzheimer 's , as well as the people around them , whether they be healthcare professionals , service providers or relatives .
The communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias is a fundamental step on the way towards specific proposals to link up the various existing policies and ways of tackling this type of disease .
Fragmented action , the uneven responses that exist in Europe and the prevalence of unequal conditions regarding access and treatment for the disease provide more than sufficient justification for this initiative .
Therefore , it is vital to focus on early diagnosis and prevention and to take action to raise public awareness of what living with dementia entails .
A European strategy must also seek to safeguard the existence of services that guarantee maximum possible coverage and equal conditions as regards access and treatment for patients , regardless of their age , gender , financial resources or place of residence .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this important document .
A new case of neurodegenerative disease ( nervous system disorders ) is diagnosed every 24 hours .
At present , this disease represents one of the main causes of incapacity among the elderly , and Alzheimer 's disease accounts for more than half of all cases .
The number of people affected is expected to rise significantly .
This causes concern , bearing in mind the increase in average life expectancy and the declining ratio between the number of people working and the number of people who are retired .
I support the European Commission 's proposal to establish a European strategy , a solidarity-based response geared to prevention and the treatment of people living with dementias ( gradual deterioration in mental abilities ) , as well as the people around them .
A European strategy should also seek to safeguard the existence of services that guarantee maximum possible coverage and equal conditions as regards access and treatment for patients , regardless of their age , gender , financial resources or place of residence .
Dementia is a disease characterised by the slow and progressive loss of memory , concentration and the ability to learn , usually in people over 65 years of age .
Dementia is a group of neurodegenerative diseases which should not be thought of as a normal part of ageing .
Estimates suggest that more than 8 million Europeans aged between 30 and 99 suffer from neurodegenerative diseases , which equates to 12.5 cases for every 1 000 people , with women more commonly affected than men .
Scientists admit that this figure could double over the next 20 years .
The most common form of dementia in Europe is Alzheimer 's disease , which represents between 50 % and 70 % of cases .
I voted in favour of this report , which is aimed at improving the quality of life and wellbeing of patients , encouraging research and prevention , and improving communication between the Member States so as to respond in a more effective and inclusive way , with a view to preventing and treating people who live with a dementia-related illness , particularly Alzheimer 's disease , as well as those around them .
The proposal for the creation of a European Year of Mental Health is also important .
I support the rapporteur and voted in favour of her proposal .
Alzheimer 's disease is becoming increasingly widespread and affects an ever-growing number of people , especially as the ratio between the working and retired population continues to diminish .
Changes in patients ' behaviour and personality make them dependent on those around them .
The proposal the rapporteur is presenting to us is to improve coordination between Member States , solidarity and support not only for those affected , but also for those in any way involved .
An increasing number of people in Europe and the rest of the world are affected by Alzheimer 's disease , and in recent decades , the average age of sufferers has fallen .
While , in the past , the disease was already a social and healthcare problem , it has now become an urgent priority on the agenda of national healthcare policies .
Therefore , the commitment the European Union intends to make over the next few years , in terms of coordinating policies at European level , is positive .
This will involve research and the exchange of good practice in dealing with Alzheimer 's disease , early diagnosis and support for sufferers ' families , as in many Member States , families are today under great financial and psychological pressure as a result of looking after people who need constant care and treatment .
I am voting in favour of the report by Mrs Matias in the hope that much will be done - more than has been done so far - for an illness that is becoming increasingly common , but which has major social implications which are not as widely known .
I agree with the European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias , because every year , an increasing number of people develop some type of dementia .
Since the population of Europe is ageing , and the social and economic consequences are also greatly affecting health systems in the Member States , action and specific initiatives need to be taken as a matter of urgency to combat this serious disease .
Europe 's recent findings show that Alzheimer 's disease remains underdiagnosed in the EU and that many inequalities exist across the Member States in regard to prevention , access to treatment and provision of appropriate services .
The focus should be on early diagnosis and prevention of Alzheimer 's disease .
Diet is a significant causal factor in the development of Alzheimer 's disease and therefore , the prevention of dementia through modifiable interventions should be a priority and particular attention should be given to preventive factors such as a healthy diet , promoting physical and cognitive activity and controlling cardiovascular risk factors such as diabetes , high cholesterol , hypertension and smoking , Furthermore , it is essential to enhance the dignity of all patients throughout the process of their disease and reduce inequalities , in other words , to safeguard the existence of services that guarantee coverage and equal conditions as regards access and treatment for patients , regardless of their age , gender , financial resources or place of residence .
Alzheimer 's disease affects everywhere equally .
The fact that scientific progress has failed to diagnose it before its onset or find a treatment makes it all the more incumbent on us to find solutions for improving the lives of those who suffer from it .
More than 8 million Europeans are faced with neurodegenerative diseases and the predictions are not at all promising - the number of patients will double in 30 years .
This is why coordination between Member States needs to be improved , along with adopting a more effective and solidarity-based response geared towards prevention and the treatment of people living with dementia , particularly Alzheimer 's , as well as towards supporting the people around them .
For any European strategy in this area to work , it is crucial that all countries give priority to drawing up national action plans .
We must also focus on early diagnosis and prevention and on gathering and processing epidemiological data on the disease .
Once these fundamental steps have been taken , integrated action is required , ranging from research to healthcare provision .
It is important to fill the gaps that still exist in such areas as professional training or support for families and to take action to increase public awareness of the issues that living with dementia raises .
I voted in favour of the report on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease , because the European Commission and the governments of the Member States undertake to introduce European and national action plans to : promote research at European level into the causes , prevention and treatment of Alzheimer 's disease and to increase funding for it ; to improve prevention and early diagnosis ; to organise information campaigns for the general public , in order to improve the ability to recognise the symptoms of the disease ; to recognise the heavy burden on carers of patients with dementia and to provide psychological support for patients and their families .
However , the most important thing is to safeguard and promote a public approach to the disease overall .
Publicly funded research , prevention , treatment and support for patients and their families and relatives is important not just in principle .
This public approach is needed in order to avoid speculation by pharmaceutical companies and other private interests .
The Member States need to provide the necessary government funded services and infrastructures , so that the health and social consequences on patients and their environment can be addressed .
It is estimated that 7.3 million Europeans suffer from different forms of dementia , the majority of cases being Alzheimer 's disease .
This is a large-scale health problem , as we should bear in mind that forms of dementia affect not only those who suffer from them , but also those who care for them .
If there were a European strategy in this area , it would allow a more integrated approach and a more effective response to treatment and awareness of mental illnesses , making the European public more sensitive to brain pathologies associated with ageing .
Firstly , I believe that it is important to improve coordination between the Member States by developing national strategies and plans targeted at Alzheimer 's disease .
Secondly , I believe it is important to ensure greater support and provision of services for patients and their families .
Lastly , I believe it is important to boost research into , and treatment and prevention of , this type of illness .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Matias on the report that she has tabled , and I support the recommendations for the Commission and the Council , as well as those for the Member States .
It is estimated that 9.9 million people in Europe suffer from dementia ; the vast majority of these - more than 7 million - have been diagnosed with Alzheimer 's .
Scientific studies suggest that this figure could double every 20 years .
This situation requires a new attitude from the European Union and the Member States on the prevention and treatment of this disease .
The report on which we voted today , whose content I support , proposes improved coordination between the Member States ' medical and social services , and the people around those suffering from Alzheimer 's , such as healthcare professionals , relatives or private charities .
I would also stress the importance given in the report to early diagnosis , to the existence of interconnected centres of reference , to a multidisciplinary approach to the disease , to the importance of professional training specialising in this type of diseases , and to the network of support for families .
Also important is the support proposed for information campaigns on degenerative diseases aimed at the general public .
I also agree with the idea expressed in the report that a European strategy on these diseases must protect services that enable universal and geographically widespread access to the system .
Almost 10 million Europeans suffer from mental disorders , in particular , Alzheimer 's disease .
The European response remains weak , and the situation of patients , their families and their carers is very imbalanced across Europe : currently , only seven Member States have national strategies in place .
That is why the European Parliament is urging the Member States to draw up specific programmes and strategies at national level to combat this disease and its effects .
These strategies must address the disease 's social and health consequences , as well as the services and support necessary for sufferers and their families .
Efforts to promote early diagnosis and health services focusing on prevention and research must become a health priority at European Union level too .
The establishment of a public-private research , development and investment programme must therefore be encouraged at European level .
The speed with which we slow down the progression of Alzheimer 's disease , perhaps to the point where it is eradicated , will lead to a significant change in the number of dependent people and will help older people make the most of their lives for as long as possible .
I voted in favour of the report on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia , because it puts forward measures to ensure the dignity of persons suffering from dementia , reduce inequalities and prevent social exclusion , and promote early diagnosis and research into the prevention of these diseases .
In Europe , some 9.9 million people are suffering from some form of dementia , which means that Europe ranks second with regard to the prevalence of this type of disease .
In Portugal alone , the number of dementia patients is estimated at 153 000 , more than 90 000 of whom have Alzheimer 's , and it is predicted that these numbers will double by 2020 .
With the ageing of the population , the response from societies and governments to this type of disease , which is very much associated with age , represents a major challenge at the start of this millennium .
For this reason , I cannot but demonstrate my strongest support for an initiative that proposes to declare dementia an EU health priority and urge the Member States to develop specific national strategies and plans for dealing with Alzheimer 's disease .
The Democratic Social Centre has defended this approach in Portugal , as it is at the forefront and perfectly in agreement with the EU 's health policies and priorities , by demanding from the government a National Dementia Plan that guarantees dignified , humanised and skilled support and care for people suffering from Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia .
Every year , 1.4 million citizens living in Europe develop some type of dementia , meaning that a new case is diagnosed every 24 seconds .
In Portugal , it is estimated that there are 153 000 people suffering from dementia , with 90 000 suffering from Alzheimer 's .
Given the ageing of the EU 's population , specialists forecast that these figures will double by 2040 .
Given the ageing of the population and the decreasing ratio of working to retired people , it is expected that dementia will be one of the main challenges to the sustainability of national social and healthcare systems .
It is therefore crucial for governments to develop specific national strategies and plans for Alzheimer 's disease in order to deal with the social and health consequences of dementia , not just by guaranteeing the provision of services , but also by supporting people with dementia and their families .
I welcome the proposal to launch a European Year of Mental Health , in order to raise awareness of brain-related diseases associated with ageing , and of ways to detect and identify early symptoms of such diseases , with public information campaigns on their prevention and treatment .
Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia are diseases that have been arousing justified attention and concern .
According to the 2010 report of Alzheimer 's Disease International , approximately 9.9 million people in Europe are affected and it is predicted that this number will rise considerably by 2020 .
The lack of professional carers for people with Alzheimer 's has to be a cause for considerable concern , since this situation will tend to get worse in the future if measures are not taken .
These measures must include the training of a sufficient number of health and social services professionals and the guarantee of appropriate care provision through public services , respecting the wish of patients to remain in their own home environment wherever possible and promoting the fundamental principles of dignity and social inclusion and also the independence and self-determination of the patients .
Since this is a disease where the medication costs are very high and cannot be met by the majority of patients , increased funding for these drugs is desirable .
It is absolutely essential to encourage and develop research in this area , particularly in connection with prevention , diagnosis and treatment , when the fundamental principle is that the public sector takes on these responsibilities without restrictions of benefit or access for any patient .
I fully support this project on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementia diseases .
Alzheimer 's disease is the main cause of dementia and accounts for over 44 000 sufferers in Ireland and about 10 million across Europe .
Alzheimer 's is a progressive disease , which means that more and more damage occurs to the brain over time .
At the same time , the symptoms of the disease become more acute .
Sadly , since the European population is ageing , there is every likelihood that the number of sufferers will increase .
There must be improved coordination between Member States in relation to research into the root causes of dementia diseases and in relation to best care practice .
Frequently , the burden of care falls on family members .
There are 50 000 people in Ireland caring daily for dementia sufferers .
I would like to pay a special tribute to those carers and to the Alzheimer Society of Ireland , who provide excellent assistance to those suffering from Alzheimer 's disease .
It is estimated that almost 10 million people in Europe suffer from dementia , and the majority of them from Alzheimer 's disease .
This figure is likely to double virtually every 20 years .
One in four people over the age of 65 could be affected in 2020 .
In France , there are 160 000 new sufferers each year .
We can therefore say that all Europeans will , at one time or another , be directly or indirectly confronted with problems linked to Alzheimer 's disease or other dementias .
Hence , I gave my full backing to this own-initiative report , which calls on the European Commission to make the fight against Alzheimer 's disease one of Europe 's priorities for action in the field of health .
It is crucial to ensure that Alzheimer 's sufferers have access to appropriate healthcare and , above all , we need closer European cooperation in the fields of research ( within the context of the next research framework programme ) , prevention , diagnosis ( with common criteria , common protocols and so on ) and treatment .
We also call for the launch of a European Year of Mental Health , to complement World Alzheimer 's Day , which I hope will provide an opportunity to further raise awareness of this issue .
As Chair of the European Alliance against Alzheimer 's disease , I can only welcome the measures recommended by this European initiative , which seeks to improve epidemiological knowledge about the disease and to coordinate current research .
Joint research programmes have been set up thanks to European support , and I hope that they will bear fruit .
In the meantime , it is essential to place prevention at the heart of any strategy and to direct our efforts towards obtaining the earliest possible diagnosis , as is highlighted in the report .
The Member States should all take action immediately , including through prevention campaigns based on an ambitious European plan for combating the disease .
Behavioural or personality changes caused by the disease mean that sufferers become gradually more dependent on others .
Patients are not the only ones who suffer from this disease ; their families and their carers suffer too .
Furthermore , I wish to pay tribute to the Alzheimer Europe association which , alongside national associations fighting against the disease , plays a crucial role in helping patients and their families .
I gave my full support to this own-initiative report , which seeks to encourage the European Commission to make Alzheimer 's disease its top priority where action in the field of health is concerned .
Not only must we promote early diagnosis methods , develop the means to detect as early as possible the symptoms of this disease and concentrate on research efforts into neurodegenerative diseases ; we must also and , above all , seek to improve the daily lives of patients and their families , as this aspect is still too often overlooked by public policies .
Finally , particular attention should also be paid to women , who are affected by this difficult disease twice as much as men .
in writing . - The Matias report deals with an issue of increasing importance in our ageing society .
In my own country , the Scottish Government has made dementia a national priority , and Scottish expertise is being used in research of international significance .
This European initiative is to be welcomed as a means of better coordinating the EU 's work against dementia .
I voted in favour of this resolution on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias , because the basic approach is improved coordination between the Member States and a more effective and solidarity-based response geared to prevention and the treatment of people living with dementias , particularly Alzheimer 's , as well as the people around them , whether they be healthcare professionals , service providers or relatives .
It is important and essential to promote early diagnosis and a good quality of life , to support cooperation between the Member States through sharing best practices and clinical studies in this field , and to respect the rights and expectations of people living with this difficult disease .
This is a fundamental step on the way towards specific proposals to link up the various existing policies and ways of tackling this type of disease and to guarantee maximum possible coverage and equal conditions as regards access and treatment for patients , regardless of financial resources .
With today 's vote on the Matias report , the European Parliament has sought to emphasise that the fight against Alzheimer 's disease is an EU health priority .
According to the World Alzheimer Report 2009 , around 28 % of European citizens suffer from this type of dementia , and this percentage is likely to increase given Europe 's ageing population .
Therefore , I believe that the institutions have a responsibility not to underestimate this disease and to take concrete action to support patients and their families .
In this regard , the role of the European Parliament must be to promote a policy of raising public awareness of the issue , and to call on the Council and the Commission to take due account of the disease when preparing future actions in the area of preventive health policy .
Of the actions suggested in the report , I would like to emphasise the drawing up of guidelines for the implementation of early diagnostic services and the identification of tools for facilitating access to funding .
Adopting this report on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease marks an important step in the battle against this disease at a time when the number of people in Europe suffering from dementia is 9.9 million , with Alzheimer 's patients accounting for the majority of them .
Adopting this report will allow Member States to take coordinated measures to combat this disease in the European Union .
I think that one possible solution is to leverage the resources of the flagship initiative ' Innovation Union ' in the Europe 2020 strategy and of the pilot ' European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing ' , which is due to be launched this spring .
Given the anticipated dramatic increase in the number of Alzheimer 's patients by 2020 , there is a need in the future to develop partnerships between public institutions , and between private and public institutions in the process of implementing research projects , thereby harnessing facilities , resources and experience in the private and public sectors to combat the effects of Alzheimer 's and of other types of dementia .
One of the most effective ways of raising social awareness about the incidence of dementia in people of advanced age is to highlight the problem and conduct an active information campaign .
We should pay particular attention to Alzheimer 's disease , since it is becoming an increasingly serious problem , not only in the EU but also on a global scale , and , according to specialists , the number of sufferers is constantly on the rise .
Our society is ageing , and we must speak about this problem openly and look for solutions .
Above all , we must highlight the importance of preventing the disease .
I therefore voted in favour of the Matias report on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias .
in writing . - I voted for this own-initiative report which is Parliament 's reply to the Commission Communication on a European Initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias .
Its key objectives are : the promotion of early diagnosis and quality of life ; improvement of epidemiological knowledge of the disease and coordination of existing research ; support for solidarity between Member States through sharing best practices ; and finally , respect for the rights of people living with dementia .
These are all welcome proposals , as I believe a European strategy on dementia should put more emphasis on the social dimension of people living with dementia and their carers while further supporting research into prevention and early diagnosis .
An alarming statistic comes from the 2009 report on Alzheimer 's disease : an estimated 35.6 million people worldwide are suffering from dementia in all its forms .
This estimate is constantly being revised upwards in Europe , where the average age of the population is rising rapidly .
It is therefore important to set up a statistical data sharing network , through the Member States , and a platform for coordinating research into the causes , prevention and treatment of Alzheimer 's disease .
Considering that early diagnosis can help keep healthcare costs down throughout Europe , it is also fundamental to share out the level of financial investment and draw up policies at European level to encourage targeted prevention .
I must also emphasise that it is important to take into account the specific needs of women , who account for twice the number of sufferers and a disproportionate number of carers in the areas of medical and social research , health and social policies .
Alzheimer 's disease is a major challenge to European society .
It is only by making a joint effort that we will be able to address the social and health consequences of dementia and provide services and support for people suffering from neurodegenerative diseases , as well as for their families .
My party in Portugal , the Democratic and Social Centre - People 's Party , has always argued strongly for a national dementia plan so that people suffering this type of disease can be monitored by qualified people , and in a way that is dignified and humane .
I cannot , therefore , fail to support this EU initiative , which aims to make combating dementia one of the EU 's priorities .
The number of Europeans affected by Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia is so high as to make such prioritisation necessary .
Action in the initial stages is very important for successfully treating this type of disease and giving sufferers the best possible quality of life .
Alzheimer 's is an insidious disease for which there are no effective drugs , despite extensive research .
It is unlikely that we will find a cure in the near future for the disease and its consequences , such as increasing loss of memory and of other higher brain functions , which lead to a state of complete dependence on others .
This makes it even more important to start treatment at an early stage .
One important measure involves educating the public about prevention , but also about early recognition and delaying the onset of the disease .
Many general practitioners are apparently beginning the treatment with anti-dementia drugs too late , in order not to exceed their budgets , and this is counter-productive .
According to medical experts , treatment with the right medicines can postpone for up to a year the need for the person suffering from the disease to move into an expensive care home .
In this context , it is important not to forget the severe physical and mental stresses suffered by the relatives who care for these sick people .
These stresses lead to depression , burnout and similar disorders among around a third of carers .
We are attempting to alleviate the suffering of people with Alzheimer 's disease at an EU level .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of the Matias report .
I am in favour of Mrs Matias 's report , in that there is a need in Europe to ensure close cooperation and coordination between Member States able to provide an effective response in the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer 's disease , which today affects 6 million Europeans .
Without European support for national efforts , not only in the areas of prevention and treatment , but also in the coordination of research funding , the dissemination of best practices and appropriate financing for the pharmaceutical industry working to discover effective drugs , we will not be able to foster the independence and dignity of persons suffering from diseases that are severely invalidating , including in terms of their affective and social relations .
My decision to vote in favour of the report on Alzheimer 's disease stems from a desire to improve the current European strategy for combating the disease .
The progressive ageing of the European population is being accompanied by a substantial increase in the number of people suffering from neurodegenerative diseases , 50 % of which turn out to be Alzheimer 's disease .
Therefore , this report is a step forward in the fight against this serious disease .
I think that in this matter , it is vital to focus on prevention , in terms of both early diagnosis and the gathering of epidemiological data .
It is also necessary to fill the gaps that still exist in such areas as professional training and support for families , by raising public awareness of what living with dementia entails .
I voted in favour of the report on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease , as it will help to improve the quality of life of patients and their relatives and reduce inequalities between the Member States in terms of prevention , access to treatment and the provision of suitable services to patients suffering from dementia .
There are 1.4 million citizens in Europe suffering from some form of dementia and over 8 million Europeans aged between 30 and 99 suffer from neuro-degenerative diseases ; half of these suffer from Alzheimer 's and this number is expected to double every 20 years .
The aim of this report is to improve the current situation ; the basic objectives which it sets are promoting early diagnosis and prevention and improving the quality of life of patients , a solidarity-based and uniform response between the various states , from research through to medical treatment , and enhancing the dignity of patents throughout their treatment .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias .
I share some of the concerns that run through the report by Mrs Matias , and I support the appeal to the Council to declare dementia an EU health priority .
It is important to act in a global way .
In fact , the level of transnational coordination is relatively low in the EU , leading to fragmentation and limited sharing of knowledge and best practice among Member States ; research into Alzheimer 's disease is lagging behind that into other serious diseases in Europe .
In the light of these facts , which are well reported in this document , it is necessary to develop not just specific national plans and strategies for Alzheimer 's disease , which are essential , but also an instrument at European level that promotes the effective coordination of European research in this area .
I believe this is the way to ensure that healthcare is provided according to best practice in all European countries at the same time .
In this way , we will be able to avoid uneven responses and the prevalence of unequal conditions regarding access and treatment for the disease .
The statistics on Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia are extremely worrying , such as the fact that every year , 1.4 million citizens living in the European Union develop some kind of dementia and a new case is diagnosed every 24 seconds .
Almost one in 20 people over the age of 65 suffers from dementia , while it is estimated that more than 8 million Europeans suffer from diseases of this kind .
In view of that , coordination of the various national policies across Europe is needed .
Fragmented action , the uneven responses that exist in Europe and the prevalence of unequal conditions regarding access and treatment for the disease provide more than sufficient justification for this initiative .
It is based on four key objectives : promoting early diagnosis , improving epidemiological knowledge of the disease , supporting solidarity between Member States , and respecting the rights of people living with the various forms of dementia .
As yet , no cure has been found for Alzheimer 's disease .
It is therefore vital to step up extra-pharmacological intervention , promoting interventions that improve the wellbeing of those affected .
In light of all of the above , I am absolutely in favour of better coordination between Member States and a more effective response with a view to preventing dementia .
This report is a fundamental step towards devising a European strategy in this area based on four key objectives : promoting early diagnosis and quality of life ; improving epidemiological knowledge of the disease and coordinating existing research ; supporting solidarity between Member States through sharing best practices ; and respecting the rights of people living with dementia , as well as of those caring for them .
Every year , 1.4 million citizens living in Europe develop some type of dementia .
A new case is diagnosed every 24 seconds .
Almost one in 20 people over the age of 65 and one in five over 80 suffer from dementia .
It is estimated that more than 8 million Europeans aged between 30 and 99 suffer from neurodegenerative diseases ( with Alzheimer 's accounting for half ) and scientists anticipate that this number will double every 20 years .
As there are inequalities in terms of access to diagnosis and treatment , not only between countries but also within them , national action plans need to be devised which provide a solidarity-based response geared towards prevention and the treatment of people living with dementia , particularly Alzheimer 's , as well as towards supporting the people around them ( healthcare professionals , service providers or relatives ) .
The number of people suffering from dementia in Europe is estimated at 9.9 million , and Alzheimer 's disease is responsible for the vast majority of cases .
Neurodegenerative diseases represent one of the main causes of disability and dependence in older people , and it is thought that the number of people suffering from dementias could double by 2020 .
In this context , the importance of this report must be stressed : it draws attention to the need for Member States and the EU to significantly strengthen cooperation and coordination of innovative and multidisciplinary clinical research efforts into the causes , prevention and treatment of Alzheimer 's disease , as well as information sharing and the level of financial resources in this area .
I would also highlight the stress placed on early diagnosis , the training of professionals , support for families and public information campaigns , all in order to guarantee these patients the provision of healthcare according to best practice .
Every 24 seconds , another person is diagnosed with a neurodegenerative disease in the EU .
Almost one in 20 people over the age of 65 and one in five over 80 suffer from dementia .
Alzheimer 's disease is responsible for more than half of these cases .
In total , more than 8 million Europeans aged between 30 and 99 are affected , and scientists estimate that this number could double every 20 years in future .
The European Union has to take initiatives so that the increase in the number of people affected by these diseases can be addressed in the coming decades .
I endorsed the European Parliament resolution calling , in particular , on the Member States to take steps to help slow down the disease 's progression in sufferers - such as promoting healthy lifestyles and ensuring that medication is available to all sufferers - to establish specialist centres , to provide satisfactory medical equipment nationwide , and to draw up strategic action plans for research in this area .
in writing . - We have supported this proposal because , among other things , it calls on the Council to declare dementia to be an EU health priority and strongly urges the Member States to develop specific national plans and strategies for Alzheimer 's disease in order to deal with the social and health consequences of dementia and to provide services and support for people with dementia and their families , as has been done in several Member States where the Alzheimer 's and similar diseases plan launched in 2008 has made it possible to coordinate medical and social care and clinical and basic research into these diseases at national level .
The average age of the European population is constantly rising and this makes age-related problems , particularly dementias , increasingly important .
It is estimated that over 35 million people suffer from dementia globally , and this number could double every 20 years .
In Europe , 9.9 million people suffer from dementia and many of them have Alzheimer 's disease .
A study by Alzheimer 's Disease International shows that each Alzheimer 's patient costs EU countries EUR 24 000 a year , making a total of around EUR 161 billion .
In the decades to come , dementia is likely to be one of the main challenges to the sustainability of our national health systems .
Given the statistics on the number of people involved , it is necessary to provide services and support for people with dementia and particularly their families , the main sources of support for their care .
This has been done in several Member States which have implemented the Alzheimer 's and similar diseases plan .
The common objective must be to promote greater public awareness about the diseases associated with ageing and to complement World Alzheimer 's Day , held on 21 September , with information campaigns on the prevention of such diseases and the treatment of cerebral vascular accidents .
I voted in favour of the report on a European initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias .
Parliament recently held a debate on issues relating to elderly people in the context of the economic crisis , labour market demands and raising employment levels .
Statistics on the number of people diagnosed with dementia reveal the enormity of the problem .
Every year , 1.4 million Europeans develop one of the forms of dementia , and the number of sufferers is estimated at 10 million .
In Poland , over 200 000 people suffer from Alzheimer 's disease .
Neurodegenerative diseases are one of the leading causes of disability among elderly people , and the problem is becoming worse as a result of the increase in the average lifespan .
Alzheimer 's disease is a major economic challenge for all societies .
The World Alzheimer Report published in 2010 states that the worldwide annual costs of Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia amount to USD 600 billion .
We need a joint European strategy in the fight against dementia .
We must develop and promote preventive measures against Alzheimer 's disease or , in other words , a healthy lifestyle , which means staying physically and mentally active , being involved in the community and eating a healthy diet .
Those caring for patients should be guaranteed appropriate financial and psychological support .
A European strategy for the fight against Alzheimer 's disease should pay particular attention to the needs of women , who are twice as likely to develop dementia and who make up the majority of carers for sufferers of the disease .
I have voted emphatically in favour of this own-initiative report on Alzheimer 's .
It contains a very good overview of the measures which need to be taken in this field .
No amendments have been tabled to the text adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which indicates that these recommendations enjoy widespread support .
In addition , I would also ask that we pay attention to the increasing number of surgeries for dementia-friendly communities being set up in countries like Germany , Belgium and Scotland .
We must also consider the impact of expectations on the evolution of this disease .
Unduly negative expectations can often have an adverse effect on the disease , as was , indeed , the conclusion of a conference organised by the Belgian Presidency at the end of last year .
These comments should be included in the policy as well .
I agree with the report , in that it is important to link up the various methods for treating the disease .
1.4 million people in Europe are struck down with dementia every year and therefore , early diagnosis and prevention is of special importance .
Better coordination between the Member States is essential too .
I also support the fact that we must endeavour to achieve the widest possible coverage as regards access to treatment , and equal conditions for patients , regardless of their age , gender , financial resources or place of residence .
I have voted in favour of the report which includes an impressive and detailed description of the problems , wishes and concerns of Alzheimer 's patients , and the people caring for them , and which calls on us to take joint action .
At the moment , only one in every 15 Europeans over the age of 65 suffers from dementia , but this figure will increase significantly over the decades to come .
As a result , we will be faced with a major challenge .
in writing . - I fully support this new initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other forms of dementia .
Dementia is expected to be one of the main challenges for healthcare in the coming years and cooperation between countries to improve prevention , diagnosis and care is vital .
The report calls for the raising of awareness surrounding this issue and the need for early recognition of the symptoms of Alzheimer 's disease .
This will aid the early diagnosis of cases and help improve access to treatment .
As well as protecting the wellbeing of those suffering from dementia , it is important to raise awareness of carers , who often have to deal with emotional and financial difficulties ; the development of action plans to improve the day-to-day situation for carers is another step towards improving the lives of those affected by Alzheimer 's and dementia .
During this plenary session , we voted on the European Parliament resolution on the European Initiative on Alzheimer 's disease and other dementias .
I voted in favour of this resolution , since it is a very important step on the path towards detailed proposals for joining up existing political strategies and ways of managing diseases of this kind .
Neurodegenerative diseases are currently one of the main causes of disability among elderly people , and it is highly likely that the number of people affected by these diseases will increase significantly .
This fact becomes all the more relevant if we take into account the growth in the average life expectancy and the falling ratio of employed people to retiring people .
In view of the above , it is a matter of fundamental importance that prevention be placed at the centre of all strategies , and that efforts be made to ensure that diagnoses are made as early as possible .
As a representative of the people , I feel jointly responsible for ensuring that the EU deploys its powers to deal with the abovementioned problem .
As a result of the rapid increase in the number of people suffering from Alzheimer 's and other forms of dementia , there is a need for rapid action by the EU , which involves ensuring a greater focus on early diagnosis and prevention .
This means , for example , that people who are at risk should undergo tests at an early stage and that targeted education campaigns should be used to help the relatives of elderly people to distinguish between the normal signs of ageing and the early symptoms of dementia .
The Member States must share their expertise and involve both scientists and healthcare professionals in the process .
The alarming number of people suffering from the disease and the resulting costs for the individual Member States make the need for prevention urgent .
This must take the form of a healthy diet and measures to delay the onset of the disease .
The report also refers to the provision of practical and psychological support for relatives .
It has been shown that a patient who is cared for at home needs three carers , who generally have to give up their jobs .
Finally , the report mentions the importance of maintaining the dignity of people suffering from Alzheimer 's .
This can be achieved by an education programme , which should start in schools .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the petition concerning the failure of the European Commission to take action regarding a competition case and the harmful impact of this on the company concerned .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the Commission 's reply to the Committee on Petitions failed to respond sufficiently to the questions raised by the petitioner and the committee members or to the concerns raised in the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
It is necessary therefore to call on the Commission immediately to take the steps needed to end the still-pending procedure initiated in 1997 under the safeguard clause of Article 8 of Directive 93 / 42 / EEC .
Furthermore , the Commission must urgently respond to the legitimate concerns of the petitioner - who has been experiencing this intolerable situation for 13 years and has consequently suffered considerable loss of earnings - and to take the necessary steps to enable the petitioner to assert his rights .
This case , of more than ten years ' standing , has caused considerable financial losses to the company , because it has still not obtained a final response from the Commission relating to its misunderstanding with the German authorities .
It is essential that all medical devices sold in the EU comply with Union law and , for the defence and protection of its consumers , satisfy safety standards .
However , it is up to the Commission to take the necessary measures to bring this case to a conclusion , since disputes need to be resolved in good time .
The issue under discussion is an inhaler for asthma that has been on the market since 1996 .
The German authorities expressed concerns about this product and informed the Commission with a view to launching and concluding a safeguard procedure .
However , the Commission did not consult the manufacturer and never issued a ruling , so a decision on the matter is still pending and the petitioner is left without any available means of legal redress .
The manufacturer placed the device on the market under a new name in 2003 and , in 2005 , the government of Upper Bavaria ordered it to be withdrawn from the market , under the German Medical Devices Act , without informing the Commission accordingly .
The manufacturer informed the Commission of the second sales prohibition with a view to initiating infringement proceedings against Germany , but the Commission claims that there was insufficient proof that the inhaler satisfied the essential requirements stipulated in the directive , and it concluded that there was no need for a new product safety review .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe it to be imperative that the Commission urgently respond to the legitimate concerns of the injured party , to enable him to assert his rights .
I am pleased that Parliament has today adopted a resolution concerning Mr Klein 's petition .
The Committee on Petitions has been working on this case for a considerable period of time .
In the 1990s , Mr Klein invented an inhaler for asthma sufferers and a disputed sales ban was twice imposed on this product .
Without going into detail , I am convinced that the initial ban on the inhaler in 1996 was not entirely lawful .
At the very least , the circumstances which led to the ban need to be examined critically .
The Commission was required to bring the safeguard clause procedure to a conclusion , in order to allow the party concerned to appeal .
The process has still not been completed .
The legal basis and the legitimacy of the second ban are definitely subjects for dispute .
However , there appears also to have been a violation of European Union law .
As a result , Mr Klein has been the victim of a flagrant denial of justice and this situation needs to be rectified .
It is important that the Commission quickly finds a solution which will resolve this problem once and for all .
My vote in favour of the motion for a resolution was based on the need to state that Europe , and specifically the European Parliament as a democratically elected body , has always been on the side of its citizens .
The resolution adopted today is based on Petition 0473 / 2008 presented by Christoph Klein , a German citizen , concerning the failure of the Commission to take action regarding a competition case relating to the withdrawal from sale of an asthma device .
In similar cases , what we need to ensure , firstly in our capacity as European citizens , and secondly , in our capacity as Members of the European Parliament , is the real possibility of being able to implement safeguards should one of the European institutions fail to comply with the provisions of the Treaties .
In summary , this is the reason for my vote .
To this I add the hope that the Commission will rectify its behaviour and , at the very least , will provide some precise answers concerning the issue of the asthma device 's withdrawal from the market , so as to clarify what happened .
in writing . - This report shows the value of the work of Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
Here we are responding to a legitimate complaint by a German citizen regarding asthma inhalers .
The resolution calls on the Commission urgently to respond to the legitimate concerns of the petitioner - who has been experiencing this intolerable situation for 13 years and has consequently suffered considerable loss of earnings - and to take the necessary steps to enable the petitioner to assert his rights
This type of conflict becomes damaging to all those involved : to the company in question because of the resulting financial costs , and to the European institutions because of the extremely negative image that they project as a result of the delay in concluding these proceedings .
It seems to me that 10 years to straighten out a conflict is too long and it is the Commission 's responsibility to find a solution quickly , for the good of all concerned .
I must , however , stress how important it is that all medical devices brought onto the market in the EU comply with all Union safety standards .
Council Directive 93 / 42 / EEC concerning medical devices explains precisely which requirements a device must meet , firstly in order to be authorised , and secondly , in order to remain on the market .
If a product has a CE mark , then it fulfils these requirements .
It is the responsibility of the Member States to put controls in place to prevent the unauthorised use of the CE mark and , if necessary , to have products withdrawn from the market .
The relevant authority must inform the Commission immediately of any measures of this kind that have been taken .
I have abstained from voting , because in my opinion , there is no need for the Commission to act in this case .
I voted in favour of this resolution which , following a petition presented by a German citizen relating to the placing of asthma inhalers on the market , calls on the Commission to take the measures necessary to conclude a procedure that has , regrettably , been dragging on for 13 years , with considerable financial losses for the company in question .
in writing . - With the adoption of this resolution , the EP :
1 . Considers that the Commission 's reply to the Committee on Petitions failed to respond sufficiently to the questions raised by the petitioner and the committee members or to the concerns raised in the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs ;
2 . Calls on the Commission immediately to take the steps needed to end the still-pending procedure initiated in 1997 under the safeguard clause of Article 8 of Directive 93 / 42 / EEC ; and
3 . Calls on the Commission urgently to respond to the legitimate concerns of the petitioner - who has been experiencing this intolerable situation for 13 years and has consequently suffered considerable loss of earnings - and to take the necessary steps to enable the petitioner to assert his rights .
Asthma attacks cause sudden breathing difficulties that can even last for hours .
Germany introduced a ban on the sale of particular asthma inhalers first in 1997 and then again in 2005 .
The Commission was called on to respond regarding the legitimacy of the bans but never issued a ruling , thus breaching the safeguard clause procedure laid down by Directive 93 / 42 / EEC , which should have obliged the Commission to do so .
The seriousness of this omission is made all the more acute by the fact that , according to reliable estimates , the inhalers withdrawn from the market could have improved the quality of life of some 30 million asthma sufferers .
The question tabled by Mrs Mazzoni calls on the Commission to respond regarding the failure to comply with the safeguard clause prescribed in Article 8 of Directive 93 / 42 / EEC .
According to this article , when the Commission is called on to rule on a national legislative measure in the field of health , it must enter into consultation with the parties concerned as soon as possible and inform them of the legitimacy or otherwise of the national measure .
At this point in the procedure , as the Court of Justice has also ruled , a committee of inquiry needs to be set up to ascertain the Commission 's actual liability .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the situation in Haiti one year after the earthquake , in which the European Parliament reiterates its solidarity with the people of Haiti suffering as a result of the earthquake and the cholera epidemic .
I agree with the very important call for a strong , long-term commitment from the international community , including the EU , to honour all the pledges made at the International Donors ' Conference in New York .
It is important to take immediate action and coordinate the provision of humanitarian aid to the people of Haiti , more than a million of whom are still living in makeshift camps that were supposed to be temporary .
Human rights associations continue to deplore the appalling living conditions in these camps , in particular , the ' rape and sexual violence ' to which women are subjected .
However , over the long term , it is clear that humanitarian agencies cannot and must not continue to make up for the weaknesses of the Haitian State or to take its place , and that urgent action must finally be taken to ensure long-term development , in particular , as regards access to healthcare and drinking water and urban renewal .
At a political level , there is a need for immediate action to build the capacity of the Haitian State in terms of democracy and good governance , which are essential for national reconstruction , and to ensure that Haitian civil society and the Haitian people are involved
in writing . - ( LT ) I supported this resolution which assesses the situation in Haiti , one year after the earthquake .
The situation in the country remains very complex and chaotic , reconstruction efforts are struggling to get off the ground , millions of people are starving , and the earthquake has had a huge impact on more than 800 000 children , exposing them to the risk of violence , sexual abuse , trafficking and exploitation , The situation in the country became even worse with a political crisis following the presidential and parliamentary elections .
Although the international community reacted effectively to the tragedy in Haiti , allocating financial and humanitarian assistance , hitherto , only a small portion of the USD 10 billion pledged has been paid .
The cholera epidemic that has gripped the country has highlighted the incapacity of the Haitian State to react appropriately to the situation , along with the limitations of the international aid system .
The continuing political unrest is hampering efforts to begin reconstruction work and help victims , and is making the situation even worse .
The European Union , as the leading donor , must exercise political leadership in coordinating reconstruction efforts in Haiti and ensuring that aid reaches those who need it most .
The situation in Haiti has become extremely grave at a time when all the international community 's efforts have not helped to improve the situation in this state , devastated by civil war and natural disasters , and now hit by a cholera epidemic .
Last year 's devastating earthquake brought Haiti to the attention of the global public .
However , in spite of the joint efforts made on the back of a wave of strong emotion , the situation is not changing for the better .
This is why the most important aspect of the resolution adopted by the European Parliament is probably the call to the UN to rethink the mandate of MINUSTAH in Haiti as a result of the epidemic and tensions caused by the recent , fiercely fought national elections , whose integrity is being seriously questioned by the international community .
The poor population of the small state is actually the big loser in terms of all these problems .
It is vitally important for the UN to be and remain in charge of coordinating all the civilian and military operations with the aim of both restoring security and providing humanitarian aid , and of carrying out reconstruction and development .
The entire international community and the European Union , in particular , must place their involvement in rebuilding Haiti as high as possible on their own agendas before it is too late for its population .
I welcome the international community 's massive response to the devastating earthquake in Haiti , and its genuine political will to support the reconstruction of the country .
I particularly welcome the collective commitment made by the Commission and the Member States to donate a total of EUR 1.2 billion , including EUR 460 million in non-humanitarian aid from the Commission .
However , the scale of the disaster in Haiti is lamentable and its effects are still highly visible a year on from the earthquake .
Safety , health , public health and housing conditions are also lamentable , and it is vital to rebuild the capacity of the Haitian State in terms of democracy and good governance , which are essential for national reconstruction , and to ensure that Haitian civil society and the Haitian people are involved .
It remains crucial to help this country recover from the earthquake , but it is also important that the international community take advantage of this opportunity to help to resolve the economic , social and political inequalities within Haiti .
One year on , the effects of the disaster in Haiti are distressing and the situation from the human , economic and social point of view is chaotic .
I regret to have to say that reconstruction is practically non-existent , the amount of rubble cleared negligible , the levels of poverty extreme , and the violence devastating , while the outbreak of cholera is spreading and women in refugee camps are being raped .
This status quo has to be changed !
The international community , in liaison with the Haitian Government , must enter into a firm , long-term commitment , honour the promises made , and make every effort to protect the Haitian people .
I urge the European Commission to develop efforts immediately to protect more than 800 000 children exposed to situations of violence , sexual abuse , child labour and trafficking .
Moreover , I regard it as essential for the reconstruction efforts to include local food production and food security through the development of rural infrastructures and aid to small farmers .
I welcome the efforts and the work done on the ground by the humanitarian organisations , but I have to condemn the inability of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission to coordinate the thousands of humanitarian agencies and the donors of funds for the reconstruction work .
It is important to Haiti 's inhabitants that the European Union shows solidarity with them after the disaster which has hit them , causing significant human and material losses .
I therefore welcome Europe 's decision to commit to providing financial assistance for the reconstruction process in this country , amounting to roughly EUR 1.2 billion , as well as the proposal from the EU 's High Representative for Foreign Affairs , Catherine Ashton , to adopt an economic plan for the next 10 years , focusing on both development and growth in the region , along with the country 's reconstruction .
It is an important decision , especially as the EU is one of the biggest donors to this country in the Caribbean region .
However , I think that EU funds ought to be distributed according to criteria similar to those applied in Member States or according to specific programmes , not only for rebuilding houses , schools , roads and other infrastructural items , but also for granting micro-credits which will boost development and the launch of micro-projects for economic recovery , based on the current model used in the EU for micro-enterprises .
In the wake of the Second World War , the United States implemented the Marshall Plan , which made a key contribution to the rebuilding of Western Europe .
Europe , in turn , can launch a similar programme for Haiti .
The terrible disaster that struck Haiti a year ago shocked us all and led to a global current of good will , making logistical , human , financial and humanitarian resources available immediately and on a large scale .
With a year gone by , it was appropriate to reassess the situation on the ground , not least because Haiti no longer dominates the headlines in the mass media .
The tabled resolution makes this assessment , and points out paths and solutions to the immense and serious problems experienced by the population in their day-to-day lives .
As far as I am concerned , it does it well : all that is missing is a greater tendency towards involving local communities and associations in distribution , and in seeking solutions for the future .
Nevertheless , I would stress the strong focus on ' long-term commitment ' and on seeking solutions that ' tackle the root causes of underlying poverty in Haiti once and for all ' , and the call for the EU / Member States to incorporate ' local food production and food security into the reconstruction effort in Haiti , via the development of rural infrastructure and the provision of aid to small farmers ' .
I also hope that a definitive solution will be found quickly with regard to the makeshift refugee camps , in which there are close to a million people living in almost subhuman conditions .
A little over a year ago , the world was stunned by the consequences of the earthquake that devastated Haiti , killing more than 200 000 people and leaving behind a trail of absolutely horrific destruction in its wake .
At the time , the international community mobilised itself to come to the aid of the victims , while the international institutions , as well as worldwide public opinion and the media , echoed this commitment .
Unfortunately , the focus of international attention seems to have moved elsewhere , so it is the duty of the European Parliament to recall what has happened and report on the current situation .
One year on , it has to be realised that nothing has changed significantly and that the country , which was already in serious difficulties and collapsed through an act of nature , has not yet managed to recover .
The data available having been collated , all the indicators point to this fact : nothing seems to have progressed quickly , with the necessary efficiency or with adequate competence .
More than a million people are still homeless .
The international community cannot abandon this country and allow it to become one more failed state .
A year on from the earthquake , the situation in Haiti remains chaotic , the country is still in a state of emergency and reconstruction work has barely started .
I welcome humanitarian organisations ' work on the ground at providing care for the injured , supplying drinking water and distributing food .
However , I would stress that the role of reconstruction falls to the Haitian Government as it is , above all , political stability that will be able to help the country 's reconstruction .
I therefore argue that the Haitian Government should stand by and implement the commitments made in the national reconstruction plan and strengthen the state 's authority , so as to make local government more effective , while strengthening the capacity of local and national institutions .
The reality on the ground shows what the resolution seems to want to hide , which is that the principal preoccupation of the United States , shared by the EU , was to secure and perpetuate its political interference in order to ensure its economic and geostrategic domination of Haiti , ignoring the human drama that Haitians have been living for decades .
After imposing structural adjustment policies on the country , through the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , which destroyed its economy and created a catastrophic social situation , the US responded to last year 's earthquake with a military invasion .
All this was recently exacerbated by a cholera epidemic , which we now know was brought in by soldiers of the UN mission in the country , the United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti ( MINUSTAH ) ( although it denies any responsibility ) .
The majority in Parliament has said nothing about these facts .
Nor has anything been said about those who have shown Haiti a true attitude of solidarity : Cuba and the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas ( ALBA ) .
Cuba has sent doctors and specialist personnel who , up to now , have treated more than 50 000 people against cholera and , with the help of the Haitian authorities , it has now been possible to reach the most isolated communities , thereby guaranteeing that no citizen of this country is left without help to face cholera , thus allowing thousands of lives to be saved .
The earthquake and the cholera epidemic that followed it were an outright disaster for the people of Haiti .
I urge the international community , including the European Union , to fulfil all the commitments made at the International Donors ' Conference in New York last year and that the money be given , without delay , to the Haitian people and to the NGOs involved .
The situation in Haiti continues to be a cause for great concern .
The efforts made by the many aid workers , whose courageous commitment is to be applauded , are met with the inability of the regime in power to lessen the risk of civil war that is threatening the island .
We must demand the full application of the European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid ( for concerted and coordinated action to improve the collective response to humanitarian crises ) and emphasise the fact that the commitments made during the International Donors ' Conference on 31 March , in particular , for the reconstruction of Haiti , should become a reality and not remain mere words .
I abstained in the vote on the compromise resolution between the political groups in the European Parliament on Haiti .
I did so because this resolution ( although it is well founded ) does not offer any lasting solution to ensure that Haiti genuinely emerges from the crisis , nor does it ask enough questions about the actual payment of the aid promised by the European Union .
The people of Haiti need real development aid , and this should be ensured as a matter of priority through the international deployment of building and public works teams and of appropriate equipment , so that they can actively participate in the urgent reconstruction of the public and private buildings in the country , starting with the poorest neighbourhoods , towns and villages .
The people of Haiti also need real medical support , initially to contain the cholera epidemic as quickly as possible , and then to eradicate it .
Doctors , medicines and medical support services must be deployed urgently and in great numbers .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the situation in Haiti , because the European Parliament reiterates its solidarity with the people of Haiti suffering as a result of the earthquake and the cholera epidemic .
I agree with the very important call for the international community , as well as the EU , to make a firm and long-term commitment to immediately make good all their promises , because more than a million people are living in what were supposed to be temporary makeshift camps and human rights organisations report that living conditions in these camps without facilities are terrible and women ' face the risk of rape and sexual violence ' .
Currently , people do not have enough food , and 80 % of Haiti 's population live in abject poverty .
It is essential to give people access to healthcare , drinking water and sanitation .
Action must be taken to ensure long-term development in Haiti .
I therefore agree that the EU and the Member States should include the recovery and rebuilding of Haiti among their most important priorities and that the time has come to help Haiti become an economically and politically strong independent country .
The international community must use this opportunity to eliminate the root cause of poverty in Haiti once and for all .
On 12 January 2010 , the earthquake which struck Haiti caused approximately 222 750 deaths and made almost 2 million people homeless .
Ten months after this tragedy , a cholera epidemic broke out on the island and has claimed 3 333 lives to date .
As these tragic figures clearly show , the situation is not a simple one .
In addition to this , despite the fact that elections were held in November , amid strong suspicions of vote rigging , the country is still without a government .
In today 's vote , we have asked the European Union to cooperate with the Haitian institutions with the aim of developing rules and regulations which will help the country to make better use of all the financial aid it has received over the last year and , above all , to do so according to principles of democracy and legality .
Underlining the importance of the link between emergency aid , reconstruction and development , and of the promotion of a policy of close cooperation with the local government is , in short , the result we hope to achieve from the adoption of this resolution .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which commends the efforts and achievements of humanitarian organisations ( the Red Cross , NGOs and the United Nations ) as well as the Member States , and stresses the need to communicate the non-visible effects of humanitarian work and the fact that the situation was brought under control thanks to , inter alia , the provision of care for the injured , drinking water , food and temporary shelter .
However , the resolution also notes that the cholera epidemic has highlighted the near-total helplessness of the Haitian State in the face of an easily preventable and treatable disease , along with the limitations of the international aid system in a country benefiting from massive humanitarian deployment ( 12 000 NGOs ) ; stresses that humanitarian agencies cannot and must not continue to make up for the weaknesses of the Haitian State or to take its place , and that urgent action must finally be taken to ensure long-term development , in particular , as regards access to healthcare and drinking water and urban renewal .
It also welcomes the collective commitment made by the Commission and the Member States at the International Donors ' Conference for the reconstruction of Haiti to donate a total of EUR 1.2 billion , including EUR 460 million in non-humanitarian aid from the Commission .
It is just over a year since the tragedy in Haiti , in which more than 200 000 people lost their lives and more than 3 million Haitians were affected .
Even now , human rights associations say that there are still 1 million displaced persons living in inhuman conditions in makeshift refugee camps .
A year ago , the international community , including the EU , made an enormous effort in order to help Haiti and prevent the natural disaster from having the effects now being observed .
It is therefore time for us to remember these people again : they are suffering enormously , particularly the most vulnerable amongst them , such as women and children .
It is time for us to join forces to return everything to normal in this country that has been rocked by natural phenomena .
A year after the devastating earthquake in Haiti , the situation in the country has not improved at all .
In fact , the outbreak of cholera has made things significantly worse , despite all the humanitarian and economic aid being poured into the country .
The capital , Port-au-Prince , still lies buried under tonnes of rubble and the local people have only shovels and wheelbarrows to remove it with .
While thousands of people still have no shelter and the trade in children is flourishing , the country , which is ruled by a dictator , remains in a state of political chaos after the elections .
I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution , as the people of Haiti need our help and the Western world must face up to its responsibilities .
On 12 January , we marked the first anniversary of the earthquake in Haiti which had such tragic consequences .
It claimed the lives of 222 750 people and forced around 1.7 million to leave their homes .
In connection with these tragic events , on 19 January , the European Parliament adopted a resolution describing the situation on the island one year after the disaster .
Despite the efforts undertaken by many international organisations and international aid aimed at rebuilding the country , the situation in Haiti remains turbulent , and the country is immersed in crisis .
The island battled a cholera epidemic 10 months after the earthquake , and the validity of the presidential and parliamentary elections has also been called into question by international observers .
In view of the country 's current situation , the European Parliament calls on the European Union and the international community as a whole to show solidarity with the island and to cooperate more closely with the Haitian authorities , as well as stating that any measures to reconstruct the country should be taken only after consulting those living there .
The fact that Parliament also draws attention to the way in which aid should be provided to Haiti is important ; it should be a donation , not a loan which will place the country in debt .
Finally , I would like to express my solidarity with Haiti , and I hope that the work to reconstruct the country will be streamlined .
A year on from the terrible earthquake in Haiti , one of the most devastating natural disasters in the history of humankind , the signs of the disaster are still deeply etched .
Unbelievably , a few months after the terrible earthquake , the arrival of a hurricane brought a cholera epidemic , which made the already complicated political situation much worse .
My decision to vote in favour of the resolution is based , first and foremost , on the need to mobilise actions and intervention which will ensure that the country is given all the help it needs to restore tolerable living conditions , at the very least .
The current civil and political tensions serve only to increase concerns , as they are hampering the delivery of EU humanitarian aid and thus slowing the pace of reconstruction .
Therefore , I believe that it is essential and a matter of duty for the European institutions to provide as much assistance as possible , at least in order to guarantee that the people who have lost everything have housing , medical assistance , food and basic social services .
It is only with our help that the people of Haiti will slowly be able to return to a normal life .
I voted in favour of the joint resolution on the situation in Haiti a year after the earthquake : humanitarian aid and reconstruction .
The resolution emphasises issues such as protection of human rights and dignity .
It reminds us that , at present in Haiti , apart from the conditions of poverty and the feeling of insecurity that prevail among the citizens ( 60 % of the population are living outside and 80 % are living in absolute poverty ) , there is acute concern about the situation of the most vulnerable persons , who face violence , sexual abuse , human trafficking , exploitation and abandonment .
In this resolution , the European Parliament calls on the Commission to go one step beyond simply establishing these cases and to make a practical contribution to the process of establishing a system of social protection in Haiti .
A year on from the earthquake , the situation in Haiti remains chaotic , the country is still in a state of emergency and the majority of the population is living in extremely precarious conditions .
Therefore , the international community , including the EU , must make a long-term commitment to honour all the pledges made regarding reconstruction assistance for Haiti and improving the Haitian people 's living conditions .
in writing . - Haiti is again a matter of urgency .
We reiterate with this resolution our solidarity with the people of Haiti suffering as a result of the earthquake and the cholera epidemic , and stress that reconstruction efforts must involve the consultation of , and include , the Haitian people and Haitian civil society .
We also urge a strong , long-term commitment from the international community , including the EU , to honour all the pledges made at the International Donors ' Conference in New York and to deliver the funds without delay .
We stress further that all EU humanitarian and reconstruction assistance must be provided in the form of grants rather than loans which have to be paid back .
Of all the disasters that struck our planet in 2010 , the Haiti earthquake has left the most difficult wound to heal .
Today , a year on from the second most devastating tremor in the history of humankind , the signs of the disaster are still painfully evident .
More than a million people , half of them children , still live in makeshift camps , and a cholera epidemic caused over 4 000 deaths last October .
There is still not enough food , access to drinking water , sanitation or schools .
Of the USD 500 billion promised by governments and private organisations , very little - just USD 6 billion - has arrived , while the rest has never materialised .
The adoption of this joint resolution today is an important step towards putting up a united front to tackle future challenges .
If nature destroys , people rebuild .
These words must inspire us to make an ever greater commitment .
I voted in favour of this European Parliament resolution , because I hope that the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania will have the political will to reject the proposed law , which would violate human rights and freedoms .
I hope that any discrimination will be stopped , including discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
This draft law has not yet been adopted in the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania , so with this resolution , the European Parliament wants to warn that the European Union is concerned about such legislative proposals which violate human rights and discriminate against citizens .
Furthermore , these draft amendments to the Code of Administrative Offences are contrary to Article 25 of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania , which stipulates that ' the human being must not be hindered from seeking , receiving and imparting information and ideas ' , and Article 29 , which states ' all persons shall be equal before the law and other State institutions and officials ' .
The Lithuanian Government presented a negative opinion of the proposal being debated in the Lithuanian Parliament , because it is contrary to international , European Union and national legislation .
Furthermore , the Lithuanian Parliament 's Committee on Human Rights has yet to present its conclusion on these proposed amendments .
I therefore hope that the Lithuanian Parliament will take into account international and European Union criticism , this European Parliament resolution and the Lithuanian Government 's negative conclusion .
Taking into account the international and European human rights obligations to which the EU is subject , in particular , respect for the rights of all minorities and the fight against all forms of discrimination , it is not acceptable that one of its Member States should establish laws that clearly question the values and principles on which the Union is based .
I respect the right that any state has to discuss , amend and approve national laws without any form of external interference , provided that it does so with complete respect for human rights and without violating fundamental principles , in this case , the principle of non-discrimination , whether such principles are established in the Treaties or in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I hope that Lithuania , or any other Member State that is in the same situation , will refrain from approving or will proceed to revise and alter any national laws that are in conflict with any rule , principle or value whatsoever established in European legislation with the greatest possible diligence and speed .
in writing . - I support this resolution , which calls on the Lithuanian Parliament to reject draft legislation that seeks to punish the ' public promotion of homosexual relations ' with fines .
This EP resolution follows a series of worrying events such as the adoption of the Law on the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information , the attempted prohibition by local authorities on holding equality and gay pride marches , and the use by leading politicians and parliamentarians of inflammatory or threatening language and hate speech .
A recent EU Fundamental Rights Agency report concludes that ' The amendments could potentially criminalise almost any public expression or portrayal of , or information about , homosexuality ' .
These draft amendments would certainly seem to contravene Lithuania 's obligations under its own Constitution , the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
I note the firm stand taken on several occasions by the President of the Republic of Lithuania , Dalia Grybauskaitė , denouncing draft homophobic legislation as being harmful for Lithuanian citizens and the image of Lithuania , and encourage the President to veto the amendments to the Code of Administrative Offences should they be approved .
Over the last few months , the Lithuanian Parliament has passed a series of laws forbidding or punishing any reference to homosexuality or bisexuality in public .
A bill currently being debated in the Parliament aims to amend the Code of Administrative Offences to punish ' the public promotion of homosexual relations ' with fines of up to EUR 2 900 .
This legislation is in complete breach of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and of the European Union Treaties which commit the EU and its Member States to upholding freedom of expression and fundamental freedoms and to providing European instruments to fight discrimination and human rights violations .
In adopting this resolution , we are calling for this bill to be withdrawn , for respect for sexual orientation to be included in the list of principles protected under the country 's Law on Education , for minors to have the right to freely access information about sexual orientation and for clarification of the prohibition stipulated in the country 's Law on Advertising .
This is not the first time that a Member State has impeded European citizens ' rights and freedoms regarding sexual orientation under the pretext of non-interference , thus , in effect , encouraging discrimination .
This homophobic hysteria must stop .
I voted in favour of this resolution , since it upholds the fact that the institutions of the EU and the Member States have the obligation to ensure that human rights are respected , protected and promoted in accordance with the European Convention on Human Rights , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union without any distinction on account of sexual orientation .
On 12 November 2010 , the Lithuanian Parliament decided to initiate the process of appraising the change to the Lithuanian Administrative Code , according to which the public promotion of homosexual relations must be punishable with a fine .
The Lithuanian authorities are in the process of considering these changes .
This fact is relevant to our deliberations to the extent that no legislation has yet been passed that breaches any EU rule .
Therefore , I shall refrain from appraising political , legislative and jurisdictional acts that lie strictly within the competence of the Lithuanian legislative , executive and judicial authorities .
However , I do urge the Lithuanian authorities to maintain respect for liberty and the principle of equality and non-discrimination based on sexual orientation .
The European Union and its institutions have a duty and responsibility to uphold respect for human rights , including those of all minorities .
It must therefore reject and combat any form of discrimination , specifically as regards sexual orientation .
In this context , I support Parliament 's resolution as an initiative reaffirming the values and principles upon which the European Union 's identity is founded , without putting the fundamental principle of subsidiarity at risk .
I would stress acknowledgement of and respect for the right of a Member State , such as Lithuania , to freely discuss and compare different concepts and ideas during the process of amending and passing national legislation .
I would also stress the Lithuanian authorities ' reaffirmation of their determination to respect the European legal framework and not go against it , as well as to promote respect for human rights .
Lithuania is attempting to control the preaching of certain minority sexual orientations , no doubt wishing , and quite rightly so , to promote instead the family , consisting of a father , a mother and their children , which forms the fundamental unit of any society .
Some people see this as an unacceptable attack on human rights and as outright discrimination .
However , as the resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) rightly points out , the legislative process under way in Lithuania is a long way from being completed and is currently being examined by the relevant oversight bodies in the light of the country 's constitutional and international obligations .
The resolution also emphasises ' the right of any democracy [ ... ] to modify and adopt national laws and provisions , without interfering in the debates of national parliaments ' .
However , the very fact that we are discussing the issue here and tabling texts constitutes interference and is a violation of Lithuania 's rights and those of its citizens .
This is unacceptable .
Since the subjects are connected , I would also like to take the opportunity as a French citizen to express my grave concern about the case taken to France 's Constitutional Court in the name of non-discrimination , challenging the articles of the Civil Code that quite naturally enshrine the principle of marriage as the union between a man and a woman .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament has taken a stand in calling on Lithuania to reject a bill to introduce fines for ' the public promotion of homosexual relations ' .
Let us remind ourselves that there is no place for homophobia in Europe and that Article 21 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights clearly prohibits all discrimination on a variety of different grounds , including sexual orientation .
The Council is still blocking the introduction of a cross-cutting directive on combating discrimination aimed at guaranteeing equal protection against all forms of discrimination .
However , it is high time we acted to prevent laws such as this one , which are far removed from the values we uphold here , from cropping up all over Europe .
in writing . - One of the earliest tasks of the re-established Scottish Parliament was to remove from the statute book a law prohibiting the ' promotion ' of homosexuality in Scotland 's schools .
The law had been enacted by the right-wing unionist government of Margaret Thatcher - a government which had no legitimacy among the people of Scotland .
The Scottish Parliament saw things differently and reformed the law to make it fitter for the 21st century .
It is to be hoped that the people of Lithuania choose to be similarly minded .
The European Parliament 's motto ' United in diversity ' is the principle that must guide all our work within and outside the European Union .
It was in line with this principle that I voted in favour of this resolution , because I believe that , while the European Parliament may not wish to interfere in a country 's internal affairs , it should always be able to express its opinions and to act as a sounding board in order to convey the needs of the European public as a whole .
The resolution adopted today serves to highlight our Parliament 's common position with regard to the Lithuanian Seimas .
It consists of a request to amend draft legislation that would amend the Code of Administrative Offences to punish the ' public promotion of homosexual relations ' , which , as the text clearly emphasises , could potentially criminalise almost any public expression or portrayal of , or information about , homosexuality .
Therefore , I believe that it is our duty today as MEPs , but as citizens before that , to ask the Lithuanian Parliament to reject the new legislation in the name of the essential principle of safeguarding fundamental human rights .
in writing . - There can be no tolerance of discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation ( or indeed on any other grounds ) in the European Union .
I therefore welcome this resolution , which takes a tough line against signs of intolerance in Lithuania and makes it clear that the EU institutions will not sit back and allow Lithuania to pass laws that discriminate against a section of society .
I want to emphasise in the first instance that the fight against all forms of discrimination , in particular , those based on sexual orientation , is one of the European Union 's fundamental principles .
We now have a sizeable body of European legislation on the subject , which means that this principle can be put into practice fully in all our Member States .
We should be taking on the fight against homophobia here in this House and in our national parliaments .
It is also important to point out that the text we are discussing today is only a bill at this stage , presented by a few members of the Lithuanian Parliament .
Furthermore , this proposed amendment to make the public promotion of homosexual relations an offence has been openly criticised by Lithuania 's President and government .
Let us not be too hasty therefore in condemning a country or a government .
Instead , I would call upon our Lithuanian fellow Members to ensure they abide strictly by our Community legislation , in particular , Article 21 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which prohibits all forms of discrimination .
Equality between citizens is a principle that Europe compromises on too often .
We would like to see it respond every time this principle is flouted .
This resolution rejects the institutionalisation of a law which would override the principle of equality between Lithuanians on the grounds of their sexual orientation and even punish them for it .
I welcome it and it certainly has my vote .
It is one of the functions of the institutions and Member States of the EU to ensure that human rights are respected , protected and promoted within the European Union , pursuant to the European Convention on Human Rights , to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and to Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union , without any discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
This proposal for a resolution is in line with this : it warns that the Lithuanian State is damaging freedom and the principle of equality and non-discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) guarantees that people with differing sexual orientations will not suffer discrimination .
When Lithuania signed the Treaty of Lisbon , it also became a signatory to the ECHR .
The European Parliament believes that the adoption of the law on the protection of minors against the detrimental effects of public information by the Lithuanian Parliament represents a clear violation of the treaty .
It also calls on the Lithuanian Government to abstain from any further legislative amendments on this subject and to include sexual orientation in the list of protected grounds .
I have abstained because , in my opinion , it is not clear to what extent the EU is interfering in national affairs .
The institutions and Member States of the EU are obligated to ensure that human rights are respected , protected and promoted within the European Union , pursuant to the European Convention on Human Rights , to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and to Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union , without any discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
It is therefore important to call on the Lithuanian authorities not to pass any legislation in conflict with the principle of equality and non-discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
in writing . - Once again , we had to call on the Seimas to reject the draft amendments to the Code of Administrative Offences , include sexual orientation in the list of protected grounds in the Law on Education , enable minors to freely access information on sexual orientation , and clarify the meaning of the ban in the Law on Advertising , although , at the same time , we acknowledge the firm stand taken on several occasions by President of the Republic of Lithuania , Dalia Grybauskaitė , denouncing draft homophobic legislation as being harmful for Lithuanian citizens and the image of Lithuania .
Parliament calls on the President to veto the amendments to the Code of Administrative Offences should they be approved .
In 2010 , the Lithuanian Parliament passed an amendment to the administrative code implementing the Law on the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information , adopted in 2009 .
This amendment would prevent the mass media from promoting sexual relations or other forms of homosexual behaviour not enshrined in the constitution or the civil code , not least in view of the influence that the mass media have on children 's emotional and mental development .
Article 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms states that everyone has the right to freedom of expression .
The exercise of these freedoms , however , carries with it duties and responsibilities and may be subject to such penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary for the protection of public morals .
In responding to market dynamics , the mass media too often appear not to care about children as individuals who can very easily be influenced emotionally .
The common objective should be to pay greater attention to matters relating to children and adolescents , which means working with all kinds of media professionals to develop a firm sense of collective responsibility .
I voted in favour of the resolution on violation of freedom of expression and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Lithuania .
Interparliamentary dialogue ( between the European Parliament and the national parliaments ) has become a vital feature of the European Union since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force .
Furthermore , the European Union is founded on unassailable values which include combating all forms of discrimination , and I will work to uphold this value throughout my term of office .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation of Christians in the context of freedom of religion ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the Situation of Christians in the context of freedom of religion .
I would like to ask Vice-President / High Representative Catherine Ashton to take the floor .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I shall begin by expressing how fully I share the concerns of this House about the recent violence against people belonging to religious minorities , as well as those who stand up for religious freedom .
I expressed my views on this issue most recently on 6 January when I visited Bethlehem and the Church of the Nativity on the eve of the Orthodox Christmas .
I went there to underline the need for all religious groups around the world to be able to gather and to worship freely .
I also stressed that the European Union condemns all forms of intolerance and violence against people because of their religion , wherever it takes place .
I have also strongly condemned the recent terrorist attacks in Iraq and Egypt targeting places of worship , as well as the assassination of Salmaan Taseer , the Governor of the Punjab in Pakistan .
These attacks are unacceptable : they are perpetrated by extremists with an agenda of intolerance which must be condemned and must be resisted .
Honourable Members , all too often in today 's world , people 's human rights are violated because of their religion or belief .
The victims do not belong to a single faith or to one region .
Regrettably , no part of the world is spared from the scourge of religious intolerance .
Any discrimination or violence against individuals because of their religious beliefs runs counter to the values that we in the European Union uphold .
Each violation must be taken seriously and each must be condemned with equal force wherever it takes place and whoever the victim may be , because , as we know and accept , human rights are universal .
Long-established Christian communities in the Middle East face difficulties which have led to significant displacement in some countries and to a dwindling of numbers in the region as a whole .
The European Union will not turn a blind eye to their plight .
We consider their demand to have their rights respected as citizens of their own country to be entirely legitimate .
Freedom of conscience and of belief belongs to everyone and every state has the duty to ensure it is respected .
The EU stands ready to enhance its cooperation with governments in order to combat intolerance and protect human rights .
We must not fall into the trap that extremists and terrorists are laying for us : we must resist the manipulation of religion into a source of division .
The best response to extremism is a united international front based on the universal standards of freedom of religion and freedom of belief .
The European Union was a driving force in the UN General Assembly behind the resolution on the elimination of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief - which was adopted by consensus in December 2010 .
We make a concerted effort every year to build on that consensus , so that the international community can send a firm and united message .
We are considering another initiative to rally strong cross-regional support on this theme at the forthcoming session of the UN Human Rights Council in March .
We also raise the issue of freedom of religion or belief during our human rights dialogues and urge countries to eradicate discrimination and intolerance .
Our delegations closely monitor these issues around the world , and the European Union 's next annual human rights report this spring will address the situation of religious minorities around the world .
Honourable Members , I am fully committed to keeping freedom of religion or belief at the top of our agenda .
The next Foreign Affairs Council on 31 January will again address this issue so that the European Union can step up its efforts to promote religious freedom .
Baroness Ashton , I am very pleased to welcome you to the European Parliament in the New Year .
It is not very often that we can discuss with you personally such important issues of the foreign policy of the European Union , so thank you very much for coming here .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , you have promised us that you will appear more often in front of the European Parliament , so that this will be settled .
I believe that it is important for you , Baroness Ashton , and for everyone else to note that a broad majority of the European Parliament is in support of this issue and that this is an indication that it is part of a sequence of measures and not just a normal resolution .
You are right when you say that we must ensure that intolerance and violence against people because of their religion , regardless of the religion in question , is regarded as unacceptable .
However , it is clear that 75 % of the attacks made for this reason in recent years have been directed against Christians .
Christian Europe must take a self-confident approach and defend itself .
It must not remain silent on this issue .
The attacks are taking place to a large extent in Muslim states , but not only there .
Christians are being persecuted in China , for example , and in other countries .
We must not accept violent discrimination or acts of terrorism .
Imposing the death penalty on someone because they have converted to Christianity is not acceptable and neither are the acts of terrorism and terrorist organisations or the fact that public bodies , which are not themselves responsible , turn a blind eye to these actions .
The result of this is that the tradition , which dates back millennia , of Christian groups and communities being present in many countries , including Syria , Turkey , Iraq and Iran , is coming to an end .
If the pressure continues on Christians in Bethlehem , the birthplace of Jesus , there will soon be no Christians living there .
The 20 million Coptic Christians living in Egypt represent a specific problem which we take very seriously .
We cannot talk about minorities in this case .
For this reason , I would like to highlight two demands made in the resolution .
There must be clear references to the persecution of Christians in the human rights reports produced by the institutions of the European Union , including your organisation and the European Parliament .
Resources must be made available within the External Action Service to handle the subject of Christianity and the issues of human rights and freedom of religion must play a major role in the treaties which we sign with other countries .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , thank you for your clear statement .
The increasing number of attacks on Christians and the growing levels of religious intolerance are highly alarming .
We must make clear our condemnation of these acts , because we are supporters of religious tolerance , freedom and diversity .
I would like once again to express our deepest sympathy and regret concerning the attacks on Coptic Christians in Egypt .
This was a heavy blow not only against the Coptic Christians themselves , but also against the tolerance which is still widespread in Egypt .
I say ' still ' advisedly , because unfortunately , it has now been put at risk .
On behalf of my group , I would like to express my very deep regret about the way in which Christians are being treated in Iraq .
The aim of overthrowing Saddam Hussein was not to bring about the lack of tolerance of Christians that we are seeing now .
However , there is also intolerance between different Muslim groups .
Therefore , our group believes that it is particularly important to take decisive action against intolerance of other religious views and especially of religious minorities .
I hardly ever make written statements , but I was happy to become involved in this case at the invitation of Mr Maurer , because it is so important for us to combat growing intolerance and to work together to overcome it .
I am pleased that we have a joint resolution and a joint basis for action .
However , in just the same way that I clearly condemn these attacks against Christians on behalf of my group , and not just the recent violent attacks , but also other discrimination , I would like to state specifically that I very much regret the growing Islamophobia in certain circles in Europe .
This is simply an argument , which is admittedly wrong and invalid , but still another argument that allows certain radical Muslim forces to find a cause , a reason and a justification for discriminating against or even attacking Christians .
All of us , whatever our views of individual religions , must admit that people have the right to practise their religion in peace .
The existence of an aggressive , violent minority , whether it consists of Muslims , Christians , Jews or members of other faith communities , can never provide a justification for attacking other religions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , religious conviction is an individual matter with a different meaning to different people .
The role of the state is to protect all citizens , regardless of their conviction , and to allow them to freely associate and express themselves across the world .
A glance at our world today shows a very bleak picture : from the Bahá 'i in Iran to Copts in Egypt , from the use of blasphemy laws in Pakistan to the attacks on Christians or places of worship in Iraq and Nigeria .
Today , we highlight the increased violence against Christians specifically , which provides a reason for great concern .
It is incredibly painful that people attack and get attacked , both in the name of religion , and people of all faiths are victims .
It is unacceptable to see that some individuals , extremists , choose to use violence and even terrorism and do so in the name of god or in the name of a religion , claiming thereby to speak on behalf of others or even seeking to be above the law and thus associating countless innocent people with this violence .
But let us not be mistaken .
By giving the extremists more credit than they deserve , by accepting the link between religion and terrorism , we disqualify the majority of believers who , in the diverse ways in which they do , practice their faith peacefully .
Terrorism is political and terrorism is a crime .
Religion can never be a credible or acceptable reason to use violence or to breach human rights .
Too often this does happen , not only through violence , but also in limiting freedom of expression such as through the abuse of blasphemy laws .
Religion or conviction should never be a reason for people to live in fear and the European Parliament rightly speaks out against the extremist acts against Christians and supports those who condemn this extremism .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the massacres inflicted on the Coptic Christians in Alexandria provoked international outrage .
The Eastern Christians ' situation as a whole is worrying : in Iraq , in Lebanon and even in Palestine , where Christians are leaving what they see as their Holy Land , worn down by the humiliation they have suffered under Israeli occupation .
I am glad that our resolution on freedom of religion gives the subject a broad interpretation and recalls the fundamental rights : the right to believe and not to believe ; the right to choose a religion without being discriminated against .
Whilst our text quite rightly mentions the recent attacks and killings that have gone on in the world , we must also admit that in some European countries , respect for this freedom of religion is under threat .
We often witness acts of intolerance : the profaning of Jewish and Muslim cemeteries , anti-Islamic and anti-Semitic talk .
Actions such as Switzerland 's vote to ban the construction of minarets and the rise of extremist parties who express intolerant views against certain communities are all signs that we must make the fight to uphold secular principles a priority in Europe .
Refugees , asylum seekers , migrants and ethnic and religious minorities are all facing a worrying increase in violations of their universal fundamental rights .
Europe ought to set an example on tolerance and intercommunity dialogue .
Eastern Christians are increasingly suspected of representing the interests and causes of the West , while Muslims in Europe are associated with radical Islam and terrorism .
Let me read you if I may two lines of a poem by Louis Aragon : ' Celui qui croyait au ciel , celui qui n 'y croyait pas , et leur sang rouge ruisselle , même couleur , même éclat ' ( ' The one who believed in God and the one who did not , their blood runs equally red and equally bright ' ) .
Mr President , Mrs Ashton , I should like to start by thanking Mrs Ashton for responding so rapidly to events in Alexandria .
It is vital for us to respond rapidly and predictably , since that means that the world listens to us more attentively .
Christians are , without a doubt , the most neglected minority in the world today .
Every year , 170 000 Christians throughout the world suffer legal discrimination , assault and even murder .
All those who claim to uphold human rights must take active measures to defend religious freedom .
The matter of religious freedom must be raised in talks with countries such as Afghanistan , Iraq and Sudan within the framework of development aid .
China , India and Vietnam must hear our views on religious freedom in the framework of trade negotiations with the European Union .
We must reinvigorate our neighbourhood policy when it comes to countries such as Egypt .
Ultimately , our diplomacy must respond to each violation of the right to religious freedom .
We therefore have the instruments at our disposal , we need only use them , and we must also convince the world that , after years of silence on the matter , the freedom of Christians really is important to us .
The world will only listen to us if it is led to believe that this issue really is important to us .
Otherwise , we cannot expect our policy in this area to succeed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the recent terrorist attacks in Egypt and Iraq are criminal acts that represent just one aspect , albeit a tragic one , of the persecutions of Christian communities around the world and particularly in the Middle East .
The most worrying part of this in institutional terms is the systematic curtailment of Christians ' rights as citizens , in that they are not allowed , for instance , to build churches , take public , civil or military office or freely practise their religion , amongst other things .
The two things together - terrorism and discrimination - force hundreds of thousands of people to leave these countries .
In Iraq , for example , over 60 % of Christians have been forced into exile , and we are talking about some 600 000 people .
This House fights for the right of people to emigrate . In this case , however , entire communities are being denied the right to live in their own country .
The aim of terrorism is to expel Christianity from Arab countries through mass murder .
Action , including military action , is needed to fight and prevent it .
Europe , which is historically Christian and a great defender of human rights , must put pressure on the governments in the area , calling on them to respect the rights of their own citizens .
( FR ) Mr President , freedom of conscience is most certainly a vital freedom .
God cannot want forced observance .
This freedom was persecuted in atrocious ways by the communist regimes .
We should have the courage to stand up today and say that these abuses are primarily committed against Christians in Islamic countries .
It is right that we should condemn atrocious killings perpetrated by fanatics .
It is not only a matter of extremism , however .
In several countries where the majority of the population are Muslim , even some that are seen as being moderate , Christians are treated as second-class citizens .
Conversion to Christianity is forbidden or even punishable by death .
In the West however , whatever Mrs Kiil-Nielsen may say , people are not prevented from converting to Islam if they so wish .
In those same Muslim countries , anyone who actually or reportedly criticises Islam can face the same fate .
In particular , legislation supposedly aimed at repressing blasphemy must be repealed .
We specifically call on Pakistan to quash the conviction of the poor woman who was accused by her neighbours .
We can talk as much as we want , but fine words are not enough .
We must act and make it clear to these States that our relationships with them are dependent upon whether they are willing to respect freedom of conscience .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to offer the Commissioner my heartfelt thanks for the content of her speech , because the purpose of our resolution here is to ensure greater protection for religious minorities in everyone 's interest .
However , Baroness Ashton , speaking with the greatest sincerity , cordiality and friendship , I would like to bring something to your attention : if you have the patience to re-read the text that you have just read out , you will notice that you managed to give your whole speech without once using the adjective ' Christian ' .
That is something that struck me , because there is actually a feeling of embarrassment in our institutions , and in that sense we are playing the game of the fundamentalists , who tend to identify the presence of Christians in the Middle East and other parts of the world precisely with the West and Europe .
My Iraqi Christian friends and our Palestinian Christian friends are Arabs , think in Arabic , love their country , love that mentality and love their history and culture .
I would like to ask you , therefore , Baroness Ashton , whether we should not perhaps take a very thorough , careful look at ourselves and how we have approached this subject up to now , because it is a strong point of ours to call a spade a spade .
That is what we must do : we must call hatred for Jews anti-Semitism , hatred for Muslims Islamophobia , and hatred for Christians by the name it deserves , because that is the only way we will succeed in involving everyone in those countries who loves justice and freedom .
That is my question to you , and I would ask you to be specific in your answer .
We are now about to adopt the agreement on Iraq .
Let us include proper rules alongside the principles of a trade agreement , so that there can be economic advantages in exchange for rights .
Let us do something tangible and in everyone 's interests , but let us do it quickly and well , because the world is waiting for a signal from Europe .
Mr President , I want to begin by reminding us of the words of the Universal Declaration .
I quote , ' Freedom , either alone or in community with others and in public or private , to manifest religion or belief in teaching , practice , worship and observance ' .
It makes the point that protection of these freedoms is integral to , and inseparable from , the protection of all human rights .
Our determination to defend them should be no less .
It also makes clear that we should act against all religious persecution , which is a problem for all religions and in many countries including - let us be honest - some of the countries of our own European Union .
The Pew Centre says that 70 % of the world 's six billion people live in countries with strong restrictions on religious belief or practice .
I personally have a strong conviction that religion can be a force for good , upheld by the work of the Faith Council in my own east-of-England constituency which promotes mutual understanding , a role mirrored in the European Union 's own obligations for dialogue , as outlined in our resolution .
But I know that when preacher of hate Terry Jones , who threatened to burn the Koran , said he would come to Luton - also in my constituency - to stir up religious hatred , he was told he would not be welcome .
Tolerance , dialogue , mutual respect and understanding are , for some , parts of their faith .
For others they are values in their own right .
Either way , they are values that we should promote and respect .
( FR ) Mr President , fanaticism that targets other peoples ' religions is barbaric and must be condemned and fought by all those who uphold democracy .
That is why it is so important that we express our solidarity today with all those who are persecuted for their faith in the world .
The terrible killings carried out by al-Qaeda in Iraq and Egypt and the threats that Eastern Christians face from Islamic fundamentalists are , in reality , aimed at only one thing : creating tension between religions , fuelling hatred , setting communities against each other and provoking a clash of civilisations .
This attempt at destabilisation will fail in Europe , as it is failing in France , where the whole Muslim community naturally condemned these barbaric acts immediately .
We must solemnly reaffirm today the right of all minorities to practise their religion freely and safely everywhere in the world , including here at home in Europe .
We must defend religious pluralism , tolerance and mutual understanding both here in Europe and everywhere in the world .
This is why I hold the hope that the democratic revolution that Tunisia is experiencing will soon reach other countries , so that the values of respect , tolerance and secularism will spread .
( NL ) Mr President , thank you very much for being here with us today , Baroness Ashton .
Have we not already discussed the situation of the Christians in Somalia , Sudan , Egypt , Syria , Turkey , Iraq , Iran , Afghanistan , Pakistan and Malaysia many times before here in this Parliament ?
Have this House , my group and I , myself , not already asked many questions about the systematic suppression of Christians in these Islamic countries ?
With that in mind , I believe that the time for talking and fine pronouncements is over .
It is time for action .
I have two specific questions for Mrs Ashton .
First of all , although the remit of the European External Action Service should be limited , the Service must take one task very seriously : it has to stand up for Christians who are being persecuted .
Therefore , establish a separate unit within the Service that will be responsible for this .
Secondly , the European Union has signed bilateral agreements with all those countries .
Freeze those agreements , put them on ice this very day !
Squeeze those governments ' wallets until they demonstrate that they have made conditions safer for Christians .
I would like to hear your reply to these two specific questions of mine .
( FR ) Mr President , the Confederal Group of the European Unified Left - Nordic Green Left did not participate in the resolution put before us today .
We , of course , condemn all acts of terrorism , irrespective of who the perpetrators or victims are and of where they are carried out .
However , our group 's members firmly believe in secular principles and a secular society .
We therefore naturally condemn blasphemy .
This means that we believe strongly in freedom of thought , freedom of conscience and freedom of religion , which includes the freedom to believe or not to believe , to choose one 's religion , change religion and to freely practise the religion of one 's choosing regardless of which religion that is .
It also means that we are firmly committed to the separation between religion and politics and we condemn the rise of fundamentalism in Europe and elsewhere , which is often a response to social unrest and the inability of public policy to address it .
We believe that this resolution is a step in the wrong direction .
To put it briefly , I would say that it lacks balance , especially in comparison with the motion tabled by my group .
We feel this resolution gives the impression that Christian Europe , or the Christian community in Europe , is running to the aid of Christians throughout the world .
We do not think this is the best way to combat the rise of these sectarian attitudes .
( NL ) Mr President , the joint resolution has rightly broached the issue of aggression against religious minorities in Europe itself .
Exactly one month ago , a Jewish student in my country , the Netherlands , wrote the following : ' I feel anxious , anxious about the paradox inherent in the protection of freedom of religion .
If I have to leave tomorrow because there is no security here , where can I then live ?
The UK or France ?
No , the same problem exists there , as well ' .
My question is : is Europe heading towards a future with no Jewish communities in any of its Member States ?
This is an acid test of our European spiritual values .
That applies equally to the European attitude towards a well-nigh forgotten group of Christians in the Middle East , the Palestinian Christian minority in Gaza and the West Bank .
They are entitled to expect concrete backing from the European Union , especially when Christian organisations take pains to provide a real home for disabled Palestinian children , regardless of their faith .
Palestinian Christians face exceptional difficulties in the labour market , especially as self-employed entrepreneurs .
They usually remain silent about their daily problems in order to avoid difficulties .
Madam High Representative , let the Council and the Commission , as important donors to the Palestinian community , look after their interests and listen to their voices , as well .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to speak on a subject that is close to my heart .
As an evangelical Christian , it has become apparent to me , particularly over recent years , that the expression of Christian beliefs is largely deemed unacceptable in a society that wants us sanitised of any strongly held belief and where we must all believe the same or believe nothing .
This attack on conviction is more aggressive towards Christianity in certain quarters .
This year , we celebrate the 400th anniversary of the King James Bible , yet today , to express beliefs founded upon the contents of the Bible is often deemed unlawful .
We face a situation where Christians are being excluded from certain professions because of their faith and hauled before courts because of their faith .
In the United Kingdom , equality laws are being used more as a sword than a shield , to punish expression of Christian faith .
This marginalisation of Christianity was exemplified recently by the Commission in the publication of their diary : Muslim , Hindu , Sikh , Jewish and Chinese festivals were marked - yet there was nothing about Christian celebrations .
I have no doubt that this was no accident , no oversight and I find it deeply regrettable .
I would call upon the Vice-President / High Representative to address this in particular in her remarks .
Freedom of religious expression is a fundamental right in society that should be protected and this debate is but a small recognition of the problem .
We should not shy away from it just because it is Christians who are persecuted ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I would like to thank you very much for your statement .
It is correct , it has been made at the right time and it is also encouraging with regard to the basic approach taken by you and your organisation to the problem as a whole , with regard to cooperation with other countries and with regard to the measures that are needed .
This debate today is also necessary , not only as a result of recent events , but also because freedom of religion is one of our fundamental values and part of our European identity .
This debate is important because discrimination , violence and persecution are taking place in many countries in the world and it is particularly worrying that a high proportion of all of those who die as a result of religiously motivated violence throughout the world are Christians .
Our sympathy goes to all of those who have been killed , injured or tortured in attacks of this kind .
Our sympathy also goes to their friends and families .
We must do everything we can to reduce and even abolish this type of intolerance .
Unfortunately , we are also seeing discrimination against Christians by official bodies and we must make every effort to combat and overcome it .
We must make a commitment to ensuring the right to freedom of religion .
This must lie at the heart of our bilateral relationships .
We need effective instruments which will allow us to protect Christians and to protect freedom of religion .
Therefore , I welcome the fact that ensuring the human right to freedom of religion will be one of the items on the agenda in every bilateral form of contact .
We must also include provisions that guarantee freedom of religion in our agreements with third countries and I very much welcome your intention to devote a chapter of the European Union 's annual human rights report to the situation concerning freedom of religion .
( IT ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , it is important to link the condemnation of these attacks and the call for urgent , concrete measures to protect Christians around the world with the more general demand for respect for the freedom of religion and freedom of conscience and thought .
There is no difference between someone who is murdered while attending mass and someone who is sentenced to death for adultery or for belonging to a Muslim , Christian or Jewish minority , or for having been born in a particular place rather than for practising a religion .
The right to freedom and coexistence is universally recognised by humanist culture and international conventions .
In contrast , we are seeing the world divided between those who uphold human rights and those who want to brutally extinguish them .
Only an attitude open to dialogue and against any form of intolerance can provide a basis for protecting identities and values .
A lack of respect for these can even lead to the expulsion of entire communities from their historical homelands .
There is a great deal of work for Europe to do in this respect at a political and diplomatic level as well as in the cultural and social spheres .
Today , we urge the Council and the Commission , and especially the High Representative for Foreign Affairs , to adopt clear guidelines for our relations with third countries in the context of the new European External Action Service .
Bilateral agreements , too , must attach greater importance to the subjects of religious freedom and human rights more generally , violations of which should lead to the suspension of these agreements .
I am also thinking that Europe should take a leading role in promoting dialogue between religions .
A lack of such dialogue often goes beyond individual incidents and leads to real wars , in which religion conceals other , more complex reasons for conflict .
Lastly , we must also look closer to home : there is no lack of cases of intolerance in Europe .
Our cities are , in practice , multicultural , and that fact brings with it religious traditions and values that must be respected and afforded freedom of expression .
There is , therefore , no alternative to dialogue and mutual respect .
It is important to repeat the appeal made by religious communities .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , the fate of Eastern Christians is changing the map of cultures , with communities thousands of years old - ' Copt ' means ' Egyptian ' in Greek - now looking to emigrate overseas to escape from the violence they have been suffering .
However , the media or xenophobic parties should not make the mistake of calling this a clash of religions or a clash of civilisations .
I would like to recount a short incident that I find significant .
Years ago in Cairo , an old man from the countryside who delivered milk to our house three times a week stood at our door crying .
We could not understand what he wanted , as all he could say through his tears was ' Said Akbar , Said Akbar , ' the great old man , the great old man .
We eventually realised that he was showing his Christian customers his grief at the death of Karol Wojtyła , who had just passed away .
This was a simple , sincere man , a Muslim who acted with all the ancient mutual respect of the Mediterranean peoples .
This short but significant incident , reflecting widespread values in Egyptian society , happened in the same country in which the Copts were massacred at Christmas .
Today , however , Eastern Christian communities need protection .
They are sometimes trapped in the settling of scores between terrorists and fundamentalists and authoritarian powers .
European foreign policy should not remain powerless while the world changes .
It should not be afraid to say the word ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , tolerance of another 's belief is a trait of a civilised society .
The horrific events in Egypt and Iraq go against human rights and basic principles of freedom of thought and expression .
No one should be persecuted because of their religious beliefs .
The action of curtailing Christians , or any other faith , in the practice of their religion is totally unacceptable in our society .
But , before we criticise , we should put our own house in order .
Last month , the Christmas religious services were prohibited in the occupied village of Rizokarpaso in Cyprus .
As we all know , the EU Member State of the Republic of Cyprus is , at present , and has been for 36 years , under part-occupation by Turkey .
The action by the occupying Turkish army of entering a church , forcing the priest to terminate the service and forcing the people attending it to leave , is unacceptable .
This incident is now being considered by the UN .
So , as we talk about the situation in countries outside the EU , and about the freedom of Christians , I would like to remind this Chamber that we need to sort out our own house first .
We cannot accept any forms of discrimination in this Chamber if we are to be credible in the wider context .
( NL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the freedom of religion or belief protects both religious and non-theist beliefs , and even atheist beliefs .
These views can be incompatible with each other , however , and then governments have a duty to promote tolerance and stand up for those who face discrimination and violence because of their beliefs .
I wholeheartedly support the joint resolution , in the form which we now see it before us , not because I think that we should solely concern ourselves with Christians , but because Christians are currently having to deal with intolerance in an increasing number of countries .
I would , in any case , have acted the same if this concerned any other religion .
The IIES requires significant capacity in this area .
I have previously held a similar position myself at the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
Finding your way around human rights violations , tensions and conflicts based on religion or belief requires a lot of manpower and effort , as do sincere attempts at dialogue and tolerance .
I therefore hope , Madam High Representative , that you will heed the recommendation that manpower be freed up for this purpose .
( IT ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , in the prevailing relativism of European politics , there is one word that is taboo : Christianophobia .
For many years , however , serious and often tragic reports have been coming in from reliable and indisputable sources about the persecution of Christians on several continents .
Europe needs to wake up , open its eyes and take concrete action .
It needs to send out clear messages , such as the one we were expecting from Baroness Ashton .
She could , for example , have quoted Pope Benedict 's inspired words for the World Day of Peace a few days ago , when he pointed out that to deny religious freedom is an insult to God and to human dignity , as well as a threat to security and peace .
Concrete action is needed .
What are we waiting for - as I asked straight away - to send a commission to check the situation of our Coptic Christian brethren in Egypt , an officially moderate country where they have practically no fundamental human rights at all , not even in public office , in the civil service ?
Wake up , wretched Europe , and remember your Christian roots !
( ES ) Mr President , the attacks that have recently taken place in Iraq and Egypt are evidence of two tragedies for Europe , albeit of a different nature .
Firstly , it is a tragedy that the events themselves have taken place , due to their cruelty and the loss of human life .
Secondly , however , it is also a tragedy to see how too often they go unnoticed in our society .
In many cases , the way in which we act means that these events are confined to the accident and crime reports in the media , as if they were something external rather than an attack against us .
It is as if they were happening somewhere else when , in fact , these attacks are taking place at the heart of and against the core of our civilisation , our Europe .
The role of the European institutions is , fundamentally , to raise awareness regarding the seriousness , the significance and the scope of the attacks against Christians in these places .
The European institutions should not only issue generic statements condemning these attacks , but should also promote action along two lines : firstly , ensuring that this tragedy is more present in our societies and our media , and secondly , ensuring that the European institutions are more present where the tragedy is taking place .
With this objective and with these two lines of action , allow me to say , Baroness Ashton , that the European institutions and you yourself must promote the important role of the victims of these events .
The victims need to be given faces .
The victims need to be present in our European institutions .
We need to prepare a programme of visits , meetings and even material support for the victims , but it is the victims of this terrible persecution themselves who will do much better than we can to defend their cause .
( EL ) Mr President , as socialists , we believe in human rights and we certainly believe in religious rights .
As Mr Swoboda quite rightly said earlier , we are interested not only in the Christian religion ; we are interested in the rights of all religions , in people 's right to worship in accordance with their faith and , more importantly , in understanding between all religions , and understanding of the faith which someone holds as a citizen .
However , I should like , due to my origins , to comment on a specific incident which happened in Cyprus and which is referred to in the report .
The Turkish occupying forces intervened in a church at which Christian services have been held for decades , in order to stop the service and , more importantly , to expel the congregation and force the priest to remove his vestments .
The difference with this specific episode was that it occurred unfortunately - or fortunately , because it gives us an opportunity to pull together and resolve this problem - on European territory .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the barbaric massacre in Alexandria on 31 December comes on top of a long series of murderous attacks against Christians in many parts of the world : in Iran , Iraq , Pakistan , Nigeria , and most recently Egypt .
The main victims of the persecution - we should dare to say the word even though it does not appear in our resolution - have been Eastern Christians .
This is a deep-seated problem and Christophobic acts are a reality .
The remedy that the European Union must provide - that we must provide - must do justice to these Christian minorities .
These are 12 million people who are in need of protection and who must be given a choice other than to flee or to face death .
As has already been reiterated several times , it is not a matter of stigmatising one religion more than another , but simply of pointing out how absolutely vital it is to combat these Islamic extremists who are destroying freedom just as they are killing people .
We hope , Baroness Ashton , that during the foreign ministers ' meeting at the end of this month , you will come up with a coordinated response and strategy to combat this violence against Eastern Christians .
I think it is important to bring pressure to bear via the association agreements we have with some of these countries , for example , and to call on their respective governments to pursue the perpetrators and bring them to justice .
This is paragraph 2 of our resolution .
Freedom of worship must be put into practice everywhere in the world , just as each individual is free to believe or not believe , because if this freedom which allows religions to be separate from the State is undermined , then all our other freedoms are also in jeopardy .
( PL ) Mr President , the victims of at least 75 % of all cases of religious persecution throughout the world are Christians .
The European Union cannot be a passive bystander , and it cannot sit back and do nothing on this issue .
Today 's debate serves not only to remind Europe that it must be involved in the global fight to ensure respect for the right to religious freedom , but also that we should all give joint consideration to what instruments the European Union can use to prevent the persecution of Christians in the future .
What can we do ?
As I see it , the first thing we should do is to ensure that respect for religious freedom is one of the priorities of the European Union 's external policy .
When signing agreements with other countries , it is important for us to ensure that they include provisions which prevent persecution on the grounds of religion in the country in question .
Secondly , we should consider setting up a European centre for monitoring religious persecution throughout the world , which would provide relevant information without delay and enable the European Union to respond quickly .
Thirdly and finally , we should put an end to our policy of double standards .
The European Union and Europe as a whole is opening itself up to immigrants from various countries around the world .
We are allowing places of worship to be built for them , and allowing them to practise their own religions .
At the same time , however , we seldom stand up for the rights of Christians in those very same countries , in the countries where possessing a Bible is often punished by many years in prison , and on many occasions even death , in countries where it would not just be hard to build a Christian place of worship , it would be simply impossible .
Today , the time has come for us to take a tough , resolute and firm stand for the rights of Christians around the world .
Today , the time has come for us to be vocal in our demands for Christians and followers of other religions to be free to practise their religion .
( ES ) Mr President , this debate is very necessary given the recent serious events that are affecting the religious freedom and even the lives of Christians .
I am particularly referring to what has happened mainly in Pakistan , Iraq , Nigeria and Egypt .
Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights sets out in great detail what it calls freedom of religion or religious freedom .
Despite this , it is , unfortunately , a right that is little respected in some countries .
We are now even seeing that those who profess the Christian faith can pay for it with their lives .
Baroness Ashton , the European Union must robustly defend the right to religious freedom in general , clearly incorporating it into its external action and demanding respect , freedom and security for what is now the most persecuted religious group in the world , the Christian community .
We must demand that all the governments concerned do what is necessary to prevent these attacks , and when that is not possible , to arrest and punish those responsible .
Ladies and gentlemen , Baroness Ashton , freedom is a symbol of European identity , and that includes religious freedom , which is part of the basic core of human rights .
That freedom is also a path to peace , as Pope Benedict XVI said in his message on 1 January .
I would also like to highlight the essential role of Christianity in shaping the European identity .
It would therefore be a sad paradox if the European Union did not demand as firmly as possible that the world protect the most basic rights of Christians and did not help them where it could .
The European Parliament resolution sets out methods for better defending religious freedom in general and the freedom of Christians in particular .
I welcome the fact that the forthcoming Foreign Affairs Council is to give them close consideration , and - I am finishing now , Mr President - that the forthcoming European Council on 14 February is to give its opinion on these serious events , just as , for example , President Sarkozy very courageously did .
( FI ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the European Union 's credibility as regards its foreign policy is measured in terms of how well it keeps to its fundamental values , which are human rights , democracy , the principle of legality , and freedom of religion .
Egypt 's legal system is in danger of remaining in the shadow of Sharia law , whose very victims are the Coptic Christians .
The Conference of European Churches is calling for dialogue in Europe between Christians and Muslims .
European religious dialogue , the cultural tradition of religion and the tradition of religious instruction are also a resource that can be used in European policy .
Christianity and other religions are peace movements like the European Union .
When it is at its most successful , religion unites people ; it does not divide them .
We cannot let terrorists use religion as a tool of barbarity .
( PL ) Mr President , according to organisations monitoring religious persecution , every day , over 200 million Christians are under threat of persecution .
Over the past two years , over 170 000 individuals have died simply because they were Christians , hard as it is to believe .
These figures come from organisations monitoring the persecution of Christians , and they mean that Christians do , in fact , suffer most in terms of religious persecution , which is something that we should remember here in Parliament .
The situation is particularly tense in a significant proportion of Islamic countries , where Christians are treated as second-class citizens .
Europe can no longer tolerate this situation , and not only because of its Christian roots .
Innocent people are dying merely because they are followers of one religion and not another .
The European Union does not react resolutely enough to attacks and discrimination against Christians .
The persecution of Christians must be raised in bilateral negotiations and relations between the European Union and the countries in which such extreme and terrible events occur .
Parliament should also require Mrs Ashton to be more proactive and resolute in her actions .
Mr President , I very much appreciate this debate and fully support the resolution , which I also sponsor .
I believe there is a sleeping giant that is awakening because of the gratuitous and vicious abuse of Christians .
If this viciousness and abuse applied to Muslims or the Jewish community , I would be equally concerned .
Europe is a mosaic : its unity and diversity are our motto .
Yet in Cyprus , the Turkish Government and its representatives think it appropriate to require Christians to apply for permission to pray and turn them out of church when they decide to do this collectively .
Has the Turkish representative to the European Union been called in ?
If not , why not ?
I would like to pay tribute to those Muslims who supported their Christian neighbours who were under attack .
So let us not make this a motion against anybody .
It is for Christians and for those who are being attacked .
I do not support and cannot accept abuse of people , individuals or communities because of their religious beliefs .
This debate is about Christians ; too many expect Christians to accept any old comments .
They think it an anachronism .
It is time we started to have mutual respect .
I respect people in this House who have no religious belief or who have a different religious belief to me .
It is time people in this House started to show respect for those who have Christian beliefs ; it is in diversity that we have unity .
( EL ) Mr President , the number of cases of religious violence has multiplied recently throughout the world , causing concern and indignation .
Banning the exercise of religious faith is a blatant infringement of fundamental rights and of international law , which stipulates that the right to faith is inalienable and self-evident .
The ban on the Christian service in Rizokarpaso in occupied Cyprus by the occupying forces and the bombing in the Christian church in Alexandria used by the Coptic community are just two examples of the increased tension and religious hatred which are developing in numerous places not far from Europe .
The European Union must develop a set of tools which will protect the right of every religious faith in practice .
The message that the European Union will not tolerate such behaviour must be clear and strong .
I should like to call on the High Representative to include an evaluation of the situation of freedom of religious expression in her priorities .
Finally , at Council and European Commission level , it would be a good idea to include protection of religious faith in all discussions with third countries .
( PL ) Mr President , Christianity has always been an indicator of European identity , and the European Union 's values derive from it .
The EU cannot , therefore , sit back and watch while Christians are being persecuted , and this includes persecution in other parts of the world .
In Arab and Asian countries , Christians are the religious minority most under threat , as is confirmed by the recent attacks on Christians in Egypt and Iraq and previous attacks in India , among the victims of which were small children .
We have many instruments at our disposal to prevent and denounce such attacks , and the European Union must resolutely condemn attacks on Christians .
One of the most effective ways to do this would be for the conclusion of agreements with the EU , for example , trade agreements with third countries , to be made conditional upon guarantees that the countries involved will respect the rights of Christians , and upon the inclusion of clauses providing for the severance of the agreement if these rights are violated .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , in 2009 , we encouraged an intercultural dialogue in Europe , between Christians and Muslims , Orthodox Christians and Catholics and between Protestants and Orthodox Christians .
In our community , we have attempted to bring about the growth of trust .
We are doing this among ourselves .
Of course , this means that we have our own views and the courage to express them .
Sometimes , this is obviously not the case .
I have recently read and heard that the European Commission has published a calendar for young people which includes the public holidays of all other religions except Christianity .
All I can say is that things like this will only encourage those people in Egypt and elsewhere to continue committing horrific acts .
We have an obligation to help Christians in those countries that have already been mentioned several times .
The majority of them live in countries such as Palestine , Egypt , Iraq and Iran , which are the birthplace of Christianity .
We must not allow these people to be driven out of their homes .
They are not minorities , they are Egyptians and Palestinians , just like all the other residents of these countries .
They want to continue living there , but this is being made difficult for them .
We must support Baroness Ashton and we must attempt to ensure that the European Union includes a guarantee of religious freedom in all the treaties which it concludes with third countries and , in particular , with the countries we have referred to .
We must make sure that no one is forced to leave their country for religious reasons .
( NL ) Mr President , when I look at the situation in Baghdad and Alexandria , I get the feeling that we have gone back in time 500 years .
Back then , we in the Netherlands were in the midst of the Hook and Cod Wars , during which Protestants and Catholics fought each other hammer and tongs .
Mr President , there is no longer any place for that kind of thing in modern European society .
When I look at Baghdad and Alexandria , however , I see that they are merely gross expressions of a life that exists under the surface in many countries .
For that reason , my message to you is that , in the framework of both that cultural dialogue and the freedoms which we have laid down together , the European Union needs to ensure the paramount importance of freedom of religion in every treaty it adopts , in every country it does business with and in every report it drafts , as I , indeed , pointed out in the report on Turkey .
That also means - although Mrs Pack has not mentioned that - that these freedoms must be reciprocal and that freedom of religion must also be respected in countries where Islam is not the majority religion .
Mr President , I think that the intolerance and violence that have taken place are unacceptable and that we should engage the warring factions in dialogue .
I therefore call on Madam Ashton , together with her diplomatic service , to ensure that we are absolutely consistent in discussing freedom of religion in every communication we have with the authorities of all those countries .
You can count on the solidarity of Parliament in that regard .
( EL ) Mr President , the persecution and slaughter of Christians in the Middle East is usually the work of fanatical and terrorist organisations .
The persecution of Greek Cypriot Christians in occupied Cyprus is the work of the ordinary army of a country with ambitions to accede to the European Union .
I have in my hands a letter from the self-styled ' Ambassador of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus ' in Brussels - an entity that exists purely and simply based on the force of the Turkish occupying army - in which he tries to ridicule me , while , at the same time , admitting that the service in Rizokarpaso was interrupted because the Greek Cypriot Christians had not obtained permission .
Lady Ashton , since when has permission been required from anyone in order to exercise religious faith ?
How long will you tolerate such blatant infringements of the human rights and religious freedoms of European citizens by a country with ambitions to accede to the European Union ?
( SK ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I would like to address you and to make a strong appeal to you in this matter , as it is simply unacceptable to us that Christians in the Middle East continue to face such merciless attacks .
Iraq , Iran , Egypt , Nigeria , Turkey , Pakistan .
These countries have been home to them - to Christians - for centuries , and they have no wish to leave .
It is appalling for Islamic clerics to promote anti-Christian sentiments in speeches to their believers .
In northern Iraq , people are afraid to adorn their homes .
In Baghdad , armed individuals burst in , shooting 52 people and wounding 200 .
In December , we had the chance to meet the Iraqi bishops who were visiting the European Parliament .
They emphasised to us that they need our support and the support of the entire international community so that innocent people are not killed for their religious beliefs .
Where have we got to with this ?
In this context , I would like to mention Turkey , which is making major efforts for European integration , while , at the same time , prohibiting the establishment of Christian religious societies or congregations .
We allow the construction of minarets in Europe , while they do not reciprocate at all .
I would also like to ask where are all the defenders of human rights , and the defenders of animal rights and so on .
I sometimes wonder whether it is not necessary to establish a group for protecting Christians around the world .
Mr President , it is very disturbing to see an increase in the incidence of vicious and violent attacks on Christians and their communities .
Those responsible are mostly fanatical Islamic extremists .
It is pure hate .
It needs to be stopped and it must be stopped .
The EU and its institutions , including this House , must increase pressure on governments where these incidents occur , particularly in those countries where the state has weak policies or turns a blind eye to such incidents .
Here , we value and protect each and every life ; we severely punish anybody who endangers human life ; and the punishment is more severe if attacks on life are against any minority and motivated by hate .
We need to insist that other countries provide similar protection of people 's lives and severely punish any perpetrators of these heinous crimes , and we need to assist the countries concerned in these respects .
We all know the grave potential if nothing is done and the current growing trend is not stopped .
The best efforts of the entire civilised world should therefore focus on reversing this dangerous trend .

( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , I do not in any way want to undervalue the pressure on other religions , but the statistics speak for themselves : 75 % of those threatened or killed for religious reasons are Christians , and around 100 million Christians around the world encounter persecution and violence because of their faith .
Recently , the situation has become particularly worrying in the Middle East , as we have heard here .
Attacks on church services in Iraq , Egypt and Syria have claimed dozens of lives , including those of children .
Elsewhere in the world , too , there are challenges .
Dramatic economic growth in Asian countries conceals serious breaches of fundamental and human rights .
In China , India and Vietnam , for example , freedom of religion is mainly only recognised on paper .
We have to acknowledge that the EU and its Member States are closing their eyes to this , on account of trade relations , for example .
Nevertheless , if it wanted to , the EU could do so much more to improve the situation for Christians and to promote freedom of religion in the world , for example , by insisting on a freedom of religion clause in all agreements concluded with third countries .
For that reason , I would like to ask you , Commissioner , whether the intention in future is to insist on such a clause and , furthermore , monitor its implementation .
Europe 's fainthearted attitude is partly due to the fact that we ourselves are losing our old values here .
We want to isolate religion in a private space .
This is reflected , for example , in the crucifix debate that took place in Italy .
In the same way , Mrs Pack mentioned here the calendar published by the Commission , from which Christian religious holidays have been omitted entirely .
Secularism is not the answer to these problems .
The answer lies in a respect for those with views other than our own and for the convictions of others .
Mr President , the plight of Christians in the Middle East , Asia and Africa is no accident .
This is not a series of regrettable but uncoordinated attacks .
On the contrary , it is classic mass persecution .
The Christians are intimidated , evicted or killed with a clear purpose : religious cleansing .
This is happening as we here in Europe are bending over backwards to accommodate the endless sensibilities of Muslim believers .
The result is a Europe full of mosques and the Middle East purged of Christians .
But this is not about numbers .
It is about liberty and identity .
Even for those among us who do not believe , Christianity should be more than a forgotten , exotic and diminishing sect .
We are free to believe or not , but we are not free to see our freedoms abused .
This approach means that we should make religious freedom a precondition in our relations with sovereign states .
This approach should be inscribed into law and become part of the High Representative 's mandate .
Mr President , I should like to say to the High Representative that in this situation , condemnations and statements are not enough .
Attacks on Christian communities have dramatically intensified , especially in the countries of the Middle East and North Africa .
It is difficult to find a state there where Christians can live as a normal minority and , most importantly , freely proclaim their faith .
People who have newly adopted Christianity are exposed to the risk of death .
We do not speak about new minorities there .
Christians are among ancient traditional inhabitants in these countries .
Nowadays , they increasingly are forced to leave their countries , are forced into ghettos , or have become internal refugees like those in Iraq .
Therefore , it is a pressing task to formulate the EU strategy on religious freedom and to earmark a set of concrete measures against those states which deliberately fail to protect religious minorities .
I would like also to mention the idea of a colleague , Mr Mayor Oreja , which is to compose a list of victims with whom the EU external services should actively make contact .
This is not opposing one religion against another .
This is about real equality of opportunity because it should be as easy to build a Christian church in Alexandria or Ankara as it is to build a mosque in Brussels .

( MT ) Mr President , the attacks against the Christian community in Egypt and other countries should be condemned , and it is our duty to react .
My question is this : if Europe , as the cradle of Christianity , fails to defend Christians and their freedom to practise their religion , then who will ?
However , we must also try to prevent Muslim communities from being radicalised and manipulated by extremists .
We must also be careful not to label all Muslims as terrorists , because those who favour violence and extremism are in the minority .
At the same time , Muslim communities worldwide are duty-bound to condemn extremists who are taking advantage of their religion and should disassociate themselves from these people , so as to prevent them from giving the Muslim religion a bad name .
In addition , we must urge the authorities of these countries with all our might to protect Christian communities from persecution .
Above all , despite the events which are unfolding before our eyes and which instil a sense of anger , we cannot forgo all sense of reason .
As Mahatma Gandhi said , ' an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth will leave us all blind and toothless ' .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Members who have already spoken have said practically everything .
They have recalled the facts , assessed them and made specific requests .
Therefore , as this is the last speech scheduled , I should like to add something that has not yet been said , and what comes to mind are the thoughts of a very great European , John Paul II , a man who very effectively helped to bring down the Berlin Wall .
In his spiritual testament , he mentions the four values that underpin our future civilisation , that is to say , the civilisation of love : they are life , peace , bread and religious freedom .
Then I think of everything that has been written by Giorgio La Pira , the former Mayor of Florence , who promoted large conferences on Christian civilisation at the height of the cold war .
In his book Premesse della politica ( ' Premises of politics ' ) , he wrote that every political idea has a particular concept of man underlying it .
For Christian Europe , he writes , man is essentially a praying being , that is to say , a being able to enter a dialogue , to conceive of the infinite and to talk to God .
Taking away a man 's ability to take part in private and public dialogue is not only a negation of religion , but also a negation of man himself .
I leave these thoughts with the House and with you , High Representative , as a contribution towards a concrete and effective commitment by our European Union , which is rooted in its Christian identity and never fails to proclaim its purpose of defending and promoting human dignity and human rights .
Colleagues , we now come to the catch-the-eye procedure .
I have a small problem because I have more than 25 requests and we have only five minutes for that , so obviously not everybody will get the floor .
I will do my best and I will try to divide the time evenly and justly , but unfortunately , not everybody will get the floor .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall confine myself to asking the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , to place a specific request on the agenda of our relations with Egypt : we call on the Egyptian authorities to remove information on religion from official documents , identity cards , passports and all documents needed to obtain work .
Christians are discriminated against in Egypt since the word ' Christian ' is included on their documents .
Islamic terrorism has now become legitimate in a situation in which there is institutionalised discrimination against Christians .
This is a specific request which , if implemented , would free Christians from one form of institutionalised discrimination .
Mr President , Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights prohibits ' inhuman or degrading treatment ' and Article 9 protects the right ' to manifest one 's religion or beliefs ' in worship .
This has been reiterated by the European Court of Human Rights in its judgment in the fourth Cyprus v. Turkey inter-state case since 2001 .
I would say to Lady Ashton : unfortunately , for the last 36 years , Turkey , a candidate country for accession to the European Union , has been destroying religious monuments in Cyprus and turning Christian churches into mosques and stables , and it recently put an end to Christmas and Epiphany masses in Christian churches in occupied Rizokarpaso and Yialousa .
Turkey must be condemned for its crimes within EU territory .
The EU must not remain passive .
Christians in Cyprus are in danger .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , today we are discussing a motion for a resolution on the situation of Christians throughout the world in relation to freedom of religion .
The European Parliament supports fundamental freedoms and human rights all over the world .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is one of the driving forces behind this support and this distinguishes us from the conservatives who are focusing specifically on the situation of Christians .
In general terms , this is not just about the position of Christians .
From a liberal perspective , this concerns freedom of religion as a whole .
By this I mean all the religions throughout our entire world .
It is about protection for religious minorities and the obligation of every state to protect to the best of its ability the members of those religious minorities which are under threat .
We also have problems in Europe .
I come from Berlin , and there alone , we have had six arson attacks against mosques within the space of six months , fortunately not resulting in any deaths , following the uproar sparked by a social-democratic former central banker .
However , the German state is attempting to provide the best possible protection for religious buildings .
In the same way , Egypt is also increasing the measures it is taking following the second major terrorist attack against Christians .
Of course , we cannot have a policeman standing in front of every church , mosque or synagogue .
I very much regret the fact that in many countries , including my own , Jewish buildings have come to look like high-security institutions .
For this reason , it is important that we as politicians take responsibility for the attitude to religious minorities in our countries and that we promote an open , friendly approach to all religions .
Mr President , when I was first elected to this House eleven years ago , it was regarded as somewhat eccentric , verging on embarrassing - particularly even within the EPP I have to say - that I frequently raised the issue of Christian persecution in the Islamic and Communist worlds , which I regret has only got worse since then .
So I am delighted today that even some of the more aggressive and anti-clerical forces in this House have woken up to the existential threat to ancient Christian faith communities such as the Iraqi Assyrians , of which I am a patron in the UK , and the Egyptian Copts .
Last Saturday , I stood outside 10 Downing Street in London with my Coptic constituents demanding that the UK Government do more to pressurise Egypt and its government to protect its own citizens .
Today , I call upon you , Baroness Ashton , as the High Representative of the European Union , to do likewise .
( EL ) Mr President , a while back , I wrote an article entitled : ' Plural monologue ' .
Plural means that several of us are speaking and monologue means that one person is speaking .
This is precisely the problem of our communities today .
Everyone is talking - and mostly about ideas - but we only listen to what we ourselves are saying .
This includes the problem of the outbreak of Islamic fundamentalism which has occurred in recent days and which occurred in Egypt in the savage attacks around the New Year .
I should like to point out that , within a century , from the beginning of the 20th century until now , the number of Christians in the East is estimated to have fallen from 22 % of the population to less than 10 % .
We need to pay attention to this outbreak of Islamism , because we have old leaders in both Egypt and Libya and in other countries and we do not know what may happen when they fall and which direction these countries may take .
This being so , I call on you , Lady Ashton , to take initiatives by exerting your influence to mitigate the situation of religious fanaticism , be it Christian or Muslim .
( DE ) Mr President , the Coptic bishop Anba Damian recently called for the establishment of a Christian alliance especially for Christians in Egypt , following the inflammatory campaigns in mosques and also the horrific massacre at the Christmas mass .
The charity Open Doors lists 50 states in its worldwide persecution index where Christians are subject to severe persecution .
I do not quite understand why we are showing our concern today .
We should not be surprised , because the problems start at the top .
If we in the EU and in the Commission distribute a calendar as the perfect example of self-denial to 21 000 European schools for 3 million school children , which does not list any of the Christian holidays , but does show Islamic , Sikh , Hindu and Chinese festivals , then this is no longer a question of self-denial , but of self-hatred .
Baroness Ashton , we need courage and we need to maintain our standards .
We must not be tolerant of intolerance .
( SK ) Mr President , the European Union cannot remain silent , cannot respond only after the event , when Christians are dying and are expelled from their homes .
The European Union fails to provide sufficient defence for Christians because the Union is terrorised by political correctness , which suppresses freedom of religion .
The ideology of laicism ties our hands and suppresses freedom of religion .
The Union finds it hard to protect and defend Christians worldwide because it does not respect Christian philosophy itself .
Some Members also disagreed with religious leaders making speeches in our Parliament .
This Parliament refused to condemn the abduction of the Archbishop of Mosul , who was later murdered .
A political group from this Parliament made sure that the Pope was accused of violating human rights .
The Commission forgot to mention Christian festivals , not to mention the crucifixes in Italy .
I look forward to the establishment in Vienna of the European Observatory on Intolerance and Discrimination against Christians , and I think it will have a lot of work to do .
( HU ) Mr President , as a member of a minority in Romania , I know what religious persecution meant in the days of Ceauşescu 's dictatorship .
I was pleased to hear Prime Minister Viktor Orbán today mention the fight against the persecution of Christians among our priorities .
I believe that High Representative Ashton should contribute to this in cooperation with the Hungarian Presidency , and ask her to do so .
When we visited Istanbul recently , we could see and hear that millions of Armenian and Greek Christians were killed there during the 20th century .
It saddens me that the persecution of Christians continues in our world to this day .
Together with Mrs Hautala , I propose that this current issue also be put on the agenda of the ' Droit ' Committee as a separate item .
On the other hand , I ask Baroness Ashton to subject the protection of Christians to serious debate at the 31 January meeting of foreign ministers and to make it a foreign policy priority .
I give the floor to Catherine Ashton to sum up the debate and answer many of those questions .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I wanted , if I might , to pick up two or three of the many strands of ideas which have been given to me - first of all , to thank honourable Members and to recognise the strength of feeling and expression of support for some of the work that we are seeking to do in this area .
As I have already indicated , part of the reason I was very pleased to be able to participate in this debate is that this has been raised once before with the Foreign Affairs Council - but we will come back to it at the end of January - and the concerns that honourable Members have made have resonated and echoed with the concerns which have been raised with me from a variety of different sources , not least from some of the Member States and some of the ministers who have been most concerned about these issues .
I want to make it clear that I did , in fact , talk about Christianity .
I began by expressing the reasons I had for specifically going to Bethlehem , and that was to recognise that although I was in the Middle East , I was also in the heart , in a sense , of many religions - specifically on the eve of the Orthodox Christmas .
That was a very powerful statement in itself and it was a very personal and deliberate act to do that .
I know that , unfortunately , Mr Mauro is no longer in his place to hear my reply , but I hope that he is told that I did in my words indeed mention that .
I want to just pick up two or three things .
A number of honourable Members have raised the question of how we use the tools that are available to us to ensure that these issues can be addressed .
I want to remind honourable Members that almost all of the trade and cooperation agreements which we have concluded since 1995 have included a human rights clause , and that exists in agreements with , I believe now , 134 countries .
The principal purpose is to demonstrate the shared commitment to human rights which we have , but it also constitutes the legal basis for sanctions in the event of grave human rights violations .
Honourable Members will remember that in my previous capacity , it was I who raised the issue of ' GSP plus ' and Sri Lanka .
You will know that we have taken steps to suspend them from that scheme , specifically on the grounds of issues of human rights .
It is very important , as honourable Members have said , that we continue to look at the way in which we conclude agreements and the tools at our disposal to do that and to make sure that those levers are pulled if necessary .
One of the things that I think will be very interesting as the Commission begins to look at the future of the GSP regulation is to see whether aspects of that regulation that concern the ratification and implementation of human rights and conventions could be improved .
I also wanted to put the other side of that , which is , of course , the instruments that we use to promote and support democracy in human rights .
We are , as honourable Members know , supporting projects worldwide in the fight against racism , xenophobia or discrimination on any ground .
We have funded anti-discrimination NGOs in some 60 countries .
Therefore , we strike a balance between using the tools at our disposal to ensure that we are able to demonstrate when we feel very strongly that this has been violated , and using those tools - combined with the willingness that we have and the availability that we have - to support those NGOs , in particular , those that are active in the field of anti-discrimination .
I wanted also to just touch on one other area , and that is the role of the delegations across the world and the role of monitoring what is happening .
A number of honourable Members indeed raised this as a particular point .
I have already said that I think it is really important that we monitor the issues across the world .
I was particularly struck by one issue that honourable Members talked about in a number of contributions and what , in a sense , has become very much more recognised in recent weeks and months but which nonetheless has been a concern to many honourable Members for a very long time : the concern about the way in which religious people , of all kinds of religion , are treated or discriminated against on a regular basis across the world and our need to be mindful and watchful of those issues , not when they become violent - when they become violent , in a sense , we are , of course , bound to act - but before they become violent , too , when this is a regular source of discrimination .
I think it is important that we see our delegations across the world as a source of being able to see and recognise the kind of discrimination that honourable Members feel ' bubbles below the surface ' , if I can use that expression , and notify us when they see it .
I also think it is important , as I have indicated that we put forward at the last Foreign Affairs Council , that in our human rights work and in the report that we produced , we are also addressing the situation of religious minorities across the world .
Christianity has played a very important part in our discussions today but many honourable Members have pointed out that this also needs to apply in ensuring that we have respect and tolerance for other faiths in everything that we do .
I think it will be important to try and get a sense of what is really happening both through our monitoring in our reports and also through our delegations across the world .
That I think will give us a greater sense of knowing how then to use the instruments that are available to us , particularly from the Commission side ; but also a sense of the political will , not just from me , but - as you have rightly pointed out - as parliamentarians you have a strong voice and a strong role in this , together with the Member States and the ministers involved in the Member States .
As I began , I said that I am committed to trying to make sure that we use what we have better , that we monitor carefully what is happening and that we use the political and economic instruments at our disposal to keep this at the heart of our agenda for the future , and I am very grateful for all the contributions .
To those whose comments and questions I have not answered : it is not lack of will , I will consider them very carefully , and all of this will feed into the debate that we will have at the Foreign Affairs Council at the end of January .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 January 2011 , at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Innocent people have become victims of a reckless criminal act which has nothing to do with any religion or moral principle .
We citizens of the European Union support and promote religious freedom and have a duty to emphasise that this must be respected , protected and promoted as one of the basic human rights .
Indeed , the aim of terrorism , in this whole context , is to cause uproar and conflicts through attacks which the perpetrators try to justify by referring to an underlying religious motive .
I would like to stress that terrorism does not have any type of religion .
This is precisely the reason why any kind of fundamentalist thinking must be left at the door of mosques , churches and synagogues .
The world 's religions do not encourage violent attacks .
Indeed , the people who participate in such attacks should not believe that they are fighting for something .
Quite the opposite .
I believe that they are fighting against morality , fellow human beings and humanity itself .
in writing . - The persecution of Christians in Islamic countries , and some non-Islamic countries such as communist China , is a growing and despicable trend .
One of the most recent outbursts of anti-Christian violence was in Alexandria at New Year when 25 people were killed and 80 injured in the bombing of a church .
The background to this attack has been highlighted to me by the Coptic community in London and elsewhere in the UK .
They estimate that there were more than 100 attacks on Christians in Egypt last year , in which many were killed .
Those responsible are motivated by fundamentalist and extremist Islamist ideology .
I and the UK Independence Party , which I represent , do not want an EU foreign policy or an EU foreign minister - currently in the form of Baroness Ashton .
However , since the Baroness is in this position , she should take account of the fact that the EU signs deals worth billions of euro with countries that are among the worst persecutors of Christians .
The EU should use its economic muscle to insist it will not give preferential deals or favourable treatment to those countries that tolerate the persecution of Christians .
This is the very least it should be expected to do .
Statistics on religious freedom show that the majority of acts of religious violence have been against Christians in recent years .
In 2010 , the number of attacks on Christian communities rose worryingly .
Unfortunately , many lost lives need to be mourned , resulting from the bloody attacks on the Christian communities in Nigeria and Pakistan , the terrorist attacks against Coptic Christians in Alexandria and the Philippines , the jihadi terrorist attacks against Assyrian Christian families , and the coordinated bomb attacks on Christian homes in Baghdad .
Moreover , I repudiate the deplorable persecution of Christians by the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran , as well as the reprehensible repression of the activities of the Catholic Church and other religious communities in Vietnam .
The European Union must renew the commitment it has always shown to the pursuit of religious freedom , freedom of conscience and freedom of thought , which are fundamental principles of the acquis communautaire .
Governments have a duty to guarantee these freedoms .
Therefore , and given the increase in anti-Christian violence worldwide , I would argue that the Council , the Commission and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy should take rapid , robust and energetic action to guarantee the defence of religious freedom in the world .
All is most definitely not well when it comes to respect for the rights of Christians to follow their own religion .
Last year alone , the European Parliament had to respond to violations of Christians ' human rights exceptionally often .
I have been the co-author of three resolutions on related subjects - one on Iraq , in particular , the death penalty ( including the case of Tariq Aziz ) and attacks against Christian communities , adopted on 24 November 2010 , one on recent attacks on Christian communities , adopted on 20 January 2010 , and one on religious freedom in Pakistan , adopted on 19 May 2010 .
This year 's events in Alexandria are a reminder of the fact that the European Parliament called on the Egyptian Government a year ago to guarantee the Coptic Christians and the members of other religious communities and minorities the ability to exercise all human rights and fundamental freedoms - including the right to choose and change religion freely - and to prevent any discrimination against such groups .
Meanwhile , tomorrow , we will hold another debate on the freedom of Christians in Pakistan .
The statistical method is not ideal , but sometimes it allows us to make a better assessment of the scale of a problem .
Deutsche Welle journalists have done some interesting calculations regarding violations of Christians ' rights ; they have calculated that , on average , a Christian martyr dies every three minutes somewhere in the world as a result of his or her beliefs .
It is truly shocking that such a thing is happening literally before our eyes .
As Europeans , we try to ensure that everyone in Europe can freely practise the religion which allows them to follow their heart and conscience .
We also adopt legal regulations which protect citizens from discrimination on the grounds of religious faith .
We teach tolerance and equal rights in schools , and we allow immigrants to make free use of their religious symbols .
It so happens that we are doing this at the expense of Europe 's majority religion .
Our tradition and civilisation draws most extensively of all on its Christian roots , and there are more Christians among us than adherents of any other religion .
I say this also as a representative of a political group which includes the phrase ' Christian Democrats ' in its title .
We have no influence over how Christians are treated in many countries of the world .
However , we can and should ensure freedom of religion for all Europeans .
We are confronted , regrettably , with a global attack on Christianity .
The data speak for themselves : last year , 75 % of violent attacks motivated by religion were carried out against Christians .
The problem becomes a political one , however , when religious differences are used as a means to prevent growth and development .
The hatred fostered by these terrorist attacks is designed precisely to destabilise the social and political system in the countries where the violence occurs .
Given the European Union 's role of promoting respect for human rights and for civil and democratic freedoms and , above all , given its Christian origins and roots , it has a duty in all this to react firmly by condemning all forms of extremism and promoting dialogue , religious freedom , mutual respect among communities , and tolerance .
I hope , however , that the EU will go further than that and include the clause on upholding freedom of religion in all economic agreements it signs with other countries , and that penalties will be imposed on countries that violate this clause .
We should not be shy or reticent about the European Union 's duty to uphold the freedom to profess one 's religion .
In view of the undeniable exacerbation of violence against Christians in various parts of the world , the EU urgently needs to take a clear stance against any violation of the right to the freedom to profess one 's religious faith .
The subject of religious freedom must be integrated in European policies , not least by including a binding clause on respect for religious freedom in our agreements with other countries .
These principles are Europe 's banner , and we cannot make exceptions to them under any circumstances .
Christians are currently persecuted in over 70 countries around the world .
This means that the fundamental human right to religious freedom is violated in every third country .
The European Union has started to realise that persecution on religious grounds is a serious violation of human dignity and freedom .
The debate on religious freedoms and the situation of Christians , which has been going on in Parliament for several months now , is also significant in formal terms , since the Treaty of Lisbon strengthened the position of churches in European debate , and they now have the right to be official partners in dialogue with the European Commission .
The European Parliament , which acts as a guardian of human rights , should find ways to defend freedom of religion around the world as quickly as possible .
Bearing in mind the recent violence against Christian minorities in certain Middle Eastern , African and Asian countries , I believe that it would be a good idea to raise this issue at the forthcoming EU Foreign Affairs Council and , together with the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , to draft specific instruments to protect the Christian community .
The European Parliament should call on countries where persecution takes place to take effective steps to protect religious minorities , despite the difficulties involved in doing so .
We should therefore also start to take the matter of religious freedom seriously when the EU signs agreements on cooperation with third countries .
Security situation in the Sahel region ( debate )
The next item is the debate on an oral question to the Vice-President of the Commission , the Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , by Arnaud Danjean , Ioannis Kasoulides , Elmar Brok , José Ignacio Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , Michael Gahler , Krzysztof Lisek and Andrey Kovatchev , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , concerning the security situation in the Sahel region - B7-0808 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the subject we are dealing with today is one that we ought to have begun looking at many months ago , given that the security situation in the Sahel region has been steadily deteriorating for over three years now .
Furthermore , we are dealing with the subject in a week in which we in France have buried two innocent young victims of Islamic terrorism , who were killed on the Niger-Mali border a few weeks ago .
Aside from the intense feelings that these crimes arouse , we need to recognise the real threats concentrated in this region on Europe 's doorstep , as the threat is not only from terrorism , even though the kidnappings and murders are the most dramatic manifestation of the deteriorating situation in Mauritania , Mali and Niger .
Criminal networks are rife .
Trafficking in drugs , arms and human beings is threatening the stability of these countries , but also that of our own continent .
For make no mistake , in the same way that the majority of the victims of the terrorist acts in this region are European citizens , Europe is also the destination for this trafficking .
In the face of this extremely worrying situation , the European Union should put in place an integrated , comprehensive strategy to combine its development and security policies .
This is absolutely vital .
There are initiatives already in place of course , via the tenth European Development Fund ( EDF ) in particular , and almost EUR 2 billion have been set aside for these countries for combating poverty , developing the economy and establishing more effective governance .
Certain Member States have bilateral cooperation policies , too , of course .
However , we now need to go much further .
In particular , our action needs to be much more coordinated .
We need to strengthen the regional approach and encourage these countries to work together more to deal with the common challenges they face .
We also need to expand the range of policies at the EU 's disposal and integrate them as much as possible , in the areas of development , security , strengthening institutional structures , customs , the courts and the police .
Baroness Ashton , there are few regions so close to Europe that harbour so many threats to our security and there are few regions in which the EU can at last put into practice the integrated approach envisaged in the Treaty of Lisbon , on the basis of which the European External Action Service which you currently head was formed .
Baroness Ashton , please can you give us some details about the strategy that you intend to implement in this region ?

Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I want to begin as Mr Danjean did , with the terrible news of the death of two young Frenchmen who were kidnapped 10 days ago in Niger 's capital , Niamey , and killed only a few hours later .
We have condemned what is a truly appalling crime and I reiterate our condolences to their families , as well as to those of Niger 's officers who were killed during the ensuing shooting .
I want to express solidarity with the French authorities and the authorities of Niger .
Of course , another five French citizens are still being held hostage somewhere in the desert of northern Mali by al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb .
In the last year alone , 10 European citizens were kidnapped and four were killed .
The security situation in the Sahel is alarming : organised crime networks , weak state presence in the desert zones and low capacity of security sectors in addition to widespread poverty , drought and food shortages .
These threats pose a serious challenge to development work and prospects , as it has become too risky for those engaged in development to continue their operations in this environment .
The EU and its Member States have been contributing for several years to tackling the development and the security problems in individual Sahel countries , but threats to security transcend national borders and the only possible , the only effective response is a regional and comprehensive one .
We need to make the ongoing European engagement in the Sahel more coherent , more coordinated and more effective .
Last October , the Foreign Affairs Council gave me the task of preparing , in association with the Commission , a strategy for the Sahel for the beginning of this year .
This strategy was to be based on a holistic and integrated approach , making use of the various instruments at our disposal in a coherent way , so we can foster security , stability , development and good governance in Sahel .
I believe that , in order to respond to the complexity of the challenges of the Sahel , we have to act at various different levels .
Firstly , we need a political and diplomatic dimension .
That is necessary to ensure that we facilitate dialogue between the Sahel countries , which continue to harbour mutual distrust .
We should build on the national strategies that we have - where they exist - and encourage the setting up of regional initiatives and tools to jointly address security threats .
In parallel , the EU should reinforce the dialogue on security in the Sahel with the Maghreb countries , regional organisations - the African Union , ECOWAS and CEN-SAD - and also the international community at large , and the United Nations , the United States and Canada in particular .
Secondly , we need to assist the Sahel countries in enhancing the capabilities of the security sectors - army , police , justice and border control systems - in each country .
They must be able to effectively re-establish the rule of law and security and redeploy state authority in the most sensitive regions .
We will encourage regional cooperation between Mali , Mauritania and Niger at an operational level so they can jointly and more effectively face the threat of al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb , organised crime and domestic banditry .
Thirdly , in the longer term , the EU should continue to contribute to the development of the Sahel countries in order to help them increase their capabilities to provide social services and development to the population .
Individual countries will continue to promote internal stability and help find both socio-economic solutions and solutions to ethnic tensions .
Fourthly , in order to prevent and fight against extremism and radicalisation , we need to support states and legitimate non-state actors in designing and implementing strategies and activities , with the aim of fighting Islamic radicalisation and promoting democratic , tolerant and non-violent visions for society .
Our endeavour will be to use , in a coherent manner , the short-term and long-term instruments that we have in order to implement the different components of this strategy .
Member States ' engagement to build into the strategy will , of course , be part of this .
I am working very closely with Commissioner Piebalgs , whose involvement in the preparation of the security and development strategy is essential , to ensure the necessary resources for its implementation .
I am convinced that if we set up this new comprehensive and holistic strategy , continuing the political , diplomatic and operational development strands of our engagement in the Sahel , we will give a new impetus to tackling the multiple threats and challenges that this region faces .
I am looking forward to presenting this strategy properly in a few weeks ' time and involving the honourable Members of the European Parliament in discussion .
Mr President , as stated in the text of the oral question that we have tabled , in the last three years , we have seen an escalation of the situation detrimentally affecting European Union interests and citizens in the southern Sahara , which has become a haven for the Islamic branch of al-Qaeda , with a whole string of murders , kidnappings , extortion , blackmail , drug trafficking and people trafficking , the victims of which have been German , Italian , Spanish and , most recently , French citizens .
We therefore want to express our solidarity with our French fellow Members , and say , Baroness Ashton , that this situation demands a firm , unflinching response from the European Union , as President Sarkozy has demanded .
In this context , this response needs to be made in the political , economic and development spheres , and Mr Danjean reminded us of the huge resources in the European Development Fund .
Baroness Ashton , I would like you to give your assessment of the G8 anti-terrorism summit in October - when you received the Council mandate - in Mali , which Algeria did not attend .
You said that the response needs to be a regional one .
I think it is a bad sign that two of the parties in this conflict - such as Morocco and Algeria - are not cooperating with each other , on top of the unstable situation in Tunisia .
Finally , Baroness Ashton , I would like you to give your assessment of the anti-terrorist centre created by Algeria 2 000 km south of Algiers , in which Mali , Mauritania and Niger are participating , and to tell me if you share the interpretation that the aim of this anti-terrorist centre is to prevent the European Union and the United States from being present in order to guarantee security in the area .

Mr President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , there seems to be positive agreement between Mr Danjean 's remarks and what you said in your speech , Baroness Ashton , regarding the analysis of the situation , which is that the situation in the Sahel is critical .
We are talking about one of the poorest regions in the world , bordering on some of the countries that have been shaken over the last week by more dangerous instability than ever .
It is also a region where terrorist infiltration and drug trafficking are intertwined to a truly worrying extent .
All that makes the situation unsustainable and a real threat to Europe .
We therefore need to see a qualitative leap in Europe 's initiative .
The 2009 initiative for security and development in the Sahel has so far proved ineffective .
What is needed is the new strategy for security in the Sahel that the Council of Foreign Ministers have called to adopt , which we are awaiting .
I believe there are two important points that have been highlighted : firstly , a regional approach ; and secondly , an integrated approach that enables us to make the best possible use of the various instruments available to the EU in a concrete , operational and coordinated way .
We must realise , however , that the path for a possible mission must be assessed very carefully , because Common Security and Defence Policy missions are one of the instruments we have available , but they are no replacement for a political strategy .
Our group therefore fully endorses Europe 's new , renewed commitment in the Sahel and we are anxious to see the new strategy , discuss it in detail and support its implementation .
Mr President , there has been an alarming increase in the Sahel region of the type of incidents mentioned in the oral question .
The people most affected by the activities of the criminal networks and terrorists are expatriates , many of whom have behaved in an exemplary way , as did the two French nationals whose tragic fate we condemn .
At the same time , each incident further undermines the authority of the respective governments , who are attempting to tackle their economic , security and political cooperation problems within a regional system whose institutional framework , let us not forget , is broadly based on the European model .
The issues raised in this discussion are extremely important .
If we want to do what is expected of us as the European Union , in the first instance , we must agree on a common approach to the Sahel region in particular and to the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) in general .
Secondly , we must look seriously at both the immediate and the underlying causes behind the deteriorating situation in this region .
One of these underlying causes is the extreme poverty of these States , which are therefore weak and unable to fulfil their sovereign functions .
Thirdly , we need to define a clear EU strategy on this subject , and I would like to thank Baroness Ashton for her announcement on this .
Fourthly , we must not skimp on the resources needed to help the States in question regain control of the situation , especially the security situation .
I would like to finish by pointing out that in tackling the problems raised in Mr Danjean 's question , we are , in fact , taking care of our own security .
Mr President , what is this all about ?
Is it about organised crime or about political and / or religious terrorism ?
This is an important question when it comes to assessing the situation .
Experts on this region are of the opinion that this is more to do with crime than with religiously motivated international terrorism .
Measures against terrorism often have fatal consequences for peace and democracy and can be used as a pretext for promoting other interests .
It may be that this is also about Africa as one of the areas in which Europe is interested .
In the words of Gilles de Kerchove , the EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator , it concerns Africa as Europe 's backyard .
I am opposed to security policies which will help to militarise Africa .
The Sahel region can only be made secure by improving the situation of the population .
Increasing security and military budgets in countries where the population is suffering from an acute food shortage is a disastrous move .
Finally , I would like you to consider the fact that kidnapping and other crimes are a business in which many people are involved in a confusing array of organisations .
Western funding for security structures could have a counterproductive effect on efforts to combat crime and could continue putting innocent people at risk in future .
( RO ) Mr President , the kidnapping and subsequent murder of Antoine de Lecour and Vincent Delory in Niger give us a painful reminder of the need to implement a strategy for promoting security , stability and good governance in the Sahel region .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has actually supported such a strategy for a long time and I would like to welcome , in this context , the European Commission 's announcement to the effect that a strategy which will combine security and development aspects will be presented by the end of this month .
I truly believe that we need to look at the security issue in the Sahel from every aspect because , if terrorism has managed to take root in this region , the reason is that it has found there political , mainly social and obviously economic conditions conducive to this development .
We are dealing with extremely permeable borders and a lack of any effective government control .
All these factors have obviously facilitated the spread of illegal trafficking .
There are also development deficiencies .
I believe that there are two extremely useful factors to help ensure the security of the Sahel and , by extension , European citizens .
Firstly , a strategy is required at Sahel-Sarahan level , aimed at restoring the authority of the states in the region over the abandoned territories as well as , obviously , at establishing the rule of law .
Secondly , I believe that we need to launch joint socio-economic development programmes in the border areas so as to create job opportunities for the local populations .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , requests to debate this topic have been made several times , and commitments have been adopted each time to put the required initiatives into practice in the Sahel region , whether to stabilise the region or to ensure greater security .
As we know , given the lack of borders and the huge size of the region , the Sahel is an ideal area of transit for drug traffickers and terrorist groups , specifically al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb .
The weakness and instability of the states in this region are the main problem and , as has been pointed out , the threats directly affect the peoples and countries in the region , particularly Mauritania , Mali and Niger .
The main task the European Union has to address is to draw up a credible security strategy based on the various facets of possible European action : cooperation and development policy , regional programmes , coordination strategies for highway security , and security training policies .
Hence , the European Union not just should , but must intervene as quickly as possible , and therefore we are looking forward to the Commission drawing up a complete strategy , as you announced , Baroness Ashton , as well as strong intervention on the ground .
To conclude , my request is clear : we need to pay far greater attention to what is happening south of Europe , because many things are about to change and we had better not be caught unprepared .
It could only do the EU good to be more far-sighted .
( SV ) Mr President , the deterioration in the security situation in Sahel is extremely serious .
It has cost many lives and is threatening to undermine the political progress that has been made in recent years in the fight against terrorism .
Naturally , I would also like to extend my sympathy to all those who have been so badly affected by this horrific violence .
It is particularly regrettable that the attacks by al-Qaeda are increasing in the Sahel region at a time when they are decreasing in many other parts of the world .
An estimated 25 % of the global cocaine trade to Europe from Latin America comes through the Sahel region every year .
Drug smuggling enables terrorist activities to be funded by stable incomes and it also makes it possible to recruit young people in the region and pay them well .
This frightening development is also worrying our colleagues in the Sahel region and , at the most recent meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in December , we discussed precisely how the security situation in this region can be improved and the smuggling reduced .
Baroness Ashton , the EU 's efforts here need to be very clear and they also need to be stepped up .
Together with the countries in the Sahel strip , we must extend and coordinate our efforts by means of an overall regional strategy just like you mentioned .
The EU has a huge joint responsibility here to provide high quality assistance with a definite strengthening of the democratic forces .
( ES ) Mr President , as you know , Niger , one of the central countries of the Sahel region , is holding presidential and parliamentary elections at the end of this month .
I think that Baroness Ashton 's decision to send a European Union delegation to those elections is an important gesture of support , and I want to thank her for thinking of me to chair it .
I would first of all like to express my regret at the recent murder of two young French people in Niger at the hands of terrorists , not forgetting the Nigerien soldiers who died during the rescue operation .
The population of the region clearly rejects violence and terrorism , as they are the first to suffer as a result , but they ask the European Union to do everything it can to help them to eradicate terrorist violence and , among other things , to provide weapons and training for their armed forces so that they can respond adequately to these terrorist incursions .
In addition , despite having a great wealth of natural resources , Niger is one of the least developed countries in the world .
The European Union must therefore work to establish an effective development cooperation strategy to help Niger and the whole region out of the difficult situation they are in .
I think there is a great deal at stake for us in this area of the world , because it is not only its welfare , but that of Europe that is dependent on its stability , given its geographical proximity .
( PT ) Mr President , insecurity in the Sahel region requires development effort , as Commissioner Piebalgs said a few days ago .
However , development , although essential and long lasting , is not enough on its own .
As Baroness Ashton said today , the EU needs a coherent strategy that makes use of all available instruments , including those aimed at reforming the security sectors of the countries in the region and at democratic and institutional capacity building .
The European Union has not acted in this way , though .
We need only take a look nearby at Guinea-Bissau , today practically transformed into a narco-state , from where the European Union very recently withdrew a European Security and Defence Policy mission .
That was wrong , because what was needed was to strengthen the size and mandate of this mission , especially since the centre of organised crime in Guinea-Bissau targets Europe directly .
Another example of how the European Union is not doing what it should in the Sahel is the way in which it has washed its hands of seeking a solution to the conflict in Western Sahara .
If we continue to look the other way - particularly now with the highly charged events happening in Tunisia and the consequences for the entire region - we shall only aggravate the security situation in the Sahel and deliver another cornered , desperate generation to criminal and terrorist organisations like al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb , which are already at large in the region .
We cannot continue not having this coherent strategy in place , as described by Baroness Ashton .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the Sahel is a pivotal region lying between Sub-Saharan Africa and Europe .
The worrying level of insecurity there concerns us all .
I would like to draw your attention to the resolution adopted on 4 December last year by the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , which addresses precisely this subject , and to the recommendations this resolution makes .
A common European strategy is obviously needed , but the European Union will not get anywhere if it is acting alone .
This is why the actors present in the region need to engage in wide-reaching concerted action .
A summit of the Heads of State of the countries in the region , organised under the auspices of the UN , the EU and the African Union , would be an opportunity to tackle the problem head on and to try to find solutions through a broad-based strategy .
In order to demonstrate real political will , a two-stage action plan for the region is desperately needed .
The first stage would deal with the immediate , urgent situation .
This would involve the region 's states pooling the resources and information they have and coordinating their actions .
The second stage would involve raising the awareness of the local inhabitants about the problem and looking at prevention .
It is important to prevent the ranks of terrorists from swelling day by day as a result of the frustration and lack of direction of the region 's inhabitants .
The European Union cannot stand by and do nothing to tackle this problem .
I would therefore urge Baroness Ashton to do everything necessary in order to move the discussions on and to come up with concrete solutions to this major problem .
( RO ) Mr President , the deterioration in the security situation in the Sahel region is no longer a regional problem .
Unfortunately , it has now become a European Union problem with the increase in the number of attacks where European citizens are the victims .
The Sahel is facing , first and foremost , a terrorist threat , which is growing steadily and whose victims are mainly Europeans , who are being kidnapped and murdered with appalling frequency .
This is also a transit region for drugs and arms smuggling , as well as a channel for illegal emigration to Europe .
I believe that practical cooperation must be stepped up with the North African authorities to increase the involvement of the armed and security forces in the region in combating terrorism .
Similarly , we have available a number of political instruments for boosting regional cooperation in order to counter this threat .
I hope that the European Union 's technical assistance efforts will be focused , to a larger extent , on supporting the development process because we cannot overlook the fact that the terrorist groups find the Sahel a fertile ground for support , particularly due to the poverty among the population and the fragile state of government authority .
I believe that increased , properly targeted development aid can play a key role in improving the situation in the region .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree that the situation in the Sahel region has worsened considerably .
A lawless zone allowed to develop on Europe 's doorstep is a threat that we should combat decisively and immediately .
The number of extremist groups is increasing , and they are threatening the lives of civilians .
I , too , condemn the loss of human life and kidnappings and am concerned for European nationals in the region .
Until now , Morocco has acted as a stronghold against the different forms of trafficking from the Sahel .
However , drug , arms and human traffickers are now bypassing Morocco by going through Mauritania and the Canary Islands to reach the European Union .
I see it as the EU 's responsibility to take action to help these States put an end to these threats .
Europe 's security is determined not only on our own territory but also in the regions nearest to us .
The time has come to act , and I call on the Commission and the Council to implement an action plan that will help restore security in the Sahel region .

( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , as a Member of the European Parliament who hails from the north of France , I will join Mr Danjean in describing not only the intense emotions that the killing of these two young men from northern France provoked but also the sense of outrage at the injustice of it .
I pay tribute to their memory .
I agree with Mr Danjean 's assessment of the situation and I also welcome the initial answers that Baroness Ashton gave at the beginning of our discussion .
However , I would like if I may , Baroness Ashton , to ask you a question : we know how permeable the borders are between Mali and southern Algeria and we know that on the other side of the Sahel , the Western Sahara could also become a source of insecurity in the future , just as the Sahel is today .
Can you therefore tell us whether you are planning any initiatives , especially in response to the autonomy plan presented by the Kingdom of Morocco to the United Nations , which I believe would help make the region secure and establish the necessary dialogue with the Algerian authorities in particular ?
Mr President , sadly , Salafist forces that are part of the global al-Qaeda franchise have found sanctuary in the Sahel region , which is a vast and remote territory ideal for them for purposes of terrorist training , kidnapping unfortunate innocents - and here I extend my condolences to the families of the two French citizens recently murdered - and , of course , drug smuggling and organised crime .
This poses a vast security challenge on top of the similar problems we already face in the Afghanistan / Pakistan border region , in Somalia and in Yemen .
The EU must now cooperate strongly with our US allies and other democratic countries such as India and Israel , as well as neighbouring moderate Arab and African governments , in finding a joint strategy to defeat this menace to global security .
Madam High Representative , Operation Atalanta , off Somalia , has been a success .
Perhaps something now needs to be considered - under a NATO hat , a French-led Common Security and Defence Policy mission , or whatever - to defeat this global threat , particularly in the region of Mali , Mauritania and Niger , which are already extremely poor countries and need every bit of help we can give them .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I will be quite brief because honourable Members have been very helpful in offering not only support for the breadth of the approach that we will be taking but also raising particular issues .
If I pick up two of them , the first is - and , in a sense , Mrs Salafranca began with it - about how we should support regional initiatives , which are often dominated by individual countries but do not include all the members of the region , and how best to try and provide the kind of support that ensures we engage with all the countries of that region .
I am putting it slightly more broadly than the honourable Member did , but very deliberately so .
One of the challenges for us is to back initiatives that countries are able to take individually and collectively , but ensure that they can be effective by ensuring that they are comprehensive , either in terms of the numbers of countries or in the approach that they take .
One of the things we need to look at is how to balance our own actions against supporting actions from those most concerned .
I am always very conscious of looking at ways in which we intervene , through our support and through the instruments at our disposal , to back up and support initiatives on the ground - home-grown initiatives - as being often but not always the best way forward .
Regarding the Western Sahara and the proposals being made , these are things we need to look at .
I need to see where best we can lend support .
I am conscious in a number of discussions with honourable Members that these issues , particularly Western Sahara , have become more prominent .
We need to think about this approach in a very comprehensive way .
We will continue to work on this .
It will be part of the discussions that we have at the Foreign Affairs Council , but also something that we will return to with the Parliament to make sure that we have got it right .
It is now really important that we move forward into a strategy that really does consider the short , medium and long term but also the breadth of the way in which we can engage as a European Union , as a Parliament , as a Commission and as a series of Member States able to pack this up into one seriously thought-through strategy for the future .
The debate is closed .
Situation in Belarus
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the European Commission and EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Mrs Ashton , on the situation in Belarus .

Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , the events which followed the elections in Belarus on 19 December have come as a shock to all of us : the force used by the authorities against their citizens prompted statements of concern and condemnation across the world .
My colleagues and I have met with many of those affected , among the opposition movement , civil society , the families of those imprisoned and the population at large .
We have had the opportunity to express our sympathy and solidarity and to listen .
However , honourable Members , the time has come to act .
I greatly appreciate the fact that Members of this Parliament have already been able to contribute to our reflections on this issue and that my colleague , Commissioner Füle , was able to present our current thinking to the AFET Committee last week .
I am looking forward to studying the EU resolution which emerges from your debates .
It is important for all of us to be as focused as possible in our thinking , given the urgency of the situation that we are addressing .
I have spent time with a number of representatives of the opposition and the wider public in Belarus , including , as I have mentioned , relatives of those detained .
I have also met Foreign Minister Martynov .
These conversations have left me in no doubt that the events we witnessed were an affront to our vision of respect for human rights , fundamental freedoms and democracy .
Not only was there unwarranted use of force , but the electoral process as a whole was also clearly undermined by the detention of civil society and opposition representatives .
The assessment by the OSCE-ODIHR supports this conclusion .
Many of those detained in the last few weeks have been released .
However , a significant group - as many as 30 people - still face charges that could lead to very substantial prison sentences and , as honourable Members know , that group includes some presidential candidates .
Mr President , I have already condemned the repressive measures taken by the authorities in Minsk and I have called for the immediate release of all those detained on political grounds , as well as the reopening of the OSCE office in Minsk .
I have reinforced this message in a joint statement with US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
In my meeting with Foreign Minister Martynov , I emphasised that the EU expects an immediate response from the Belarusian authorities to the demands of the international community .
In determining the next steps we take , we need to start from basic principles .
The first of these principles is that the security and safety of peaceful activists , including presidential candidates , must be at the forefront of our minds at all times .
The second is that Belarusians are our neighbours and partners , and their interests should be paramount .
While we express our concern to the authorities , we cannot isolate the people .
The third principle is that respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is at the core of EU foreign policy and of the Eastern Partnership and is part of a set of common values which we share with our closest partners .
We will work with those partners , as we have done with the United States , to maximise the strength of the message sent to Belarus by the international community .
Mr President , our assessment leads to a clear conclusion : that we should use our channels to convey a firm and prompt reaction .
That reaction should give the authorities in Belarus a clear signal of our views , without isolating citizens and civil society .
Our reaction should be a balanced one .
On the one hand , we have to consider targeted measures against the Belarusian authorities and , I believe , to conduct a review of sanctions .
On the other hand , we need to have an intensified dialogue with , and to support , civil society and citizens - and , in practical terms , that means continuing our assistance to NGOs , the media and students , and perhaps an increased effort to enhance mobility for citizens who wish to travel to the European Union .
In the short term , reintroducing a travel ban for President Lukashenko , and extending that ban to further named individuals , is certainly an option if detainees are not released .
With regard to intensified support for civil society , I have asked the External Action Service , in cooperation with the Commission , to prepare options for urgent measures focusing on NGOs , media and students .
I know that the European Parliament has scope to provide scholarships for students expelled from university and I hope , Mr President , that this facility can be exploited .
Of course we shall be trying to leverage additional resources from elsewhere , including Member States .
I mentioned earlier the issue of mobility and I am thinking in particular of visa facilitation : I want to encourage Member States ' consulates in Minsk to facilitate the delivery of visas as an ad hoc measure in the interests of Belarusian citizens .
Mr President , the short-term measures I have just described will , of course , have to be considered by the Foreign Affairs Council on 31 January , but it is not too early to reflect on some longer-term aspects of our relations with Belarus .
Firstly , I said earlier that we need to work with other international partners on this issue and that is one reason why Belarus should continue to participate in the multilateral track that we have available , and why we need to engage strongly with our Eastern Partnership countries to build a consensus on this issue .
Secondly , as far as bilateral financial assistance from the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) is concerned , we should place a stronger focus on the needs of the population and on civil society .
Finally , last year , we drew up a joint interim plan , mapping out the development of our relations with Belarus in the medium term .
I believe we need to pause in this process .
That does not mean abandoning the joint interim plan , but we need further consultation , including with civil society , and a review if necessary .
Mr President , this is the framework within which we are currently working .
I am now very interested to hear the views of Members of Parliament .
Mr President , there was no room for doubt in the minds of international observers , and there should be no room for any doubt whatsoever in our minds .
The recent presidential elections held in Belarus in December were not fair .
They were not fair , and so the policy that we have been conducting since 2008 with regard to the Belarusian authorities , a policy of dialogue with Belarus and an outstretched hand , cannot be continued any longer .
This is not the time for ' business as usual ' ; this is the time for new decisions , a new policy and a hard line in dealings with the Belarusian regime , by which I also mean both political and visa sanctions , without ruling out economic sanctions .
We should , of course , make intelligent use of such sanctions and target them in such a way as to ensure that the lives of ordinary Belarusians are not affected , but we should not hesitate to impose them , including the suspension of Belarus ' membership in the Eastern Partnership .
Since the elections were unfair , the results of the elections are not credible .
We can thus state , calmly and in full awareness of the facts , that the Belarusian democratic opposition can claim a moral victory in these elections .
We should therefore support the opposition in its attempts to create a political representation here in Brussels to represent both its interests and the interests of the whole of free Belarus in its dealings with the European Union and the Member States at a political level .
Finally , we should demand the release of those who have been arrested , both the presidential candidates and the political activists , independent journalists , students and university lecturers .
They must all be released before we engage in any further talks with representatives of the Belarusian state .
Mr President , Lady Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament expresses its great regret that these presidential elections have turned into another missed opportunity for the country to set out firmly and with commitment on the road to democracy .
We can , however , say that essentially , the European Union 's policy of gradually engaging Belarus on certain conditions has yielded certain results , so we should be wary of calls for a radical change to our policy .
I say this because it is thanks to our engagement that the presidential campaign ultimately made some progress , and it could be that it was also the reason why many more people gathered on the square in Minsk than the organisers had expected .
In other words , we had probably generated an atmosphere of greater freedom which the citizens of Belarus may have interpreted correctly .
However , from here on , we have to be , in the first place , clear and firm enough with our demands to the authorities in Belarus to free those detained and to immediately stop persecuting all those who took part in or organised the protests in one form or another .
We cannot compromise on this , and we have to be quite clear about what we want .
Anther element , however , is what we can do in the medium and long term .
Firstly , we have to avoid casting the country back into isolation , because in that way , as the representatives of the opposition and of civil society stressed , Belarus ' isolation means the isolation of the country 's citizens .
What we have to do is , within the framework of the policy we already have towards Belarus , to try and take certain measures to adjust our policy , so that it benefits the country 's citizens and supports its media , civil society , the opposition .
In this way , we can create an environment in which fair and democratic elections will be possible .
We should , in my view , work towards this with Belarus ' non-EU neighbours , Russia and Ukraine , and , as a parliament , try and use the opportunities provided by the Eastern Partnership and EURONEST to engage the other five countries in the Partnership in joint activities to democratise Belarus .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( PL ) Mr President , I know that I only have 30 seconds .
Perhaps the interpretation was not very clear , here , Mr Vigenin , but did I really hear you say that you regard the demonstration which took place after the elections , or , in other words , the demonstration which , in actual fact , was held to protest against the falsification of these elections and all the irregularities that took place , as proof of the fact that the elections and the situation are improving ?
That was how it sounded .
I would find it very difficult to accept that your words were , in fact , interpreted correctly .
( BG ) Perhaps I was not clear enough , or some of the subtleties were lost in translation .
What I meant to say was that the situation in Belarus has changed in the sense that more and more people see the need for democracy and the need to fight for democracy .
It is in that sense that I see the fact that more people came out onto the square in Minsk than anyone expected as a positive signal .
That is what I meant , and by no means did I mean that it was the regime in Belarus that had made it possible .
Perhaps there is a problem with the English interpretation .
Is there a problem with the English interpretation ?
Please check it .
No , it is not the interpretation .
It is a problem with the microphone .
Is it OK now ?
Mr President , I always try to speak in my own language , but sometimes I feel that I should not on such sensitive issues .
I was trying to convey that I believe that the situation is improving in the sense that more and more people in Belarus understand that Belarus needs democracy and more and more people understand that they have to fight for democracy in Belarus .
That is why I said that I consider it a positive signal that so many people , many more than the organiser expected , were at Minsk Square .
I hope this explains what I meant .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it was good to hear what the High Representative said and we fully agree with what she has said .
It is very important that the European Union has been able to react to the failure of the Belarusian presidential elections .
I wish we also had the courage to be as vigorous , firm and principled in the case of a country neighbouring Belarus , where suppression of the democratic opposition and violations of the rule of law and of human rights have also become commonplace .
The deterioration of democracy in Russia might also be the very reason why the Kremlin has recognised the Belarusian presidential elections and described the violent repression as an ' internal affair ' of Belarus .
Such indifference to the appalling situation in Belarus is a significant sign of tendencies in Russia .
The European Parliament has come up with a strong resolution that proposes targeted visa and economic sanctions against the criminal regime of Lukashenko .
It is vital that the European Union stands united on this and that the Member States cease pursuing any bilateral initiatives with Lukashenko and his regime .
We must suspend the Eastern Partnership and other cooperation until the political prisoners are released .
At the same time , we must increase support to civil society , NGOs and independent media in Belarus in order to prepare them for the build-up of Belarus after the downfall of Lukashenko , which will hopefully take place by means of democratic elections .
Therefore , Madam High Representative , I would like you to support calling for a pan-European forum on the future of Belarus .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I think that the High Representative is completely echoing our feelings when she says she was shocked .
We were indeed shocked after 19 December , as many of us had already hoped that there would be a gradual opening-up of Belarus towards the European Union .
I now think that a lot of those hopes have gone for the time being .
It is very worrying to hear - almost hourly - news of ongoing repression in Minsk and other parts of Belarus .
Just yesterday , the harassment of the human rights organisation Viasna continued , with house raids , arrests and detentions .
This is an organisation which has very courageously been defending human rights in Belarus .
The authorities have still not allowed it to register .
The Belarusian Helsinki Committee received a warning after it contacted the UN Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers .
It has good reason to believe that those charged with these serious offences are not going to be given a fair trial .
Today , we also had news of the former presidential candidate , Mr Sannikov , his spouse Iryna Khalip , a journalist and correspondent of the Novaya Gazeta in Minsk , and their child - which was a worldwide sensation .
We have heard that the child may be allowed to stay with its grandparents , as the parents are detained .
However , I would just warn that this is not good news yet .
We still need confirmation , which may arrive next week .
So why is this ' strike hard ' happening in Belarus ?
We really need to insist on an independent international inquiry into what happened , in order to understand all the background and to understand whether provocateurs actually instigated this violence - which has now been declared criminal - and not those who were actually only calling for democracy in Belarus .
In my view , the most appropriate body to conduct such an investigation would be the OSCE and , failing that , the United Nations .
What about new elections ?
We should be careful about calling for new elections too soon because we need to safeguard the road map towards democratic reforms .
We need to guarantee freedom of the press , of association and of assembly .
Without that , we would not be gaining much , even if Belarus held new elections today .
Mr President , we are talking about the situation in Belarus , but let us not pass the buck .
It is easy to level accusations at the Lukashenko regime , which deserves such accusations , and we should indeed accuse and denounce it .
However , Europe should also take some of the blame .
Is it not the case that the visit of the Italian Prime Minister , Mr Berlusconi , served to lend credence of sorts to the regime ?
Is it not the case that the visit of the Lithuanian President , Mrs Grybauskaitė , served to lend credence to the regime ?
Is it not the case that the visit of the German and Polish foreign affairs ministers , Mr Westerwelle and Mr Sikorski , served to lend credence to the regime , and indeed came in very useful for the regime ?
The truth of the matter is that politicians from European Union Member States have given Mr Lukashenko a certain amount of room for political manoeuvre , without asking for anything whatsoever in return .
Today , we must demand respect for human rights , but also take blame where blame is due .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , my group has not signed up to the compromise resolution on Belarus .
However , I would like to make it clear that this should not be seen as an acceptance on our part of the results of the election , the arrests and the reprisals against those with differing opinions .
For us , fair , transparent and democratic elections - ' the freedom of dissenters ' to quote Rosa Luxemburg - are a basic requirement for establishing a relationship with Belarus and with all other states .
This also includes the immediate release of all political detainees .
However , I doubt whether sanctions are really an effective means of bringing about the immediate release of political prisoners and radical changes in the democratic system in Belarus .
Sanctions have had little effect in the past in Belarus and elsewhere .
Ladies and gentlemen , you are as well aware of this as I am .
A better approach seems to me to be to confront those who hold political power with our arguments and demands in the context of a political dialogue , not to give them the opportunity to discredit the criticisms made by those in civil society by referring to external criticism , to establish a transparent political system and to coordinate our efforts with those of all our foreign policy partners in Belarus .
This also seems to be more honest in relation to our own arguments , as this morning 's discussion on the Hungarian Presidency has shown .
Mr President , the brutal repression of any political alternative to President Lukashenko 's regime since the election of 19 December 2010 has clearly reduced Minsk 's room for manoeuvre in the outside world .
Belarus , on its own initiative , has abruptly discontinued the shuttle diplomacy which it had been conducting between Moscow and Brussels for the past three years .
Currently , President Lukashenko is managing to maintain strong political and economic ties with the Kremlin .
It is precisely this dependent relationship that demands a greater European involvement in Belarus 's civil society .
Do , therefore , by all means , continue pursuing the mind change strategy as a necessary step towards regime change .
Do actively demonstrate European solidarity .
For example , reduce visa costs for Belarusians as soon as possible .
Next , initiate a critical strategic discussion with the Belarusian political opposition and , as part of the same process , pay particular attention to reformist forces within the power apparatus .
That is balanced politics .
Brussels must not abandon Minsk now .
Do not leave Belarusians subject to Russian or Chinese law ; chart an independent path for them towards a free society and the democratic rule of law .
Mr President , Alexander Lukashenko has never missed an opportunity to prove himself a dictator .
The December elections were actually a ritual of re-appointment .
But we in the EU clung to the illusion that Lukashenko would miraculously change .
Indeed , we said we would wait for the December elections .
The elections came and Lukashenko remains the same and the opposition is either in hospital or in jail .
I think it is time for the EU to reconsider its approach to Belarus .
Clearly there is no place for Belarus in the Eastern Partnership .
Belarus should be suspended .
Our only partner should be civil society .
I await the results of the Foreign Affairs Council on 31 January and I hope that both Lady Ashton and Commissioner Füle recommend suspension .
Finally , regarding the implications for the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly , we can no longer give Lukashenko a veto on Euronest .
Belarus was used to block Euronest .
Therefore , the conclusion is that Euronest should be launched as a matter of urgency .
( LT ) Mr President , High Representative , the European Parliament resolution on which we will vote tomorrow should send a strong message to Belarusians , the whole of Europe and the world .
There must at least be a return as soon as possible to the situation that existed prior to 19 December and combined efforts to ensure that Belarus follows the path towards democracy and strengthening human rights .
The most important objective today is the release of political prisoners and a cessation of attacks against the opposition , non-governmental organisations and the free press .
However , I agree with the High Representative that when we take a swing at the regime , we must not hit Belarusian citizens .
We must calculate with millimetre accuracy whether we will harm Belarusians , as well as mutually beneficial ties with EU Member States in the fields of business , culture , education and tourism , which are essential for the opening up of Belarus in Europe .
The recent policy of dialogue with Belarus has borne some fruit : now almost half of all Belarusians are in favour of closer relations with the European Union .
We must react to events in Minsk so that from next year , this figure would grow even more .
That would be a tangibly painful reward for the organisers of 19 December .
In conclusion , I would again like to mention the financial , visa-related Berlin wall , which unfortunately has grown between the European Union and its eastern neighbours , and which is most difficult to overcome in Belarus .
It is high time to tear down that wall and make it possible for ordinary Ukrainians , Belarusians , Georgians and Russians to have access to and obtain visas to the European Union without any difficulty .
Those millions of euro that are taken in incomprehensibly high visa fees really are not recouped because they deepen the chasms inherited from the past , this time between European Union Member States and their neighbours .
It really should not be like this .
( NL ) Mr President , in life , and certainly in politics , hope is very important .
Hope provides something to look forward to , hope allows people to believe that things will be better in the future , and hope is what has been very much absent from Belarus since 19 December .
The hope that these elections would be more democratic than the previous ones .
The hope that the opposition would have better odds this time and the hope that the Belarusian media would present a more balanced picture to the citizens of Belarus .
All of those hopes have been dashed .
That is precisely why the EU should change its policy on Belarus .
Unfortunately , the policy of rapprochement with the regime has not worked .
The EU will have to impose sanctions on the Belarusian leadership .
Sanctions which will affect , not its citizens , but its leaders .
Sanctions such as withdrawing all visas for the leaders and their families .
This last thing is important , if we are to break the complex ties between political and economic power in Belarus .
Fortunately , Lady Ashton seems to be on the right track .
The Commission has also responded appropriately by demanding the immediate release of all political prisoners .
This Parliament , too , could also make a contribution by sending a mission to Belarus , as soon as possible , in order to show the opposition , the free media and the NGOs there that we support them .
It is only with their help and through their efforts that the new Belarus will be able to take shape .
To conclude , the EU should give a new impetus to the neighbourhood programme .
So far , this programme has not exactly lived up to its promise .
We should not just support the development citizenship in Moldova , Ukraine , Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan .
Using the same approach , we could also show Belarusians how important it is for their country 's future , too , that they seek a rapprochement with Europe .
If we do this , we will ensure that hope returns once again to the people of Belarus .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , our hopes that Belarus would move closer to democracy after the presidential elections have been bitterly disappointed .
Despite all our negative experiences and our reservations concerning the government of Mr Lukashenko , the EU has stretched out its hand to Belarus over recent months .
The extent to which the proposed cooperation would depend on these elections was made entirely clear and , for a while , it seemed as if the elections would be at least partially fair , correct and free .
However , the slight concessions have obviously shaken up the repressive system in such a way that the President has once again revealed his true colours as a ruthless dictator .
His alleged election is a dreadful sham , his power is not legitimate and his violence against the opposition is a brutal crime .
The electoral fraud and the suppression of protests represent a significant step backwards for Belarus .
Once again , there is an atmosphere of fear and repression in the country .
The electoral fraudsters brazenly claimed that foreign secret services and diplomats had intervened when , in fact , the system itself had sent out the agitators .
It is also outrageous that the secret service , which is controlled by the President and still calls itself the KGB , is using methods from the Stalin era to terrorise the opposition and civil society .
This violation of fundamental human rights by a member of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) is unacceptable .
The post-communist regime has become unbearable .
We have drawn up a parliamentary resolution which forms a good basis for the discussions between the European foreign ministers .
The resolution focuses primarily on the immediate release of detainees , medical care for the injured , the dropping of absurd accusations and the establishment of an independent investigation committee , together with targeted political and economic sanctions , which will have an impact on those in power , but not on the population .
We must now support the pro-European forces within the country whose hopes we have raised , who want a change of government and who have cast their votes .
They see the future of their country as being in the EU and not in a closer relationship with Russia .

The fact that the first leaders to congratulate Mr Lukashenko on his election victory were the Russian President , Mr Medvedev , the Russian Prime Minister , Mr Putin , and the President of Ukraine , Mr Yanukovych , demonstrates their understanding of democracy and the bleak prospects awaiting Belarus in this direction .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to start with some news for Mrs Hautala .
I hope that she has put her headphones on again .
Well , Mrs Hautala , there is one more thing to say in addition to the information you gave us about the organisation Viasna .
Not only has the organisation not been allowed to register , but recently , the police removed all of their computers , and on Monday - and this is the news I have for you - I started a collection of laptops in Poland to send to them .
Let us now get down to business , Commissioner .
I shall start by repeating that in your opinion , ' the time has come to act ' .
This is true .
The second very important thing you said was that we must not isolate Belarusian society .
The measures we take should adhere to this principle , and they really must be ' soft ' measures , or , in other words , building civil society , supporting the media and students and abolishing visas .
We should support such measures and , in particular , earmark more funding for them .
I agree too , however , that there should be harder-hitting measures , such as those proposed by Mr Protasiewicz or Mrs Ojuland .
This is a matter where both types of measure should be linked .
Mr President , I think that the diagnosis as designed and the therapy as planned are correct .
The problem is not that we had so different a diagnosis and plan for therapy in the past but that we did so little .
So perhaps we should ask ourselves whether we are sufficiently determined to do differently this time .
We obviously should condemn and demand liberation , impose sanctions and consider suspension but , if we do not go beyond this verbal condemnation and moral support , there will be no fruit from this action .
We need a long-term strategy and action and it will really be a test for the new foreign policy which Lady Ashton is now heading .
It is not only about Belarus .
How we tackle the Belarus question will determine the true political dynamics of the whole region : in Moldova , in Ukraine , also vis-à-vis Russia and elsewhere .
For the moment , geopolitically speaking , the course of events takes Belarus away from Europe , and Europe is in retreat as it is in Ukraine .
Obviously , we are right to recommend the double-check approach : sanction and isolate the regime , open increased assistance to the society .
I would say : let us replace the carrot-and-stick policies directed towards the regime so far with ' stick to regime and carrot to society ' .
However , to a much greater degree , we should remember that our partner is society , not the regime .
Lady Ashton said that we should continue helping .
We should discontinue doing as little as we did in the past .
Did we do all that we should have done ?
No , it was ridiculously modest assistance and we have to change that .
Mr President , as we debate here today , it appears that Alexander Lukashenko is rushing through plans for an inauguration this Friday , with no international guests , precisely because the international community does not recognise the Belarus elections as free , fair or transparent .
If it goes ahead , it will be a black Friday to follow what has begun to be dubbed ' Bloody Sunday ' , 19 December , when 700 democratic protestors were arrested , including seven of the nine presidential candidates in the elections , one of whom has had both his legs broken and another beaten by riot police until he sustained brain damage .
I ask the Vice-President / High Representative and the EU Member States to back the Polish proposals for a visa ban and , as our resolution makes clear , support the principle for further targeted economic sanctions .
In this context , one of the things that the European Union can do is to express clear and simple demands for the release of all political prisoners , for the authorities to lift any threat of banning or restricting the Belarusian Helsinki Committee , and for quick movement towards the organisation of new elections .
For the future , I agree with what has been said today both by Catherine Ashton and by my own group , that we need to keep the multilateral track open and we need to put an emphasis on civil society and support for it .
But I do say that this is not simply a watershed moment for democracy and human rights in Belarus : it is a test of Europe 's own Neighbourhood Policy .
Yes , we seek clear and closer cooperation and partnership with our neighbours to encourage a process of increasing congruence with those on our borders where there is a genuine mutual commitment to do so , but this will not work if there is an absence of actions when that mutual commitment is missing and things are going wrong .
The pain we should worry about in this debate is not the pain intended of proposed smart sanctions by Europe against Belarus , but the physical pain of the beatings inflicted on people who share Europe 's commitment to democracy and human rights and who need us to stand together with them in solidarity so that the long years of pain of Belarus can come to an end .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I would like to thank you for your rapid response to the events in Minsk .
I also admire the concept that you have produced .
It represents a good balance between sanctions against those who are responsible for the serious violations of human rights and measures to support the population of Belarus .
I would also like to thank the Munich security conference , which cancelled Mr Lukashenko 's invitation .
This sent out a clear signal that dictators have no place on international committees and should not be acknowledged by being invited to attend their meetings .
International recognition of a self-declared president weakens the opposition in his country and could also be regarded as international recognition of the non-democratic elections .
This is why the response of the conference was exactly the right one .
We know that we will have a long wait before we see any political changes in this country .
We are also aware that Mr Lukashenko has been in power for a long time and that his reaction is typical .
However , we cannot wait when it comes to the humanitarian situation in Belarus , Baroness Ashton .
We must react very quickly and ensure that the political prisoners are released , that parents are returned to their children and children to their parents .
They have done nothing more than demonstrating in support of their democratic rights and making their feelings clear on the streets .
The response to their actions was unjustified .
Baroness Ashton , I call on you to act quickly and to make it clear in every statement that these are political prisoners and not criminals .
I would like to send greetings to Andrei Sannikov and the others who are in prison .
They should be aware that they have our solidarity .
( CS ) Mr President , last month , the totalitarian regime in Cuba refused to allow Sakharov Prize laureate , Guillermo Farinas , to travel to Strasbourg .
A few days after that , we witnessed a series of repressions that took place following the presidential elections in Belarus .
No one doubts , perhaps , that the Lukashenko regime is an authoritarian regime , but it is also totalitarian , just like the Castro regime in Cuba .
We are holding a debate here today on whether to prevent senior representatives of the Lukashenko regime from entering the EU .
I am in favour of us being more open to the ordinary citizens of Belarus , who have never known what freedom and democracy look like .
Any form of political isolation will only play into the hands of Lukashenko .
The citizens of Belarus should be welcomed into the Union .
Conversely , however , we should cold-shoulder representatives of the Lukashenko totalitarian regime , and we should be very tough on them .
People who do not respect democratic values simply have no place in a decent society .
( PL ) Mr President , the policy which has been conducted towards Belarus by certain European governments recently , including , unfortunately , the government of my own country , Poland , has resulted in a total disaster .
Mr Lukashenko , Europe 's last dictator , is making fun of us and , spurred on by our apathy , persecuting his political opponents and putting them in prison .
A policy of agreement and tolerance could not bring about the desired effect .
Once again , it has turned out that our parleying with the dictatorship has been interpreted in Belarus as support for Mr Lukashenko , and our illusions were shattered back in December with the brutal beatings , assault and arrests of hundreds of opposition activists .
It is vital that we , the Members of the European Parliament , send a clear message to Belarus .
Europe will not tolerate the suppression of freedom by the Belarusian dictatorship .
Sanctions must be well-targeted and affect the regime 's representatives , not ordinary citizens .
On the contrary , the people need our help , as do community organisations , the independent media and the opposition .
We can provide real assistance when it comes to education and visa facilitations .
The Eastern Partnership must be either suspended in the case of Belarus , or tightened up to ensure that the regime does not catch sight of another euro .
The more Europe there is in Belarus , the faster the last dictator in our continent will fall .
Mr President , I think that one of the great developments in the modern world is the transition from totalitarianism to democracy in the eastern European countries .
Hungary , whose landmark Presidency we discussed this morning , is an example of that and our own President , Mr Buzek , is a shining example of that development .
However , there are other countries where the transition has not been as smooth .
Belarus , unfortunately , is an example , and Lady Ashton in particular summarised what needs to be done regarding dealing with that situation .
At best , you could say that they have embraced democracy by taking two steps forward and one step backwards .
In the recent election , they probably took three steps backwards and no steps forward , but I think she is correct in saying we need to work with civil society , the NGOs and our international partners to bring pressure to bear on President Lukashenko to end his repression and dictatorship .
( PL ) Mr President , what happened in Belarus on 19 December was a violation of liberty and democratic freedoms .
The arrest of 700 individuals , including all the presidential candidates , is not worthy of comment .
The elections were unfair .
This is now a test for the EU , and also for those countries with which the EU has a privileged relationship , for example , Russia , which has recognised the results of the elections .
We must support the opposition and send out a clear signal that the prisoners must be released before we will discuss anything in the context of relations with Belarus , and , in particular , with the Belarusian Government .
Any restrictions imposed must not affect the country 's citizens , however .
We must follow in Poland 's footsteps and relax the visa regime .
We should provide assistance to those who have lost their jobs and allow students who have been thrown out of university to study in other countries .
The independent media , including both radio stations and Belsat television , need our support .
This is not only a job for Lithuania and Poland , but also for the other Member States and the European institutions .
I would like to call for this in the strongest possible terms .
( EL ) Mr President , obviously , things have developed very badly in Belarus , as far as our principles and our creed are concerned .
Lukashenko is leading the country and the opposition is in gaol .
So what people expect of us is for us to address civil society in which , as rightly explained earlier , the European Union and its principles are held in esteem , to call for freedom of the press and the release of the imprisoned leaders of the opposition and , most importantly , for us to construct a policy such as that referred to by Lady Ashton , which I absolutely agree with , so as to create new conditions for us to re-establish relations with Belarus .
Mr President , the election for the Presidency in Belarus proved to be gravely disappointing for those of us who have been watching that country for a number of years .
I met the Belarusian Ambassador in London , who reassured me that this time it would all be different , that it would be up to international standards , and that the OSCE would be able to say that it was fair and free .
Unfortunately , the Homo Sovieticus instincts of Lukashenko proved more enduring than anything else .
His maverick behaviour was not predicted by his own senior officials , including his ambassadors .
I , too , now join the call to release all political prisoners immediately and to re-run the elections with a long-term EU observation mission in place and with the OSCE 's full agreement that it meets all the standards required for it to be essentially free and fair .
It is highly unlikely that Minsk will agree , but we must at least try .
Otherwise , there must be an immediate reimposition of enhanced , targeted sanctions , freezes of Mr Lukashenko 's assets - if we can find them - and travel bans on him and all his senior officials .
( LV ) Mr President , for my part , I should like to support Mrs Ashton 's report for the measured attitude it takes to events in Belarus .
We very often resort to purely emotional assessments and base them on our emotions .
We speak of political prisoners who must be released .
However , there is yet to be a trial .
We do not yet know what the verdict will be .
That is why I now ask fellow Members yet again to take a very measured attitude to this type of event .
Two years ago , the same thing happened in Latvia - until a meeting took place , no one was prohibited from having meetings .
However , once the mob , clearly urged on by a provocateur , had arrived and started to wreck the parliament building , the police intervened .
So too in Belarus .
I should very much like to know ( I shall finish right away ) where the money that sustains the opposition in Belarus comes from .
That is how we could help them . Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , we repeatedly read in the media that the reintroduction of the sanctions against President Lukashenko of Belarus , which were relaxed more than two years ago , would be tantamount to admitting that our long-standing efforts at rapprochement have failed .
In my opinion , these efforts had already failed , at the latest , at the time of the presidential elections or when the offices in Minsk of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) were closed .
The behaviour of the last dictator in Europe shows once again that the EU has a problem when it comes to violations of human rights .
The scandal of the CIA flights or the inconsistent approach to the conflict between the territorial integrity of states and the right of self-determination of their peoples , for example , in the Balkans , have damaged the image of the EU as a champion of human rights .
It also harms the credibility of the Union when it goes against the admirable principles of Copenhagen and holds accession negotiations with Turkey , a country which has a poor human rights record .
However , the die has been cast in Belarus , undoubtedly with the help of Mr Lukashenko himself .
( PL ) Mr President , given the ever-greater repressions imposed by the Lukashenko regime , solidarity with the Belarusian people is our duty .
Our assistance should be targeted at supporting the independent media , inter alia , by enabling them to operate on EU territory , and a good example of this is Belsat television in Poland .
Grants for students and school pupils are also a good way of providing support , since a large number of young people have been expelled from universities and schools for what are known as opposition activities .
The same is true for visas , which are simply too expensive for Belarusians at present , and this should be remedied without delay .
Belarusian citizens should have complete freedom to travel to the EU , with the exception of representatives of the regime , of course .
Support for civil society is an absolute priority , since a genuinely civil society will bring about changes in Belarus and ensure a better future for all of Belarus .
( RO ) Mr President , the presidential elections on 19 December marked a step backwards , both for the development of democracy in Belarus and in relations with the EU .
Using force and arresting opposition representatives do not provide any means at all of resolving political conflicts .
On the contrary , denying the opposition the right to representation in parliament results in deepening social tensions .
Against this background , I feel that the authoritarian regime in Minsk is not entitled to enjoy the benefits deriving from the Eastern Partnership .
In addition , Belarus has not confirmed its commitment within this policy as other countries in the region have done , particularly Georgia and the Republic of Moldova .
Indeed , suspending Belarus from the Eastern Partnership would be a direct , tangible sanction against the government .
I hope that the next Foreign Affairs Council will , for its part , mention such sanctions in the common position .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , I would like to ask Mrs Ashton a somewhat indiscreet question .
Do you know what , in 1982 , Jerzy Buzek used to do in the evenings ?
Or what Janusz Lewandowski used to do , or what Donald Tusk used to do ?
They all turned on their radios and listened to Radio Free Europe or Voice of America or the BBC , to find out the truth about what was happening in Poland .
I have another important question for you ; how could Lech Wałęsa survive , and how could any of the opposition activists survive , after being sacked from their jobs by the Polish Communist regime ?
They all survived because American trade union members sent financial assistance .
Those who listened to the radio could do so because support and funding had been provided for the radio stations .
Today , the responsibility rests with us to ensure that the truth reaches the Belarusians , and that financial assistance reaches the Belarusian opposition .
Mr President , I fully agree with my colleagues in suggesting sanctions against top Lukashenko cronies and providing support and assistance to the Belarus opposition , NGOs and ordinary citizens .
The joint motion for a resolution mentions the possible move of the 2014 world ice hockey championship away from Belarus if political prisoners are not released .
This is a reasonable and extremely effective tool .
Mr Lukashenko is an avid hockey fan and so are the citizens of Belarus .
Such a move would certainly raise attention and many questions across the country .
The IHF is the body in charge of such a decision .
It could be a chance to improve their tarnished image , caused by admitting to the IHF Council a former high-ranking KGB officer and Communist spy in the USA and a person who helped to defraud hundreds of thousands of citizens out of billions of dollars .
When the time comes , I hope the IHF will make the right decision .
( FI ) Mr President , it is good that several of us here have openly admitted that the so-called policy dialogue of the EU and many Member States has failed .
Lukashenko , who is a clever political player , has been able to exploit his campaign programme , has enjoyed all the political and economic benefits , and , at the same time , has continued to pour contempt on democracy and human rights .
He has even succeeded in charming a few politicians here , like Mr Rubiks , whose greatest concern in this situation seems to be whether the opposition will acquire help from abroad .
The sanctions that the resolution demands must definitely be implemented against the political leadership .
At the same time , however , we must ensure that help reaches the ordinary people who have lost their jobs and student places while hoping for democracy to come along .
Now it really is the last chance for the EU to show its colours and demonstrate that we support the people of Belarus in their struggle for democracy , and that we want Europe 's last dictator out .
Colleagues , let me say in general that it would be greatly appreciated if those asking for catch-the-eye were present throughout the debate .
It would make it much easier to be able to respond to the lively debate .
( PL ) Mr President , today is the moment of truth for us when it comes to solidarity with Belarus .
As we are all aware , Belarus is the last dictatorship in Europe , and we should show our full solidarity .
As we are also all aware , the US is providing only limited funds in this area , and the proposal which we would like to put forward today is a very significant programme of funding aimed at supporting both the opposition , the media and non-governmental organisations , but also , and above all , the young elite .
I am talking here primarily about the hundreds or even thousands of Belarusian students who are currently unable to continue their studies , and I would like to make a very specific proposal , namely , that a special Erasmus programme be prepared , within the already functioning Erasmus system , targeted exclusively at Belarusian students .
We know that we can make huge savings by using this programme , and that it will not require much effort , but the creation of a modern young future for a democratic state may prove effective in the long term , and I would ask the Commissioner to ensure that this is the case .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I very much wish to thank you and all the honourable Members who have participated in this very important , focused and well-considered debate today .
I will , of course , study Parliament 's resolution on this important and challenging issue .
It is now still only a month since this crisis began , and events move quickly .
My hope is , of course , that they will now move in a positive direction , in line with the goals that we all share .
The detainees should be released and Belarus should lay the foundations to embark on an inclusive reform process .
I stress my hope that parliamentary cooperation will continue to have an important role to play in that process .
Many honourable Members have endorsed the ideas that I set out in the beginning : the need to be absolutely clear about the unacceptability of what has happened , to be clear that we wish to take steps on this , and to be clear that we wish to support civil society , young people , the media and students - the categories that many honourable Members have talked about .
I will take great heart from the comments that have been made .
We will now move forward to make sure that we do this .
Finally , when I met the families and the opposition leaders who came to meet with me , I was absolutely clear with them that we expected to see people released from prison and Belarus move forward , in the way that we would all wish , towards real democracy .
I also made very direct comments to the Foreign Minister .
It is in their hands to reverse their position and to do what they know that they must .
If they do not , then the international community will and must act .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 January 2011 .
Madam Vice-President / High Representative , I understand that you have been in the Chamber since 15 : 00 and now it is 18 : 15 .
Would you like us to take a five-minute break just to relax ?
It is up to you , otherwise we can keep going .
Vice-President of the Council / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I have to leave to start travelling to Turkey for the talks with Iran , so my dear colleague and friend , Stefan Füle , will take the last part of this debate .
The situation in Belarus is extremely worrying and the EU needs to take appropriate steps .
In this respect , I would like to tell you about a conspiracy theory that is circulating , told to me yesterday by a Belarusian businessman .
He claimed that this situation is not what President Lukashenko himself wanted after the elections but that it was a result of collaboration between the Belarusian and Russian secret services aimed at undermining any attempt at cooperation between the EU and Belarus .
Of course , it is impossible to prove theories such as this , but we should nonetheless consider the fact that by imposing sanctions on the Belarusian parties responsible , we may also be harming Belarusian citizens , civil society and so on .
Considering the likely , albeit silent , involvement of Russia in this situation , I would like to repeat something I have already said to this House before : Ceterum censeo , France decided to sell a Mistral class warship to Russia , and I am convinced that it will regret its action .
EU-Libya Framework Agreement
The next item is the report by Ana Gomes , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the negotiations concerning the EU-Libya Framework Agreement .
Mr President , Libya has a strategic position with regard to controlling migratory flows to Europe , in addition to significant energy resources and great potential as a neighbour and partner in the Maghreb .
Some Member States have close relations with Libya , but it is important to ensure that such relations are duly anchored in the fundamental values and interests of the Union .
Therefore , we support the development of relations with Libya through the establishment of a framework agreement covering various areas of cooperation with a view to stimulating a substantial political dialogue .
We cannot forget , however , that Libya is governed by a dictatorial regime with a history of serious breaches of human rights and terrorist attacks and interference in other countries , though , in the last few years , there have been signs that it wants to do a U-turn .
Consequently , the framework agreement with Libya can only have the consent of this Parliament if certain conditions are met .
A sine qua non condition is that Libya allows the United Nations High Commission for Refugees ( UNHCR ) to operate in the country again with an extended mandate .
Let me say it quite clearly : no UNHCR , no agreement .
Libya must be persuaded to ratify the Geneva Convention on Refugees .
As it is already a party to the African Refugee Convention , it is difficult to understand why its internal legal order does not recognise refugee status .
Any re-admission agreement between the European Union and Libya has to exclude all those who claim to be asylum seekers , refugees or persons requiring international protection , and it must be applied completely in accordance with the principle of non-refoulement .
Critical situations , such as occurred with the 400 Eritreans who were on the verge of being expelled en masse from Libya last summer , must not happen again .
The European Union must encourage Libya to adopt legal and social solutions that improve the inhuman living conditions of the approximately 2 million immigrants - about a quarter of the population - who are working in Libya .
These immigrants deserve legal protection and cannot continue to be treated as abeed , slaves .
The European Union has to invest in joint programmes to combat the growing traffic in people , which has devastating consequences , particularly for women and children .
The European Union 's support for the International Organisation for Migration and all the organisations that help migrants in transit in Libya must be increased to improve the conditions of migrants interned in detention centres , which are starting to fill up again , in spite of suddenly being emptied in the middle of last year .
The Union cannot abstain from persuading Libya to commit itself to a moratorium on the death penalty and it is essential that it demands that the Libyan authorities publish the identity of national and foreign citizens who are executed .
The Union must insist that Libya ratifies the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court .
Within the framework of cooperation , the Union must encourage reforms that modernise social , political and judicial structures , which open the country to the outside , which expose society to free information , which promote independence of the media and which invest in the institutional capacity building of corporate and labour organisations and other organisations that are representative of civil society .
The Bouazizi revolution in Tunisia will certainly have repercussions in neighbouring Libya , and even the Gaddafi regime can understand that .
We have to strengthen the support given to the health sector in Libya through the Action Plan for Benghazi by extending it to other medical centres and other public health requirements .
We understand that the negotiations between the European Commission and Libya are at an advanced stage , though some difficulties have emerged with regard to trade and energy cooperation .
From our point of view , it would be advantageous to set up an EU office in Tripoli soon to facilitate the negotiations and monitor the development of the situation in Libya .
Commissioner , in these recommendations , we ask the Commission for detailed information on the budget lines used and planned in the cooperation with Libya .
I hope that you will be able to let us have this information soon .
Finally , I wish to point out that only recently did Parliament have the opportunity to consent to the Council 's mandate for the negotiations .
That is unacceptable and cannot continue .
Finally , I would like to express my thanks for the cooperation of all the shadow rapporteurs , who were essential for the broad consensus that has been achieved on potentially such a divisive topic .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to brief this House regarding the negotiations on the European Union-Libya Framework Agreement .
The Commission and the European Parliament are already working closely on the Libyan issue .
We have a joint interest in ensuring the positive development of our relations with Libya , which is an important neighbour .
In this context , I would particularly like to congratulate your Delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries for the agreement reached during the visit to Tripoli , which indeed provides for regular consultation with the Libyan Parliament .
I am determined to ensure that the close cooperation between our institutions continues .
In particular , I am keen to inform the European Parliament regularly about the latest developments regarding negotiations on the Framework Agreement .
I know that our chief negotiator debriefs you after each negotiation session .
Let me give you some information on the latest state of play .
We completed the ninth round of negotiations in mid-November in Tripoli .
The next one is scheduled for 24-26 January in Brussels .
Since the launch of negotiations more than two years ago , we have made good progress .
In fact , we have provisionally agreed the preamble and six out of ten titles of the Agreement .
In particular , we have reached a provisional agreement on the title on political dialogue , which contains important references to respect for human rights , the fight against weapons of mass destruction , the fight against terrorism , etc .
Libya has agreed to establish a regular dialogue on human rights and fundamental freedoms , which was a key objective for us .
In fact , we are very satisfied with the outcome achieved in this title .
As you might be aware , there are some outstanding issues , namely , the questions of energy and trade .
Energy represents the core of Libya 's economy - indeed , 70 % of Libya 's GDP .
Therefore , the attention and caution Libya devotes to this issue is understandable .
As for trade , Libya has limited experience negotiating complex trade agreements .
This is why progress has been moderate in this field .
Experts from both sides meet very regularly to ensure that we can reach agreement on these two issues as soon as possible but , of course , there are difficult political issues .
One of them is the question of the Rome Statute .
Libya categorically refuses to make an explicit reference to the Rome Statute .
However , it is ready to make a commitment on cooperation with the European Union on the fight against impunity , in particular , on those crimes defined in the Rome Statute .
On migration there are also difficulties , notably because Libya refuses to readmit third-country nationals .
I have taken note of the recommendation made by this House regarding this particular aspect of the negotiation and I will certainly discuss this with Member States .
Also on migration , I can reassure this House that we are committed to ensuring that Libya respects its international commitments regarding the principle of non-refoulement .
This is an important point for the European Union .
We also consider that it is important that Libya should adhere as soon as possible to the 1951 Geneva Convention and its 1967 Protocol on the status of refugees .
However , it should be noted that Libya has indicated that it does not intend to adhere to this Convention .
I would also like to stress that we are following closely negotiation between Libya and the UNHCR in the hope that a satisfactory solution will be found to ensure that the UNHCR is able to discharge its mandate fully and in a legally secure environment .
More generally , in October , we reached an agreement with a view to developing cooperation with Libya on all migration-related issues , including the issues of international protection , improving the conditions of migrants in Libya , management of migration and border control .
This is a positive development because we need to work jointly with Libya to tackle all the challenges that it faces in relation to migration .
Finally , let me conclude on the issue of the negotiating directives , which this House has repeatedly requested access to .
I am fully aware of the obligations created by Article 218 of the Lisbon Treaty .
As you know , negotiating directives are a classified document of the Council .
This is why the Council had to study your request in a horizontal manner .
I am glad to tell you that this debate has been concluded and , as you are probably aware , the Council has granted access to the negotiating directives of the European Union-Libya Framework Agreement in respect of the agreed procedures and of the Council 's security regulations .
The Council has informed the Chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs accordingly .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the June 2009 Council recommended prioritising the conclusion of readmission agreements with Libya and Turkey , considered as major gates for illegal immigration into Europe .
The Libyan gate mainly affects Malta and Italy .
Massive illegal immigration in Malta risks altering its demographic composition .
Although shared responsibility is recognised by all , little is done in practice to correct this development .
The number of arrivals in Malta decreased only when Italy , equally affected , reached a bilateral agreement with Libya , in which Libya assumed responsibility for patrolling its shores and harbours .
What is needed is an EU-Libya readmission agreement in the context of a framework agreement .
Negotiations are difficult , but we support the Commission 's efforts and we encourage it to continue until it succeeds .
We commend the migration and cooperation agreement concluded between the Commission and Libya last October .
It is essential to prepare Libya with regard to issues such as the protection system for asylum seekers , the management of land borders , the alignment of legislation with the African convention on refugees and the management of migratory flows .
We know about the human rights situation , the dependent judiciary , the conditions of detention , torture and capital punishment in Libya .
However , the readmission agreement is necessary .
This excludes people who are entitled to asylum , need political protection , or risk mistreatment in Libya , while the principle of non-refoulement applies to everybody .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the work done by Mrs Gomes in my view makes a serious contribution to what the Commission should do in defining the framework agreement .
Libya undoubtedly plays a decisive role in the fight against terrorism , in peace and security in Africa , in the fight against illegal immigration in the Mediterranean , and in the energy sector .
Our aim in the context of the European Union 's strategy must therefore be to consolidate Libya 's integration into an international political and economic system based on shared rules .
To achieve that , a number of conditions need to be imposed on Libya , and that is what the recommendation is calling for .
First of all , in the matter of immigration , Libya is clearly a transit country .
This is an extremely important subject , but it cannot be seen simply in terms of security , stopping immigration and refoulement .
The subject involves the need for a government ruled by the streams of economic and social policies equal to the challenge of migration , the issues of the recognition of political refugees and the ratification by Libya of the Geneva Convention and , lastly , the problem of the readmission of immigrants based on concrete guarantees to safeguard the immigrants ' living conditions .
Then there is the question of launching economic and democratic reforms to make decidedly more room for democracy in this important country .
We shall have to take this issue into ever greater account , as the events in neighbouring Tunisia are showing .
Lastly , this recommendation calls for reflection on the issue of bilateral agreements .
Such agreements can certainly make a valid contribution to defining and solving problems , but they are not the final answer .
For example , the problem we have with Italian fishing boats shows that the bilateral agreement option does not address these problems .
Now , however , the review of the partnership and neighbourhood policies also involves the call to rethink the Libya question in a new framework , which means including Parliament .
Many of us have called for the Council 's mandate for the framework agreement to be made known .
In this respect , Commissioner , there is a real need to break step and involve the European Parliament more and more in defining new policies for the countries to the south of Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all , I would to thank the rapporteur for her outstanding work in trying to consolidate the positions of all the groups of the European Parliament .
Regarding this report , I would like to highlight the importance of addressing the situation of immigrants in Libya trying to cross the Mediterranean .
I can fully understand the concerns of the southern Member States relating to the flow of illegal immigrants and the pressure it puts on their budgets as well as on society in general .
However , while keeping in mind the interests of Member States , we cannot set aside European values .
The EU cannot afford to have the blood of any asylum-seeker or refugee on its hands .
No agreement of the EU and its Member States with Libya should lead to the inhuman treatment , torture or execution of anyone .
Therefore , it was encouraging to hear from the Commissioner that he sees progress in EU-Libya relations and negotiations .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , we witnessed in Tunisia the rising of the people against an oppressive and abusive regime which has denied them basic human rights for years .
It is a big source of shame for the EU that for many years , we have been supportive of this dictatorship .
To make things even worse , the EU risks committing the same mistakes in Tunisia 's neighbouring country , Libya .
If the Commission and the Council do not change course , it will continue to prop up yet another dictator in the region in the name of stability and border control and migration .
For years , the Gaddafi regime , one of Ben Ali 's best friends as we have seen recently again , has been systematically violating the human rights of its citizens and especially of migrant workers .
Nevertheless , the EU and several of its Member States have increasingly close relations with Libya , and the EU is now even negotiating this framework agreement .
I therefore urge the Council and Commission to notice the writing on the wall and ensure the following conditions are fully satisfied before we can conclude any agreement with Libya :

First of all , Libya needs to ratify and implement the UN refugee convention and grant the UNCHR full access to the country ; secondly , it needs to guarantee adequate protection and rights for migrants and adopt asylum legislation including the principle of non-refoulement ; thirdly , no readmission agreement with Libya can be concluded until the high risk of inhuman and degrading treatment faced by migrants in Libya has ceased to exist .
And , on that matter , because I do not think this will come too soon , I really wish the Commission to fail in the negotiations on the readmission agreement .
Furthermore , Parliament needs to be fully informed at all stages of the negotiation process .
The Greens strongly object to any dirty deal with a dictator like Gaddafi on the back of migrants and Libyan citizens .
Continued EU support for this oppressive regime is neither in line with the EU 's values and legal commitments , nor does it serve its long-term interests in the region .
As we have so vividly seen now in Tunisia , only a democratic and free country will be truly stable and prosperous .
Let us make sure the EU does not commit the same mistake twice .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , Libya is a country where human rights are routinely abused and democracy is non-existent . Colonel Gaddafi has never stood for election since coming to power 41 years ago .
Indeed , political parties are banned .
Gaddafi is the Fidel Castro of Africa .
He tries to portray himself as a benevolent father of his own people , even claiming that he has no formal role in the state hierarchy .
We in my country , the UK , know him differently as a previous sponsor of terrorism , in particular , the Lockerbie bombing of 1988 .
To polish up his international image he has , to his credit I suppose , compensated grieving families , but in truth , the maverick Gaddafi would be totally ostracised by the West were it not for Libya 's prodigious reserves of oil and gas .
This gives Gaddafi leverage over the EU and , in particular , he has sought to divide the Council by courting the leadership of certain Member States .
Nevertheless , on pragmatic grounds , I accept the need for cordial trading and diplomatic relations between the EU and Libya under a framework agreement .
But I do fear that all we are really doing is consolidating Gaddafi 's power , which , in due course , inevitably will pass to one of his sons in a dynastic succession akin to that of North Korea .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur for her work and Mr Füle for being here today .
We consider that in what is , from every point of view , a sensitive region , constant efforts should be made in the Mediterranean to develop understanding and cooperation , cooperation on an equal footing that takes account of the asymmetries and inequalities that exist in the various sectors of development between countries in the Mediterranean and between the European Union and its neighbouring countries in the region , cooperation that targets lasting peace .
This can be achieved through dialogue on the basis of mutual respect and , as such , we must be open to reciprocal influence .
Within this framework , we are in favour of strengthening relations between the European Union and Libya .
However , there are certain sensitive issues which require particular attention in the process of developing these relations .
I shall comment mainly on the issue of refugees , immigrants and the readmission agreement .
The aim is to achieve a readmission agreement with Libya , as part of the framework agreement being discussed between the European Union and Libya .
If such an agreement is signed without any concomitant reforms to improve the social and economic circumstances of immigrants , this will add to the continuing infringements of human rights , meaning that we shall be advocating the forced return of immigrants to conditions which do not guarantee their safety or minimum acceptable living standards .
We need to demand that the Libyan authorities duly recognise the presence of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees .
We must also address the sensitive issue of the death penalty .
The right thing to do would be to seek an agreement suspending its application in Libya , with the ultimate aim being its abolition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of concluding the framework agreement between the European Union and Libya because it is a step forward compared to the past on important points such as immigration , cooperation in economic and health matters , particularly the fight against AIDS , and , to some extent , the energy programme .
Another important subject is Libya 's control over terrorist activities , not only on its own territory , but also on the country 's southern borders .
Progress has been made with an agreement between the Council and the Libyan Government , including on general principles such as the Statute of Rome and the United Nations Convention on Refugees .
Much remains to be done - that is obvious - but it is important for Parliament to support the agreement already negotiated without bringing it back into discussion and risk losing the results that have already been achieved .
I hope the collaboration between the European Union and Libya brings about the same results that were achieved with the Friendship Agreement between Libya and Italy , which , amongst other things , has settled the long-standing dispute over the country 's colonial past .
If one has to deal with governments and countries about specific issues , one cannot choose whom to talk to .
( NL ) Mr President , the European Commission has provided a new export product to Libya , a rogue state , and its dictator Gaddafi .
Oil production is not the only way that Libya makes money these days - it also enriches itself by blackmailing Europe .
Dictator Gaddafi will pocket EUR 60 million of European taxpayers ' money in return for preventing fortune seekers from Africa from reaching Europe .

That EUR 60 million is just the beginning , because Mr Gaddafi is now demanding that that amount be increased to EUR 5 billion each year and backing up his demands with threats .
It could be that the European Commission has allowed itself to be led astray by Mr Gaddafi 's pretty face , but I do not trust that man one inch .
I have a few newspaper articles with me from recent years : Gaddafi demands billions from the EU .
Libya puts pressure on London and Edinburgh .
Gaddafi wants more money or else he will let Europe turn black .
Gaddafi : ' Islam must become the religion of Europe ' .
Gaddafi rejects democracy in favour of strict observance of Sharia law .
Gaddafi uses 30 million Africans who want to come to Europe as a bargaining chip .
Gaddafi wants to launch a jihad against Switzerland .
Honourable Members of the European Parliament , we should not reward this scoundrel Gaddafi .
We should punish him if Libya continues to allow so many refugees free access to Europe .
Nor should we reward the refugees with refugee status or permanent residence .
They should be sent straight back to Africa .
Rewarding refugees with European refugee status , benefits and training programmes will lumber us with an even bigger stream of asylum seekers , with many drowning in the attempt to get a foothold on the European mainland .
The European Union 's generous and feeble asylum policy is the real cause of the large influx of asylum seekers .
( SV ) Mr President , Libya is quite good at ratifying international agreements , but it seems to be just as good at refraining from implementing these agreements .
It is a disgrace that Libya has a seat and a vote in the UN Human Rights Council .
Incidentally , it is also a disgrace that Saudi Arabia does too .
By means of forceful pressure from its largest trade partner , the EU , Libya really should be made to pay attention to what respect for human rights and freedoms means and what these entail .
As we all know , the EU 's relations with Libya concern various aspects of how refugees should be treated .
Until the Council and the Commission can persuade Libya to allow the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to reside lawfully in the country , it will not be feasible to feel the slightest degree of confidence about how refugees are treated in Libya .
Libya 's leader is a master of capriciousness and unreliability .
The EU is now about to conclude a framework agreement with him .
I cannot help but wonder what the term ' framework ' means to a regime like Colonel Gaddafi 's , which shows disrespect without bounds when it comes to human rights issues .
We know that Libya practices widespread discrimination against migrant workers on account of their nationality and that the racist persecution of African migrant workers exists .
Human dignity is more important than money .
Therefore , respect of human rights and freedoms must , in fact , be so important as to prevent us from handing over people to a state in which torture or other forms of inhumane treatment are practised .
This is , incidentally , what the charters of the European Union require .
( RO ) Mr President , Libya is the European Union 's third biggest supplier of oil and gas , while the Union is Libya 's main trading partner , accounting for more than two thirds of this country 's total trade .
We must also take into account the progress made by the authorities in Tripoli , which have successfully shifted the country from a situation of isolation and embargos to becoming open and economically and diplomatically dynamic .
However , the European Union is not merely a community of economic interests , but is based on a set of values which we cannot abandon for the sake of pragmatism .
Admittedly , Libya no longer sponsors terrorism , has abandoned its nuclear programme , agreed to pay compensation to the families of terrorist attack victims , released the Bulgarian nurses condemned to death for spreading HIV and concluded agreements with some European states .
I think that we must encourage this progress , but the partnership between the European Union and Libya needs to have a solid moral foundation .
In this respect , the report from Mrs Gomes , whom I would like to congratulate on the job she has done , highlights the serious shortcomings in the respect for human rights , which we are duty-bound to tackle .
Last year , we adopted a resolution in which we asked Libya to abolish capital punishment .
I believe that it is appropriate for us to reiterate this request for abolition , backed up by the request to comply with international norms for legal fairness , especially as foreigners are victims of abuses .
Particular attention must be focused on the problem of migrants and refugees , both those extradited by Libya to their countries of origin where their lives are exposed to serious threats , and those returned by Italy to Libya where they are likely to face harsh reprisals .
On the other hand , pressure is required for Libyan asylum legislation to be adopted and for agreements to open the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , which kept a record in Libya of almost 13 000 refugees and asylum seekers .
As regards the readmission agreement as part of the EU-Libya Framework Agreement , I call on the Council to drop this plan as it would involve repatriation to a country which systematically violates human rights .
The policy of the Berlusconi government cannot be accepted as the example to follow .
The Italian exception must not become the European rule .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is barely credible for the European institutions to still want to conclude a framework agreement with a dictatorship like Libya .
We cannot go on saying that Libya has very important trading relations with European Union Member States and acts as a partner for the European Union in the Mediterranean basin , and putting respect for human rights as a secondary issue .
The primary condition for us to be able to start a credible dialogue with Libya is for that country to ratify the Geneva Convention .
We cannot barter economic interests for human lives : not just the lives of Libyan citizens , but also of people from other countries who are fleeing civil wars and religious persecution and pass through Libya only to find death and horrendous torture .
We have a duty not to forget the thousands of calls for help made by people held in Libyan prisons .
We cannot forget the horrors that Gandufa prison revealed to us .
Libyan citizens do not enjoy many political and civil rights , such as freedom of expression , assembly and association .
The oral amendment by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which seeks to replace the term ' treaty ' in recital B with ' agreements between Italy and Libya on joint coastal patrols ' is absolutely unacceptable , and the Italian delegation from Italia dei Valori will vote against it .
The agreement between Italy and Libya is much more complex : it is a treaty with precise conditions regarding more complex issues than joint coastal patrols .
For the European Parliament to remain credible , it needs to call a spade a spade , even if that may be embarrassing .
A separate discourse needs to be entered into for the UNHCR , the United Nations Refugee Agency , which is unable to carry out its work in Libya and is accused by the Libyan regime of incredible abuses and crimes .
Are these the bases on which agreements should be conducted ?
We cannot deal with either terrorists or dictators .
We are the European Parliament , not the board of directors of an economic giant .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Gomes for giving us the chance to debate a mandate for negotiations that is certainly thorny , as is the content of the negotiations themselves .
The Tunisian example should serve as a warning that we need to proceed very cautiously , especially in the way in which we report on the negotiations .
We cannot simply notch up successes as we go through the negotiations and celebrate because a regime such as the Gaddafi regime may have agreed to certain human rights references , for example , because that regime is well-known for its major violations of all fundamental rights .
What is more , all the migrants who arrive on our shores , though they are increasingly fewer in number , say in so many words that they would rather drown on the way here than go back to Libya , because of the rapes , torture , abuse , forced repatriations , mass expulsions and racist acts .
It has already been said , and I will repeat it : the list of serious , mass human rights abuses of migrants in Libya is long .
So yes , of course , I think it is absolutely urgent that we do everything in our power to improve these people 's situation .
This is a job for the High Commissioner for Refugees , and it is our task to resettle the individuals identified by the HCR .
It is also a job for community-based organisations , which , at the moment , are extremely thin on the ground and need to be strengthened by all means possible .
I believe that , if we truly want to abide by the goals we have set for our foreign policy in the Treaties , we still have a long way to go before we can send migrants staying illegally in the EU back to Libya .
Mr President , back in 2007 , President Sarkozy denied any link between the release of five Bulgarian nurses from Libya and the Libyan order for French missiles worth EUR 240 million .

These arms were sold to a country held responsible for the Lockerbie bombing and the supply of terrorist weapons .
Yet even Gaddafi 's son suggested that there was a link between the two deals .
It was arms for prisoners .
In 2004 , the EU removed the arms embargo against Libya in exchange for migration controls .
That was arms for borders .
Now , the London Times reports that Baroness Ashton suddenly wants to drop the EU arms embargo against China , which was imposed because of the massacre in Tiananmen Square , saying it is ' a major impediment to developing stronger EU-China cooperation ' .
Actually , I believe it is a major impediment to saving the euro , is it not ?
Just like the Libyan deal , it seems the EU is so desperate now to save the euro that it is prepared to risk our collective security , as only the Chinese have enough money to rescue the euro .
This is arms for bonds .
Chinese foreign exchange reserves are USD 2.9 trillion .
It has already bought Greek , Spanish and Portuguese bonds .
However , China is also the country that bans the word ' democracy ' from its search engines and executes thousands every year .
So , I ask in all sincerity , just how low will the EU go to save the euro ?
( DE ) Mr President , the overthrow of the Tunisian Government has caused shock waves in neighbouring countries in the Maghreb region , which are mainly dictatorships , and also in Libya .
A radical change of this kind is , of course , also an opportunity for democracy , but only when it cannot be exploited by Islamic agitators .
The unrest will certainly have an impact on the influx of refugees .
Therefore , it is important for us to cooperate more closely with the African countries on the refugee problem .
However , Colonel Gaddafi 's call for the European Union to pay Africa at least EUR 5 billion a year to combat illegal immigration is definitely a move in the wrong direction .
The countries of the European Union are already paying billions of euro in development aid .
In my opinion , the aid system urgently needs to be reviewed to ensure that the aid no longer benefits dictatorships and corrupt regimes , but instead reaches the people who really need it .
In addition , the plight of Christians in Islamic countries must be given a higher priority in EU foreign relations .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Füle , we are responsible for all the men , women and children who seek refuge here because their lives are at risk .
This responsibility is the result , on the one hand , of the moral values which Europe now represents and of the personal history of many Europeans , which is often forgotten in this context , and , on the other , of the legal guarantees given in international treaties and conventions .
If we take on responsibilities , then we must also be prepared to bear the accompanying burden .
This means sharing it equally between the Member States .
It definitely does not mean placing the responsibility on the shoulders of a few countries whose borders happen to coincide with the external borders of the EU or , and this is the reprehensible thing which I cannot condone , paying regimes such as that of Colonel Gaddafi to relieve us of the burden .
Let us have no misconceptions .
If we can prevent people from undertaking a dangerous journey which may put their lives at risk , this is a good thing .
However , Colonel Gaddafi and his regime are not concerned with saving lives or protecting people .
They are only interested in hard financial facts .
The European Union should beware of becoming the accomplice of a regime which shows a complete disregard for human rights .
I have visited the camps in Libya and seen what goes on there .
We had the opportunity to speak with the people in charge .
They are not concerned about human rights or about giving refuge to people .
They complained that we had not given them any gunboats to allow them to defend their borders more effectively .
We rightly have not supplied Colonel Gaddafi with any boats , because they could become dual-use items .
We also have to take this into account .
We must not betray our values simply because we want the economic benefits or a readmission agreement .
I am also of the opinion that we should take a look at the negotiation mandate of all the Members of this House and not just a few .
Secret diplomacy will not take us any further forward , particularly not following the experiences we in the European Union have had with the regime - and we cannot give it any other name - of Colonel Gaddafi .
This is another point which we should not forget and I am calling on you to make sure of this .
Mrs Gomes has mentioned all the criteria which must be met if we should ever reach the stage of an agreement .
( MT ) Mr President , those who are against the agreement with Libya should appreciate that it is our neighbour !
Neighbours cannot be ignored .
A way has to be found to live with one 's neighbour , though it does not necessarily mean agreeing with their way of doing things .
It is all very well for those colleagues who do not originate from a country neighbouring Libya to criticise this agreement , but it is far more difficult for those Mediterranean countries that lie at close proximity to Libya to find a way of cooperating with this country .
It is true that the agreement should also include a chapter on immigration , as well as a readmission agreement .
Doubtless , this must also respect the right to international protection for all those who seek asylum .
( ES ) Mr President , this debate on Libya is taking place at a time when very significant changes are happening in another neighbouring Mediterranean country : Tunisia .
I have always believed that the European Union must help to promote serious reforms in the Mediterranean region , with the aim of making it an area of freedom and prosperity .
I refer to my speeches in this House in recent years , in which I have repeatedly said that the Union 's policy cannot be focused on simply maintaining the status quo .
This is not , however , the specific issue being debated today , which is the Framework Agreement with Libya .
I would like to stress the need to cooperate with Libya in managing migratory flows , including an agreement to readmit illegal immigrants including third-country nationals , as is the case in all readmission agreements concluded by the Union .
Giving in to Libyan positions that are contrary to this agreement would be detrimental given Libya 's important position as a transit country , and it would also send a very negative message for the negotiations with Morocco and Algeria on readmission agreements , which have been in deadlock for many years .
However , we do also have to insist that the Libyan authorities respect the rights of refugees , including - as has already been said - the principle of non-refoulement .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Maghreb is going through difficult times .
The bloody encounters in Tunisia over the last few days are conclusive proof of that .
It would be a serious mistake at this moment in history if we did not recognise the urgent and decisive need to strengthen relations with Libya , which lies at the heart of the Mediterranean and plays a vital role in containing and regulating the flows of migrants .
Despite all its contradictions - I was in Libya with Mrs Gomes - there is no doubt that a framework agreement could certainly make a contribution to the fight against terrorism , to fundamental freedoms and to the energy issue .
To ignore Libya and the Maghreb would truly be a very serious mistake .
A reference model is the Friendship Treaty with Italy , which could be implemented to ensure that this framework agreement is really solid .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I thank the Members of Parliament for their remarks .
I will send the rapporteur , Ms Gomes , more details of national indicative plans for the years 2011-2013 , showing EUR 60 million being provided for our programmes in Libya .
I am fully aware that certain topics are problematic in relations with Libya .
Nonetheless , the European Union has taken the option of building relations with Libya in order to be able to address all issues in an open and constructive manner , including very sensitive ones like human rights , the respect for fundamental freedoms and the rights of migrants .
Last year , I visited the detention centre in the Libyan Desert with Cecilia Malmström .
I have absolutely no illusions about the challenges we face .
I also had the opportunity to understand what the alternatives are to our engagement in the field of migration .
Let me add a third , personal remark : we are not rewarding anyone with these negotiations ; we are taking care of our interests in accordance with the values we believe in .
Libya has shown its strong will to deepen relations with the European Union .
We consider that this is positive and that the European Union should continue to pursue the policy of engagement .
I am , of course , committed to ensuring that this will be done with full transparency , taking the views of the European Parliament into account .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank all my colleagues who have participated in this debate .
I think this debate highlights the dilemmas we face .
From my own visit to Libya , as part of the delegation led by our colleague , Mr Panzeri , in November 2010 , I came to the conclusion that we have to pursue the line of engagement .
We recognise that we have to deal with a difficult interlocutor , but it would be unconscionable not to pursue that line because there are humanitarian obligations towards the people who are suffering so much in Libya , in particular , the migrants who are going through Libya and enduring the situation there .
I believe that many of the difficulties are due to the fact that this regime is isolated .
Despite the difficulties , and despite having no illusions that we will achieve an agreement soon or that all the conditions that we put forward will be met , we need to pursue that line .
In my opinion , this is clear .
Indeed , in that sense , having the EU delegation established in Tripoli is extremely important because I think that - as many have said here - what is happening in Tunisia now is bound to have repercussions in Libya , despite the differences .
In Libya , we are not dealing with a similar situation in many respects because of the total dependency of the people on income from oil .
Nevertheless , I think that the message is that , despite our different perceptions at this stage , we are committed to following closely the negotiations by the Commission .
I am grateful for the briefings we have had and which have been useful .
We will follow them very closely and will be able to make recommendations at any time .
I think that through the very wide consensus achieved with the collaboration of my shadow rapporteurs and everybody , we are conveying a very clear message to the Council and to the Commission , which has the task of negotiation , but also to our Libyan interlocutors , on what points we believe are absolutely essential to be met if we are to achieve the improvements that we want to see in the bilateral relations , and also on the crucial question of respect for human rights in Libya .
That message is very clear .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 20 January 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I welcome the opening of negotiations between the EU and Libya , as a step to develop a new relationship for the EU in the Mediterranean region and in Africa .
I also consider cooperation with Libya useful in addressing issues such as security and stability , migration , public health , development , trade , climate change , energy and culture .
However , I urge the Council and the Commission to press Libya to ratify and implement the Geneva Convention on Refugees of 1951 and its 1967 Protocol , including full cooperation with the UNHCR , so as to guarantee adequate protection and rights for migrants , and adopt asylum legislation that recognises refugees ' status and rights accordingly , notably , the prohibition of collective expulsion and the principle of non-refoulement .
I also remind the Council and the Commission of their obligations to ensure full compliance of the EU 's external policy with the Charter of Fundamental Rights , particularly its Article 19 , which prohibits collective expulsion and grants the principle of non-refoulement .
I urge the Council and the Commission to request that the Libyan authorities sign a Memorandum of Understanding granting the UNHCR a legal presence in the country , with a mandate to exercise its full range of access and protection activities .
Cost of examining asylum seekers ' applications in Member States ( debate )
Thank you very much , Mrs Gomes , and the debate is hereby closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
The next item is the final report of the day , more specifically , an oral question addressed to the Council and the Commission on the subject of the cost of examining asylum seekers ' applications in the Member States .
First of all , I give the floor to the author , Mrs Nadja Hirsch .
You have two minutes .


the oral question to the Council , by Mrs Nadja Hirsch , Mrs Renate Weber , Mrs Cecilia Wikström , Mr Louis Michel , Mrs Sonia Alfano , Mr Stanimir Ilchev , Mrs Nathalie Griesbeck and Mr Jan Mulder , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , on the transmission of information on the cost of examining asylum seekers ' applications in the Member States - B7-0662 / 2010 ) ,


the oral question to the Commission , by Mrs Nadja Hirsch , Mrs Renate Weber , Mrs Cecilia Wikström , Mr Louis Michel , Mrs Sonia Alfano , Mr Stanimir Ilchev , Mrs Nathalie Griesbeck and Mr Jan Mulder , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , on the transmission of information on the cost of examining asylum seekers ' applications in the Member States - B7-0663 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Council , by Mrs Monika Hohlmeier and Mr Simon Busuttil , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , on the transmission of information on the cost of examining asylum seekers ' applications in the Member States - B7-0664 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission , by Mrs Monika Hohlmeier and Mr Simon Busuttil , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , on the transmission of information on the cost of examining asylum seekers ' applications in the Member States - B7-0665 / 2010 ) ,

the oral question to the Council , by Mrs Monika Flašíková Beňová , Mr Claude Moraes , Mrs Sylvie Guillaume , Mrs Carmen Romero López and Mr Antonio Masip Hidalgo , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , on the state of play regarding the Commission proposal for a recast of the Asylum Procedures Directive - B7-0003 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Council , by Mrs Hélène Flautre , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the state of play regarding the Asylum Procedures Directive - B7-0004 / 2011 ) , and

the oral question to the Council , by Mr Kyriacos Triantaphyllides , Mr Cornelis de Jong , Mrs Cornelia Ernst and Mrs Marie-Christine Vergiat , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the transmission of information to Parliament and the Commission on the outstanding issues in the Council on the Asylum Procedures Directive - B7-0002 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , we have agreed in the European Parliament that we want a common European asylum system to be in place by 2012 .
This also involves having the same or similar conditions in all the Member States .
However , the implementation of the system has met with resistance and that is primarily due to the fact that during the discussions on the asylum package , we were given inadequate information , sometimes no information at all , or even conflicting information .
We had very little data as the basis for the financial estimates relating to the Procedures Directive and the costs in the Member States .
Our aim is to call on the Commission to provide Parliament with a study or with the necessary information .
This concerns areas such as the interpreting service and also legal advice .
It is not clear what effects this will actually have in the Member States .
On the other hand , during the process of revising the Procedures Directive , it has become clear that we can produce a high quality , fast procedure which is of benefit to both sides , because it helps decisions to be made quickly so that the situation is clear to people and there is a low error rate .
Our objective as liberals is to give the Commission our complete support for its plans .
However , we need arguments , including in the discussions with the Member States , which will demonstrate the effects of the revision of this asylum package and , in particular , the Procedures Directive .
For this reason , we are calling on the Commission to give us genuine support to ensure that this asylum package becomes reality by 2012 , so that we can establish a common European asylum system .
Mr President , it is important that the EU comes to grips with the problems of migration and the right of asylum .
The Commission has submitted proposals in this area .
However , there is currently no accurate analysis of the implementation of existing legal provisions .
There are also hardly any detailed calculations and analyses concerning the new proposals .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) wholeheartedly supports the right of asylum and the right to protection for people who need it .
However , when we look at the actual situation , it is unfortunately clear that people are applying for asylum for very different reasons or even systematically abusing the system .
The right of asylum and subsidiary protection is not a tool for general migration into the 27 Member States .
We must ensure that the organised people traffickers do not have the opportunity to make billions of euro in profit out of people 's fates as a result of our right of asylum .
Asylum procedures must be fit for purpose and they must be implemented with great care .
Victims of persecution must be guaranteed a refuge in the EU .
This is why the Commission 's obligations in this respect are laid down in the new drafts .
I think many of them are appropriate , including interpreters , proper healthcare and taking into consideration special protection needs .
However , I would also like to mention the points which I believe are problematic .
The authorities in the Member States are being given far too few opportunities to prevent abuse .
The option of the accelerated procedure and the border procedure should be restricted by applying charges .
If an applicant commits a serious breach of his duty of cooperation , there are very few possibilities of imposing sanctions .
On the contrary , if an asylum seeker disappears , the Member State cannot bring the procedure to a negative conclusion .
If he reappears , he is offered an extended range of procedural options .
Even if an application is obviously without any foundation , the use of the accelerated procedure will only be possible after the second subsequent application .
This will lead to significant cost increases .
The current Commission draft states that free legal advice will be available from a lawyer , which will also result in the Member States ' costs rising considerably .
I would simply like the Commission to reconsider the practical consequences of its proposals , the financial impact and the problems for the authorities in the Member States .
We want to see a system with high standards , but it must be workable and should not present already overburdened Member States with completely impossible tasks .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to point out that I think one of the issues for this debate is the establishment of a common European asylum system by 2012 , which will finally allow us to stop adding to the worst national practices on asylum .
Let us not lose sight of this , as it means we need to move towards greater harmonisation , based on common rules .
Indeed , I believe that practical cooperation alone will not resolve the current discrepancies between the national asylum systems .
I would also like , if I may , to express my concern about the state of play regarding the common European asylum system , in view of the many hold-ups within the Council .
The future of this complex undertaking is by no means clear .
We only need to look at the Commission 's attempt to salvage the situation with its forthcoming proposal for recasting two directives .
Against this background , then , we need to talk about costs , since that is what our debate is focusing on today .
What we are hearing is that firmer procedural guarantees will considerably increase the financial burden on Member States of examining asylum claims , which they will find even more difficult given the state of their budgets in the economic crisis .
However , I repeat , it is inefficient , shoddy procedures that are more costly for Member States .
I believe that a front-loading approach , as advocated by the Commission in its recast proposal , in other words , improving the first-instance procedures , will allow us to make real economies of scale in the medium term .
Why ?
Because from the outset , these harmonised procedures will help the authorities to identify bogus applications more easily and will provide clearer guidelines for the grounds for decisions .
This will allow the right decisions to be made and made more quickly , which will then reduce both the length of the procedure and the number of decisions appealed against and overturned by the courts , and will hence reduce the costs of detention and , ultimately , the overall costs .
Furthermore , if we want to talk about the issue of costs , why not also talk about the Dublin Eurodac system ?
Why have none of the Member States ventured to ask for a cost-effectiveness report on the application of this system ?
What we do know is that some appalling human consequences are not being matched by any evaluations backed by convincing evidence , both regarding actual transfers and regarding the prevention of secondary movements or multiple claims , even though these are the very reasons why the Dublin system was created .
Let us talk about costs therefore since we must , but let us look at the system as a whole , including the costs of the Dublin system .
From my point of view as rapporteur on the Asylum Procedures Directive , I believe that the level of harmonisation as it stands is inadequate and is detrimental to the quality and efficiency of the process .
These deficiencies take their toll both on Member States and on the victims of persecution .
We are still aiming for 2012 , but we must not feel we have to rush through a text based on lowest common denominators purely for the sake of sticking to deadlines .
What we need are fair , accessible and effective procedures , and this will remain my goal and that of my political group in this debate in any event .
Mr President , I think the aim of this discussion is to get the Council to finally show its hand , because I have to say that given such an ambitious , not to mention necessary , reform package on asylum , it is unbelievable that all we are getting are snippets of information , some contradictory , as to what is holding the Council up on these proposals that have been on the table for a long time now .
We are getting a vague idea that the Council or the Member States may be stalling because of costs , but it is not even clear what is meant by this .
Are they talking about human costs , political costs or financial costs ?
These different costs are sometimes linked in any case .
One thing is for certain : there are instances of unsatisfactory practices and inadequate protection in Europe at the moment .
In the first place , it is not true that Europe shoulders all the world 's problems .
For example , in 2007 , I think Europe took in only 14 % of the world 's refugees .
In the second place , some of the existing practices are utterly unacceptable .
I am thinking of instances such as phallometric testing in the Czech Republic , right here in Europe , or the documents of the Committee against Torture , which brought to light many cases such as forced repatriation without the right to appeal or based on hurried-through procedures .
I think we can certainly talk about costs : for example , we could talk about the cost of expelling migrants , which is very costly : the French Senate says that it costs EUR 20 000 per person expelled .
Above all , we can talk about how we might improve the situation .
There are certainly questions to be asked as to how we can improve the first-instance decision-making process , as Mrs Guillaume has done in her report , when roughly 50 % of first-instance decisions are overturned on appeal .
There are clearly very substantial economies to be made in terms of financial , human and political costs .
We might take another look at the aberrations of the Dublin Convention , and I think the Council should look very carefully at these , because they also represent very substantial costs both in human and in financial terms .
Lastly , and I will end here , one thing that is very expensive is detention , as the Parliamentary study confirms .
The cost of detaining asylum seekers is prohibitive .
This needs to be said , people need to be told and it needs to be discussed in the Council .
This is absolutely urgent .
Mr President , sometimes we are the victim of our own working methods .
If we had had just one asylum directive regulating the procedures , assessment criteria and reception , we would have had only two options : either to adopt the directive , with or without amendments , or face the failure of the negotiations .
Such a scenario would have enabled us in the European Parliament to say ' no ' to a common asylum policy and ' no ' to a system modelled on the Dublin Regulation .
However , the reality is different .
We have a whole range of directives .
The Council has the option of giving priority to one directive , while considering another too controversial .
Before long , we will end up in a situation where we will , indeed , be able to negotiate a new Dublin Regulation , but still have reached no agreement over asylum procedures or reception , for example .
Let us think through what the implications of that might be .
If that were to happen , we would be making Member States responsible for examining asylum applications , without having any guarantee that those applications would be properly examined or asylum seekers taken care of in a humane way .
I find that totally unacceptable , especially given the current situation .
I therefore have this question for the Council and the Commission : how are you going to ensure that you rescue the Asylum Procedures Directive from the doldrums without sacrificing quality ?
You will soon receive a number of proposals from Parliament on how the directive might be improved .
Will you try to convey to Member States the clear signal which the MEPs have sent out and will you dig your heels in , should Member States insist on an à la carte approach ?
By way of conclusion , I would like to clarify one point .
I made no reference in my question to the costs of the asylum procedure .
I omitted them , not because I was unaware of that issue , but because humane treatment of asylum seekers is paramount for me .
That requires a neat process and proper arrangements for reception .
If we fail to regulate that properly , then I will no longer have any desire to work on the other sub-initiatives .
I hope that I have the full support of the European Commission on this , in particular .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President , for your kind words .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I would like to thank Parliament for giving me the opportunity to talk about the very important issue of asylum application procedures this evening .
Parliament addressed five questions to the Council , and since they all deal with the Commission 's proposal for a recast of the Asylum Procedures Directive , I suggest we debate these five questions as one .
In your questions , you referred to the September 2010 Commission report on the application of the Asylum Procedures Directive .
This report confirms that considerable differences continue to exist between Member States in terms of asylum procedures and procedural guarantees .
The Council and the European Parliament agree that this does not conform to our mutually accepted goal of creating a common European asylum system .
In October 2008 , the European Council adopted the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which stressed that the EU and its Member States are committed to addressing the challenges and opportunities presented by migration and asylum in a fair , effective and coherent way .
Among other things , the Pact contains a specific commitment to taking the necessary initiatives for completing the establishment of a common European asylum system .
The European Council therefore invited the Commission to submit proposals for the creation of a single asylum procedure containing common norms .
The Stockholm Programme also set out clearly that , in the context of the creation of a common European asylum system , increased harmonisation must remain one of the fundamental policy objectives of the EU .
After the European Council had thus given the process political impetus , the Commission submitted multiple proposals in the field of asylum policy , both in 2008 and 2009 : Eurodac , as you mentioned earlier in the introductory debate , the proposal for the amendment of the Dublin Regulation or the proposal for the amendment of the Reception Conditions Directive ; similarly , the proposal for the establishment of a European Asylum Support Office ; and lastly , the proposal for the amendment of the Asylum Procedures Directive and the Qualification Directive .
After these had been received from the Commission , the Council immediately set to work .
In this stage , the Council and its preparatory bodies subjected all proposals to intensive and meticulous examination .
To this date , the only proposal that Parliament and the Council managed to adopt out of these was the Regulation establishing a European Asylum Support Office , and I am pleased that the Office will soon commence its operation .
Last year , Parliament and the Council also agreed on the amendment of the Long-Term Residents Directive , which I believe will give significant momentum to further work on a common European asylum system .
Unfortunately , as you are absolutely right to complain , progress in other areas has proven more difficult .
I am certain that you are fully aware of the political sensitivity and technical difficulties of the issue .
In this we , the Council , and , I believe , Parliament as well , will all need more time .
As you have very accurately pointed out in the questions submitted , the proposal for a recast of the Asylum Procedures Directive contains a particularly high number of problematic issues .
Parliament , too , is in the progress of forming its position , which is a good indication of the complexity of the process .
It is clear that there remain considerable concerns within the Council with regard to several issues related to the proposal .
These especially concern the issue of the potential effects of the proposed measures on the costs of national asylum procedures and the effectiveness of such procedures .
You have yourselves mentioned earlier this evening that we must indeed pay special attention to effectiveness and costs .
The Member States firmly support the harmonisation objectives with a view to reaching an agreement on certain common fundamental norms and values and uniform protection criteria .
As such , the Member States are committed to fully respecting asylum seekers ' right to protection .
However , the Member States wish to make their systems sustainable , especially considering the current difficult economic situation .
In order to achieve this , the guarantees provided to asylum seekers and the rules , which must be effective and enforceable and must not result in increased administrative or financial burdens , must be balanced .
The Council in general is convinced that if we fail to strike an appropriate balance in this regard , those who do not need protection at all , as Mrs Hohlmeier has already mentioned , will be motivated to abuse the asylum system .
Such abuse may harm those asylum seekers who are in real need of protection and , in the long term , could jeopardise the issue of asylum in the European Union .
In this context , the Commission 's announcement that it intends to submit an amended proposal has gained extensive support in the Council , as I think the Commissioner will elaborate shortly .
I am certain that this new proposal will give new momentum to the debate in the Council , ensuring that this new proposal will reflect the opinions of the Council and Parliament as well .
We will thus be able to make progress in the matter of the proposal on asylum procedures , which is , as you have correctly pointed out in the questions submitted , an important element of the asylum package .
To this I must add that , in response to the Commission 's announcement , the Member States have firmly expressed their readiness to lend their assistance to the Commission in drawing up the new proposal .
In this context , please allow me to point out one more aspect .
A more accurate estimation of the costs of examining the applications submitted would be facilitated if we had such an estimate , which would enable us to conduct an appropriate debate in the Council .
I must unfortunately inform you that we in the Council possess no such information .
In accordance with the Treaties , the examination of asylum applications falls under the competence of the Member States .
The collection and ordering of information relating to the costs of examining asylum applications is not a task the Treaties confer upon the Council .
Therefore , as a representative of the Council , I cannot make a commitment in this debate , either speaking for myself or on behalf of the Council , to make available the information in question .
However , the Council , of course , remains committed to continuing its work on the proposal for the amendment of the Asylum Procedures Directive , and I would like to thank you for the work you have done so far , and I am confident that the Commission will incorporate the observations you have made so far in the new proposal .
We are counting on the commitment and expertise of the European Parliament .
The Hungarian Presidency is confident that , through proper cooperation , we will be able to make progress in this area as well .
Please note that it is the goal of the Hungarian Presidency to prepare the common European asylum system that is scheduled to be created in 2012 .
You , too , have mentioned here several laws in connection with which we definitely wish to make progress .
We intend to reach a political agreement in the discussion on the Qualification Directive , as well as in the field of the Dublin Regulation , before the end of the Hungarian Presidency .
We will do everything in our power to increase harmony between Parliament and the Council on issues related to the procedure as well .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Asylum Procedures Directive is an essential element of the common European asylum system .
It is the aim of the Commission to establish a system that is balanced , fair , efficient and cost-effective .
Financial impact is a critical aspect of every Commission proposal and is assessed thoroughly .
The Commission carried out extensive research at the time of the preparation of the Asylum Procedures Directive proposal , in line with the requirements on impact assessment .
The evaluation of financial impact was mainly based on statistical information and data obtained from Member States through the comprehensive questionnaires sent out by the Commission .
Only a few Member States could identify the full cost of asylum procedures .
Others provided certain elements , mainly on the costs of legal assistance and interpretation .
The Commission assessed financial implications on the basis of the available information .
The Commission concluded that given , inter alia , the aim of reducing costs , an approach based on front-loading was to be preferred : i.e. investing resources in the early stages of the asylum procedure in order to make it faster , more efficient and fairer .
Additional investments in the first-instance procedure improve the efficiency of the asylum process .
Such investments are offset due to savings at the appeal stages and a reduction in overall reception costs .
The choice of this approach was fully supported by the findings of a recent project in the UK , the so-called ' Solihull Pilot ' , presented at the ministerial conference on asylum in 2010 .
This project confirmed the hypothesis that front-loading the asylum process - in particular , by providing access to competent legal advice for asylum applicants at the start of the procedure and allowing the legal representative to interact with the decision maker - leads to significant improvements in the quality of first-instance decisions .
It resulted in much quicker decisions and a higher percentage of positive decisions at first instance , fewer appeals and a higher percentage of removals to countries of origin .
It was possible to reduce considerably expenditure on appeals and on accommodation and welfare .
These savings considerably outweighed the additional legal aid costs .
I would also like to remind you of the recent study , prepared by the European Parliament , on burden sharing between Member States for the reception of asylum seekers , which provides an analysis of costs of asylum procedures and reception , including legal aid .
To conclude , the Commission has paid considerable attention to the cost element as part of the impact assessment .
The findings have been confirmed by empirical evidence and the information has been complemented by the European Parliament study .
Therefore , the Commission does not intend to prepare another study on costs .
However , during the next stages of the negotiations on the Asylum Procedures Directive , the Commission will continue to be attentive to the cost aspects .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , there is no question but that the asylum package is currently blocked and this is a pity .
It is an unfortunate situation and we should all do our best to unblock the situation .
I can think of many reasons why the situation is blocked .
First of all , we seem to have concentrated on new proposals when we all know that there is existing legislation which Member States are struggling to implement - and this has created an ill-at-ease feeling amongst Member States , because they are clearly not prepared to move on to new laws when they have difficulties with existing ones .
Secondly , the new proposals feature and envisage new and much higher obligations and burdens which are , at times , unrealistic , especially in the current context , and which could also , as has been highlighted already , lead to abuse that should be avoided .
Thirdly , there is indeed a lack of a financial assessment , of a study to determine costs , and I am afraid I have to disagree with you , Commissioner : I do not think that the study carried out by the European Parliament on burden sharing is about the costs of these proposals .
In any case , it is a job for the Commission to study the financial implications of its own proposals .
Furthermore , there is no proposal on a proper , legally binding burden-sharing mechanism and this , too , creates difficulties for a number of Member States , and indeed for this Parliament .
Finally , the Council is still stonewalling on proposals such as the review of the Dublin Regulation .
I am very happy to hear the Council say that the Presidency will pay close attention to this and increase the efforts to find a solution on the Dublin dossier .
It is difficult .
We are in a difficult situation and we need to get out of it .
The EPP Group is still very much open to cooperating with the Council , and most importantly with other groups here in Parliament , to try and reach a compromise that is acceptable for all .
Mr President , all of the EU 's institutions have a deadline of 2012 when the common European asylum system is to be ready .
I have to admit that I have a feeling of both hope and despair about this .
Will we manage to do this or not ?
It is based on a common system for the reception of asylum seekers , the examination of applications and decisions concerning these people 's futures .
Once we have this system in place , it will be the same in all countries , which is not the case today .
There are currently huge differences with regard to how people are received in our various Member States .
From the report that Commissioner Füle just referred to , we know that it is a fact that there are large differences in how the Member States receive asylum seekers .
We also know that the costs decrease when we increase the quality of the first instance decisions .
We are currently working on amending the Procedures Directive , and it would therefore be very important for us in Parliament to be aware of the specific costs for different Member States when it comes to the asylum procedure .
I believe that , by carrying out thorough examinations , we will reduce the risk of mistakes being made and people getting into difficulties .
It will be interesting to see whether the Commission can come up with a more thorough procedure and demonstrate how we can reduce the costs of the reception of asylum seekers .
At the end of the day , this will perhaps be the decisive argument that Mr Busuttil referred to , in other words , the key to unblocking the situation with regard to the fixed positions that we see the Council taking .
I deeply regret the fact that the Council is so closed in this process .
We have been visited today by the Hungarian Prime Minister , who has taken over the Council Presidency , and I would now ask the Hungarian Presidency to continue the good work that was started while Belgium held the Presidency .
It would be unfortunate if this process should cease .
Together , we can indeed develop an operational asylum system that has humanity and consideration for our fellow man as key concepts , and we can do this by 2012 .
Let us continue to hope and work towards this being possible .
Mr President , I think that there is always an implication in these discussions that humanitarian action is expensive , so we do not take humanitarian action because it is expensive , but this implication also has an interesting correlation : we would take humanitarian action if it was not expensive .
Well , it happens that there are cases where a humanitarian policy is a cheaper policy .
A recent study from the British House of Commons proves this point exactly : a system that allows a rapid response to asylum seekers is very much cheaper , and delay and the forced removal of families is also more expensive .
We are only talking about administrative costs , without counting the costs for the asylum seekers themselves , both those who are entitled to asylum and those whose claims are ultimately denied for the right or wrong reasons .
The question , then , is : if we can take humanitarian action , fulfil our moral duties and do so more cheaply , why are we not doing it ?
The EU does not have a concerted plan of action , nor does it have a common plan of action , and I take the liberty here of disagreeing with Mr Busuttil : it is not because the implementation of current legislation is expensive for the Member States , but because this implementation is partial and incomplete .
At the moment , we have a policy that is solely repressive and ends up being unfair to asylum seekers , the authorities and , ultimately , as we are now discovering , European taxpayers , too .
I would ask the Council to let us have up-to-date information and to answer these questions so that we can finally progress towards a consistent and concerted policy .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this debate is a result of the implementation of the common immigration and asylum system enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty .
Member States lose even more control of their own destinies while having to pay the - as yet unknown - cost for the privilege .
Britain 's asylum system is already a mess , with thousands upon thousands of cases pending and applicants simply lost and gone to ground .
The whole system is essentially a racket for those not eligible for legitimate immigration .
I realise that I am wasting my breath in speaking about this here , since most of you could not care less about preserving the democratic powers of the nation state .
Most of you are entranced in a grotesque fantasy world of endless EU integration , like characters in some kind of painting by Hieronymus Bosch , but the British people will one day hold to account the treasonous and treacherous politicians in Britain who made this possible by denying them a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
( DE ) Mr President , the aim is to standardise the right to asylum within the EU by 2012 .
However , it is unclear whether we will still be able to make use of rapid deportation in transit zones , for example , which has proved its worth in Germany .
The Commission has rejected the plan to abandon this airport regulation with cryptic statements which indicate that it will still be possible in future to turn away asylum seekers at the border , if they come from a safe country .
We are all familiar with the debate about what is a safe country and opinions about this differ widely within Europe .
The plan is also to give siblings the right to stay , which previously only applied to parents and married couples , and to extend the right to medical treatment .
I do not even want to start discussing the proposals that asylum seekers should be brought into line with the relevant country 's social security system .
Therefore , I very much doubt that these proposals will reduce the costs of the procedure .
I also doubt that there will be less red tape .
I believe that the burdens on the Member States will be greater and that asylum law will be relaxed , which will ultimately lead to an increased influx of migrants .
Unfortunately , that is not a good thing for Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that this directive on procedures is particularly important .
Once refugee status has been rigorously ascertained , it means the recognition process should be quick and smooth and that , frankly , has not been the case .
While the asylum package , which should define a new , more up-to-date frame of reference , is stuck in the Council , a different view has emerged in the Member States regarding the effectiveness of the asylum procedures based on the rules already in force .
I say to the Commissioner and the President-in-Office that you cannot invoke the crisis to reduce the funding needed for an important procedure , or other arguments that I do not find wholly convincing regarding a procedure that is currently stalled .
It is fair that people who cannot remain in their own country for documented political , religious or other reasons should have the right to be received in the Member States , just as it is equally necessary to deny the right to be received if someone claiming to be a refugee actually is not one .
It is true ; the Stockholm Programme has strongly stated this principle : 250 000 applications have been made in the last two years , which is a large number , although lower in the last reference year .
What is needed is advice , probably interpreting , lower costs and a balanced sharing of the burdens .
What is needed is probably for the support offices to work better and harder - we rely on the one in Malta - and for the European Union to really want to take a decisive step forward , to guarantee refugees their rights but , at the same time , to allow only those entitled to be classed as refugees to enter the EU Member States .
Mr President , as my colleague , Mrs Guillaume , said , this is a crucial moment in the development of the European asylum system .
We have had some real progress in some parts of the package - including , during the Belgian Presidency , my own report on beneficiaries of international protection - but clearly these are just the side elements of the asylum package .
It must be stressed today that the procedures recast forms the backbone of the package .
It is therefore essential that we move forward on this recast in view of the rapidly approaching 2012 deadline for the creation of the common European asylum system .
One of the recurring criticisms by Member States of the proposed recast of procedures is that it will lead to an unnecessary financial burden on them , but there is a significant body of evidence - and I pay tribute to what the Commission said on the Solihull project in the United Kingdom - that front-loading asylum procedures leads to better decisions at first instance ; quality decision making is a key element which we must not miss .
We therefore want more information from Member States backing up their claims .
However , I would like to stress that this debate should not just be about costs .
As Mr de Jong said , the procedures recast is about harmonising practices and raising standards across the EU .
It is clear that standards vary too much between Member States and the current legal framework needs revising .
We know the Commission is going to come forward with a revised recast proposal in the coming months in view of the opposition of the Council .
Parliament should put forward a strong position on this matter to ensure that the Commission does not water down its original proposal .
The right to legal assistance , a guarantee of personal interview , limitations on the use of accelerated procedures ; all of these safeguards are essential to a fair and effective asylum system .
This goal of achieving a common European asylum system is not a goal that Parliament set ; we all remember in 1999 , in Tampere , that it was the Council that set these goals ; they reset these goals at The Hague and at Stockholm , so let us revise our history and understand that we depend on the Council to unblock the system and we will work cooperatively with the Hungarian Presidency to try and maintain the momentum of the Belgian Presidency .
This is what so many of the Members across the party divide want to see ; we may want to see different outcomes but we will cooperate , and let us hope in the Hungarian Presidency we can see some genuine progress .
( ES ) Mr President , in 2012 , we urgently need a common asylum policy .
The report presented by the Commission on 8 September highlights the numerous obstacles that the Member States encounter when seeking to achieve the objectives of Directive 2005 / 85 / EC .
Asylum seekers ' right to legal aid applies at different levels .
Many Member States invoke the directive in providing legal assistance at the appeal stage , while others grant that right during both the application process and at second instance .
Some Member States require proof of merit in order to decide whether or not free legal assistance is granted at the appeal stage .
In the majority of cases , there are major differences regarding the deadlines for appealing , while the applicability of the automatic suspension of the effects of refusals also presents difficulties , as it only applies in six Member States .
These differences demonstrate that the directive must be reviewed .
In reviewing it , the Commission stresses the need to focus efforts on the initial phase of the procedure , in order to be more effective in differentiating which people have a right to protection .
According to the Commission , this measure will help to save significant interpreting and legal assistance costs at second instance .
However , the proposal is not accompanied by a detailed study of what the interpreting and legal assistance costs would be at first instance , nor of the costs that the Member States actually incur currently when applying the European legislation .
For that reason , the Commission needs to provide information as to the actual costs relating to its proposal to focus efforts , and I do not think that the refusal that I have just heard from the Commission is acceptable .
I sincerely believe that this is unacceptable and that it needs to be reconsidered or qualified .
( ES ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , welcome to this House , which has been yours , and we think that , although this is not a subject that you have had knowledge of , you are taking an interest in this asylum package , which was something that the Belgian Presidency was driving forward , in order for the Hungarian Presidency to do the same .
Although some of your competences are not those that have been mentioned here , the Presidency can act to ensure that the Commission has all the information it needs on this subject .
We are aware of how difficult it is for the Commission and the Council to collect this data , as there are Member States that are not prepared to provide it , perhaps because they have not conducted a study as to the consequences of improving the procedures for deciding on refugee or international protection status .
Perhaps the Member States do not consider that standardising these procedures would improve the quality of the first period - as has been said here today - and would reduce the number of appeals currently being lodged that have to be managed by the Member States that receive asylum applications today .
Perhaps this has not been highlighted sufficiently .
The effect of the diverse range of procedures is that some Member States cope better than others with asylum applications .
By improving these procedures , the Commission 's proposal would avoid the use of a significant amount of resources and secondary movements and therefore , the cost of the common asylum system would be less by standardising the procedures and avoiding hosting costs .
We are not only talking about the cost of these procedures but , more importantly and essentially , about the cost of not having a common asylum system .
We currently have several thousand asylum applicants at Europe 's borders from the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and states that have collapsed or are out of control , such as Somalia or Sudan .
When we talk about these costs , we do not take into account the human costs of keeping the applicants in detention centres for several months without the necessary guarantees , or even the guarantees that our criminals have , and with no assistance whatsoever , while the refugee commissions decide whether or not to grant them status and what type .
Neither do we take into account the human costs of those who have subsidiary protection for years and remain in the camps when their only crime is having fled wars and arrived on boats , and being obliged to give their fingerprints .
Their crime is not having had the money to catch a plane and present themselves at the airports .
Has the Council considered that making these procedures quicker would prevent not only these tragedies , but also the cost to some Member States of maintaining that situation ?
( PT ) Mr President , I wish to start by congratulating the authors of this question , and specifically , my colleague , Mrs Hohlmeier , and I am very much in agreement with what Mr Díaz de Mera has just said .
We know that this is only one of the five instruments that deal with the bases of the European asylum system .
It deals with the minimum standards applicable to asylum procedures .
The report that the Commission presented to us last year , however , recognises that the Member States have adopted divergent practices and that considerable variation exists between the procedural guarantees provided in each Member State .
There are significant disparities between the Member States , ranging from the provisions relating to accelerated procedures to those relating to personal interviews , assistance and access to an effective appeals procedure .
Let us be clear : some Member States have transposed this directive incorrectly or incompletely and others simply apply it not very strictly .
We have two options : either we abandon having a European asylum system or we have to eliminate these procedural differences .
We have to introduce improvements , that is to say , the improvements that appear necessary , in particular , improving the quality of the examination of applications , known as front loading .
Therefore , the assessment that we are asking of the Commission is necessary .
It is necessary to identify where and what we can improve and to remedy these differences .
We are aware that the Commission needs the cooperation of the Member States , in particular , to provide for the necessary training , including , but not exclusively , in terms of costs .
Let us be clear : the European institutions and the Member States have to cooperate on this objective .
Our objective must continue to be the same : that the common asylum system can be a reality in 2012 .
( EL ) Mr President , just today , the German Government announced its decision to stop returning refugees to Greece for the next twelve months .
Similar decisions have been taken by Sweden , Great Britain , Iceland and Norway .
However , just a few months ago , in November last year , the Council of Ministers of Justice rejected the inclusion of a mechanism to suspend the transfer of asylum seekers to the revised Dublin II Regulation , as proposed by the Commission since 2008 , considering that Dublin II is fine and that there is no problem .
At the same time , we hope - rightly so and we need to do this in the directive we are debating today - to provide free legal support for asylum seekers in the first stage of the examination of their application .
However , we know full well - as Mrs Hohlmeier also said earlier - that these procedures are often abused by asylum seekers , in order to use legal tricks to extend their stay in Europe , even though they are not entitled to do so .
All this is with no clear evaluation of the cost of such a measure and whether the cost will subsequently undermine its implementation .
Finally , I wonder , with such contradictory decisions , how we shall manage to complete a viable common asylum system by 2012 , when we ourselves are passing different decisions , making different proposals and ultimately taking different action and achieving different results in practice .
Is this happening due to weakness , due to a lack of solidarity or for some other reason which the Council and Commission can elucidate for us ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not wish to sing out of tune , but I strongly believe that the correlation , including from a semantic point of view , which I have heard from various groups , in other words , the relationship between savings and the right to asylum , is , in my view , a negative correlation .
Let me explain myself better , even though I only have a few seconds : I strongly believe that , even if administration costs are reduced , they will be fictitious costs .
The real issue is harmonisation , but it is not an ideological issue but primarily a cultural one .
Unfortunately , there are cultural approaches , I repeat , to this issue and not ideological ones .
That is what we must address .
The most exposed countries are the Mediterranean states , which have a much stronger culture of receiving people than other countries because we have a much closer connection with this issue .
While spending on this has risen in Italy , because it has now reached EUR 30 million , other countries want to reduce it .
I do not believe that .
We also have to be careful to put a fifth of this spending - while we are talking about these things - down to disability issues , because political refugees very often have disabilities because they have been tortured ; and we must also talk about protection and protected people , who are another matter , but a group to be received .
I have not heard about the protection of these people that we have to receive .
I shall finish by saying that the Europe of freedoms , the Europe of the protection of rights ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Mr President , I , too , feel it is important to recast Directive 2005 / 85 / EC as the process for establishing minimum standards on asylum procedures must be fairer and more efficient .
The purpose of the amending proposal is to simplify and enhance the procedures at EU level .
The standards envisaged must be based on the best practices identified throughout the EU .
Although all Member States officially grant the right to apply for asylum , problems occur with the national access systems .
They vary significantly in their present form from one country to another .
This results in a number of administrative problems which need to be resolved using a common approach .
I also ask the Council to provide as much information as possible about the current situation in Member States .
It is important for us to resume the negotiations on this dossier and to achieve a result by the specified deadline .
Mr President , thank you very much for allowing me to speak again briefly .
I have a request for you , Mr Füle .
I would like to start by saying that incorrect assumptions lead to incorrect cost estimates .
At the moment , the number of asylum seekers is not falling , but rising significantly .
This is a result of visa facilitation , for example , for Serbia and Macedonia .
We are currently also seeing a massive increase in abuses of the asylum system as part of attempts to enter countries in the European Union .
If you start with incorrect assumptions , in other words , that disputing the first instance in detail will save costs in subsequent instances , it will automatically seem as if all Member States have poor first-instance procedures .
However , that is not the case .
If overall standards are raised , the consequence will be cost increases .
Improving the standard of quality for everyone and making the procedures more complex will , in reality , result in increased costs .
I am more than happy to discuss this point .
Therefore , I would like to ask you specifically to take the concerns of the countries seriously , because some of the practical reports from the countries have already been completed and will be distributed .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have listened carefully to the views expressed by Members of this House .
The Asylum Procedures Directive is an essential element of the common European asylum system that will need to be established before the end of 2012 .
The Commission welcomes the commitment of the European Parliament to proceed with the negotiations on the Asylum Procedures Directive .
As regards the negotiations in the Council , the Commission appreciates the commitment of the Member States to discuss the proposal in an open and constructive manner .
Several elements of the proposal proved , nevertheless , to be difficult indeed .
Thus , to facilitate the adoption of the directive , the Commission intends to adopt a modified proposal before the start of the Polish Presidency .
The Commission 's overall objective regarding this directive is to progress towards a common procedure and to facilitate more consistent and efficient application of procedural standards .
The modified proposal will continue to promote respect for fundamental rights and high quality decision making at first instance , which will result in solid decisions and faster conclusions of procedures , hence , leading to a reduction of costs .
In the modified proposal , the Commission will aim to simplify certain provisions with a view to facilitating their application .
The Commission will continue to endeavour to ensure proper balance between fairness and efficiency of procedures .
Concerning specifically the financial impacts , the Commission fully understands the importance attached to the cost-related elements of this proposal , and will continue to be attentive to the cost aspects during the next stages of the negotiations .
Let me close by stressing that the opinion of the European Parliament is , of course , a key benchmark which will allow the Commission to take into account Parliament 's position when preparing the modified proposal .
We will continue to work with Parliament and the Council towards progress on this proposal within the context of the wider asylum package .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for this valuable debate .
I also thank you for enabling us to discuss concrete facts , and I am confident that this will contribute to the new Commission proposal taking these considerations into account .
We talked about establishing common minimum criteria , about the elimination of bad practices through a single system , about being efficient and cost-effective , and about preventing opportunities for abuse .
I believe that these are all very important ideas , concerning which we will need to work together .
Please allow me one final thought .
We are all proud to be part of a community , here in the European Union , which counts human dignity among its most important values .
And asylum policy is a matter where the supremacy of human dignity is our primary guiding principle .
The Hungarian Presidency considers the human factor to be the most important consideration in all EU policies .
Prime Minister Orbán said this morning that , even though the current situation of the European Union calls for a clear mind and a cool head , we must also demonstrate that we have a heart .
He stated this in connection with the Roma policy .
I believe that we must also assert this in connection with asylum policy : yes , the EU must be able to demonstrate that it also has a heart .
The Hungarian Presidency will carry on the work of its Belgian predecessor .
In our programme , in this green booklet which all Members received in the mail yesterday , you will find on page 25 that our priorities in relation to the Justice and Home Affairs Council include the common European asylum system .
In my first speech this evening , I also explained , more specifically than it is described in the booklet , that we intend to reach an agreement within the Council on both the Dublin Regulation and the Qualification Directive .
I therefore trust that , on the basis of what has been said , you will recognise that the Hungarian Presidency is indeed treating this as a priority issue , and we will be counting on your cooperation .
The debate is closed .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 00 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Report on competition policy 2009 ( debate )
The first item is the report by Mr Eppink , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary affairs , on the Report on Competition Policy 2009 .
rapporteur . - Mr President , these days , competition is often regarded as a concept that makes life difficult .
Some people prefer cosy arrangements and the hot tub of backstage agreements as protection against the harsh world of global competition .
But , Commissioner , competition is not the spoiler but the lifesaver of the European economy .
Europe is at a crossroads .
Will it create a transfer economy , with low growth and high structural unemployment , or will it have a wealth-creating economy that stands the test of global competition ?
A football team , Commissioner , that is not competitive loses game after game .
An economy that is not competitive loses investment , jobs and finally , the basis of its social arrangements .
Since European competition policy is the exclusive competence of the European Commission , you , Commissioner - or rather Commissioner Almunia , for whom you are standing in - play a decisive role .
This week , the United Nations published figures on foreign direct investment in 2010 .
The United States attracted 43 % more foreign investment than in 2009 .
Foreign direct investment in Latin America rose by 21 % and in Asia by 10 % .
In the European Union , it dropped by 20 % - and why is that ?
The money goes to where the action is .
Apparently , investors regard Europe as the continent of inaction , only generating poor growth figures .
It demonstrates the European Union facing a competitiveness deficit .
Commissioner , you have to assure a level playing field for entrepreneurial activity in Europe to make our continent fit for global competition .
We all know China .
I would like to draw your attention to several aspects of competition policy in 2009 , of which many features are visible today .
The main issue now is the consequences of massive State aid to the financial sector : states allocated taxpayers ' money to prevent the collapse of the financial sector .
Had we allowed a meltdown of the financial sector , the savings and pensions of millions of European citizens would have been buried too .
But it goes without saying that State aid on this scale created distortions of competition .
That is why it has to end as soon as possible and the money has to be paid back to taxpayers in Europe .
Commissioner , my first question therefore is : how temporary is the temporary framework , and how will it be phased out ?
I hope you will clarify this issue on behalf of Commissioner Almunia .
Another aspect is liquidity support of the European Central Bank to certain banks in order to keep them alive .
I admit there is an interface between monetary and competition policy - but did its impact distort competition ?
That is my question .
Another issue is the set of rules for divestment .
Work criteria for downsizing companies are sufficiently clear and fair .
Now we should look at the future : what is going to happen , Commissioner ?
Member States have gone very far to recapitalise the financial sector by partly and / or entirely nationalising institutions with taxpayers ' money .
This will have to be unravelled .
But once Member States start withdrawing from financial institutions to restore their private status , there is a danger that they will leave behind a dowry , a sort of wedding gift .
Dowries may be used to prop up the position of financial institutions in the private market .
This is a feature we have often seen in the process of privatisation .
I remember it too well in the postal sector .
Governments propped up their postal provider just before entering the private market .
In a letter , I reminded Commissioner Almunia of the long-lasting investigation into the German postal provider .
The Commission is currently opening investigations into the British , French and Belgian postal providers as well , since these postal markets will be liberalised this year .
So , Commissioner , I ask you to be attentive to the phenomenon of dowry in the financial sector .
Preventing a problem is better than going the long way of legal redress .
I thank you , Commissioner - and also Commissioner Almunia - for your cooperation , and I also thank the service of DG Competition which , as I know , is one of the best in the Commission .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of Vice-President Almunia , who is unable to be here this morning , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Eppink , for his work on the report on Competition Policy 2009 .
I would also like to thank the rapporteurs in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and the Committee on Transport , Ms Koch-Mehrin , Mr Buşoi and Mr Cramer .
The Commission welcomes the positive tone of the report and the support expressed for our actions in the field of competition policy in 2009 , in particular , in the context of the economic and financial crisis .
We share your view that competition is essential to ensure a level playing field in the single market and to promote a sustainable exit from the crisis .
This is why the Commission remains committed to enforcing its firm stance on anti-competitive behaviour and mergers .
The Commission takes note of the many requests for specific reports or studies - more than 10 of them .
It is not feasible for the Commission to produce all these reports , due to our priorities and limited resources .
However , as Vice-President Almunia announced to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in November , the Commission will analyse the effects on competition of the temporary State aid measures taken in the context of the crisis .
This work will be difficult , but the crisis is a learning opportunity we simply cannot miss .
Secondly , I would like to restate here that these measures are indeed temporary .
The Commission prolonged the crisis framework for State aid until the end of 2011 because the economic conditions are still uncertain .
However , the gradual phasing out of these measures has already started .
Some measures have been terminated and others have been maintained under stricter conditions .
Thirdly , as regards private enforcement of competition rules , the Commission takes note of Parliament 's support for the creation of a European form of collective redress , and of its request for specific EU legislation to ensure compensation for victims of infringements of EU antitrust law .
The Commission will launch a public consultation at the beginning of 2011 on a European approach to collective redress .
It then plans to adopt a communication based on the results of this .
Finally , I would like to refer to the concerns expressed about competition in specific sectors , such as energy , transport , the food supply chain and emerging digital industries .
The Commission shares your concerns , and we will maintain our strong enforcement activities in these fields in close cooperation with the national competition authorities .
Mr President , competition policy is one of the most important , central policy areas of the EU .
Good competition policy enables markets to function properly .
Good competition policy also allows consumers to benefit from a wide variety of products at reasonable and affordable prices .
Good competition policy also contributes to creating growth again in Europe .
That is why it is so important , Commissioner , to include all the areas that you have mentioned in competition policy .
It is also important to strengthen small and medium-sized enterprises , as they are the driving force behind growth in Europe .
Market barriers must be abolished , which also means doing away with the excessive costs that still pertain where competition is not working , such as roaming charges on mobile phones , where competition still does not exist - something that needs to be changed .
Finally , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Eppink , for his excellent work , and to the Commission I would say : be ambitious in your goals .
( Applause )
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the Commission on its flexibility in applying the competition rules during the current financial and economic crisis .
It is very important that the crisis is not used as a pretext to eliminate competition , and the Commission has already shown a very firm attitude against cartels , which is a good thing .
We need to make sure that there are exit mechanisms and that we come back to normal market conditions as soon as possible .
There are some areas - and you spoke about that , Commissioner - where competition can be enhanced .
These include the energy market , where regulated energy prices still distort competition ; the completion of the single railway market can also bring important benefits to European travellers .
The Commission should also be particularly careful concerning competition on the medicines market , especially with regard to those practices of originator producers which restrict the entry of generic medicines .
Furthermore , I call on the Commission to be firm in securing competition between public and private hospitals by means of bold action against cross-subsidies which favour public hospitals .
The Commission needs to communicate the benefits of competition policy to consumers more effectively .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for his excellent cooperation .
Transport is also a decisive issue when it comes to competition .
After all , transport is responsible for 30 % of CO2 emissions , which is why I am pleased to see that it has been accepted that transport should be included in the central demands of the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , we still have unfair competition and this is where the Commission needs to take action .
For example , the aviation sector , which is the climate killer par excellence , enjoys an exemption from value added tax and duty on fuel .
This means that the European taxpayers pay out EUR 30 billion every year for aviation , simply so that the airlines can offer intercity flights at the same price as a short taxi journey .
The railways are required to bear the burden here .
We have a mandatory rail toll for every locomotive for every kilometre travelled .
This is a mandatory levy and has no upper limit .
On the roads , it is left up to the Member States to decide whether they charge any tolls at all .
The tolls mostly apply only on motorways and only to heavy goods vehicles weighing 12 tonnes or more .
In other words , some of our Member States levy a high rail toll but no road tolls at all .
We cannot allow this because it completely misses the point .
After all , if we do not change mobility habits , we will never succeed in averting climate change .
Yet this is something we have to achieve .
That is why you must establish fair competition in the transport sector too .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are all lazy .
If we can get away with not doing something , most people will indeed not do it .
Business is no exception in this respect .
The majority of entrepreneurs ( I am convinced of this ) dream of the possibility of being monopoly providers who can dictate terms , instead of having those terms dictated to them by consumers .
Competition is exactly what ensures consumers receive not only low prices but also optimum quality .
Unfortunately , in the European Union , we still have several sectors where there is no real competition .
The first of these is energy .
There are still isolated markets in several areas in Europe where there is no competition at all , for legally technical reasons .
What is the result ?
Artificially high prices for consumers .
A concrete example of this is the Baltic States and the gas market .
As Commissioner Oettinger himself has admitted , consumers in Germany currently pay 30 % less for natural gas than consumers in the Baltic States .
Why is there competition on one side , but none in the Baltic States ?
This must change .
There is a second sphere where there is no real competition , and that is the agriculture sector .
Without even mentioning what effect subsidies as such have in the agriculture market , we have within Europe very unequal agricultural payments or subsidies in one Member State compared to another .
What does this mean ?
It means that European consumers pay artificially high prices in many places and , of course , farmers also suffer .
Ladies and gentlemen , I call on you to support this report , which concerns the Commission 's work on ' Towards competition ' in 2009 .
I shall remind you , however , that this work does not end with this , and that we have to extend the spheres where competition needs to be present . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , the 2009 report on competition policy is probably one of the most extensive and comprehensive reports drafted by Parliament to date - the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has succeeded in incorporating the opinion of three other parliamentary committees - and it was produced after a period of five years following the implementation of two significant regulations , the Modernisation Regulation and the Merger Regulation , which have played a positive role in competition policy .
However , the implementation of the regulations could be improved if the priorities were better aligned , the cooperation efforts redoubled , the administrative burden alleviated and if there was convergence between national and EU laws .
The report includes the importance of public services in meeting the basic needs of citizens and we feel we need to emphasise this within the new framework established by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Therefore , and taking into account the importance of the information society , support is being given to the aid aimed at offering suitable universal broadband coverage at affordable prices to our citizens , and we request that attention is paid to the development of roaming prices in the telecommunications field in subsequent reports .
Competition policy is key in financial services .
The aid offered has contributed to stabilising and mitigating the effects of the economic crisis .
The report highlights its provisional nature and that its extension must take place under stricter conditions and a level playing field must be re-established for the exit process in order to avoid any moral risks and , above all , so that the financial institutions that have not claimed State aid see their competitive position restored .
Three points are also emphasised in the financial arena : the transparency of financial information , the need for the European payment system to be accessible , transparent and to function in a non-discriminatory and efficient manner and , thirdly , the need to combat unusually high prices in cross-border transactions with payment cards .
The report also raises concerns about small and medium-sized businesses and energy , and takes on board the recommendations of the High-Level Group for the dairy sector - which holds the view that strengthening the negotiating power of the producers and the new contractual relationships must be compatible with competition policy - and asks the Commission for a legislative initiative to facilitate individual or collective claims for compensation for damages caused by infringements of competition law , whilst avoiding the excesses of the US system .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Eppink , on his excellent work .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
We have worked in tandem ( me being last year 's rapporteur ) , and that brings me to my first point .
It strikes me about these annual debates on competition policy that there is a very friendly and polite exchange of views , and then the Commission just carries on with business as usual because the Commission has the exclusive powers in this area .
I think , at a time where we are discussing economic governance for the European Union , that should change .
The European Parliament should have a much bigger role in shaping competition policies , and I therefore urge the Commission to follow , in particular , recommendations 3 and 4 , and really seriously report back to the European Parliament about its recommendations .
Secondly , in my view , a report should be more than a mere summary of actions taken .
It should be an analysis of the impact of the competition policies , and that is currently lacking .
You say that you will do one on the temporary State aid framework because that is your priority , but we have been calling for such analyses for years : on green recovery , on State aid to innovation , on State aid to public services .
That is long overdue , so I would ask the Commission to do more in-depth analysis .
Finally , I would urgently reiterate the calls we have been making - for years now - for a sector inquiry into online advertising and search engines .
This is really long overdue , and I would like to hear from the Commission when they intend to conduct such an inquiry .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Commissioner Almunia , who is not here today but who , even though it is not the European Parliament 's domain , spends a considerable amount of time with us in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and is therefore investing time in an ongoing dialogue with Parliament on these matters .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur .
We often do this formally but , Mr Eppink , although our parties often disagree on many things , I must say that while drawing up this report , there were no taboo matters in our discussion .
All points were fully addressed in a very constructive spirit , and this should be highlighted .
I would now like to move on to three points with which I believe the Commission should move forward .
One , as was pointed out , is the importance of the financial sector , which , in truth , is given too much weight in the economy .
We know the financial crisis has meant that the financial groups that came through did so bigger and stronger .
So there really is a problem of market distortion in that area , and this does not only relate to special State aid measures established by Member States to help their financial sector , but also , and we emphasised this in the report , various forms of direct aid from the European Central Bank ( ECB ) that are , I am sorry to say , not very transparent at all .
We therefore urge the Commission to focus on the way in which the ECB has helped the banks , because it is clear that the banks that went to the ECB to seek help benefited from a kind of aid that those that were better managed did not request .
Banks that were properly managed , therefore , have somehow been victims of a market distortion .
The second sector is that of raw materials , particularly food commodities .
We know that large agro-industrial businesses and major retailers have a market position that gives them far too strong an influence over price formation .
A market survey on this issue is absolutely vital .
Another point , and not the least important , is tax competition .
You know that most Member States , including my own and many others , practise forms of tax competition that are very harmful to the general European interest .
These forms of competition must be stopped .
I know that the Commission is beginning to take an interest in this issue once again , but I strongly urge Commissioner Almunia and Commissioner Šemeta to tackle this problem .
Moving on to my last point , we were pleased to note that Commissioner Almunia has already imposed fines in various sectors since the beginning of his term of office , particularly in the air freight sector .
We also welcome the opening of the investigation into Google , which I think partially answers the point Mrs in ' t Veld made a moment ago .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr Lamberts , Mr Hans-Peter Martin has used his blue card to signal that he wishes to ask you a question .
Are you willing to listen to him ?
Many thanks .
Mr Martin , you have 30 seconds to question Mr Lamberts on the matter .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Lamberts referred to the special supports that banks have received from the European Central Bank .
Perhaps he could explain in a little more detail what he means and how this worked ?
He also made reference to the fact that this support is to be abolished .
How would he propose that we take control here , ensuring that the wrong people do not make a fat profit ?
That is a big question to answer in just thirty seconds ; however , I have every confidence in Mr Lambert 's powers of summation .

Mr President , answering that kind of question in 30 seconds is clearly an almost impossible task .
What is the issue here ?
The European Central Bank ( ECB ) agrees to provide liquidity to banks that request it , in an unlimited way , accepting all kinds of assets as collateral for that liquidity .
However , we do not have a very clear idea of the nature of those assets .
We also strongly suspect that many of them are , as they say , syphilitic or toxic assets whose real market value is very difficult to determine and some of those assets might even be worthless .
Under such conditions , this therefore constitutes a direct form of aid .
Clearly , if the ECB did not provide this liquidity in exchange for these guarantees , which are actually quite short-lived , then it is possible that some of these financial institutions would go bankrupt .
Finding an answer to this is not simple ; however , in any case , the first step is to have transparency as regards those assets .
Thank you , Mr Lamberts , for such a clear response on such a complicated issue .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , firstly , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Derk Jan Eppink , on his comprehensive and well negotiated report , covering so many topics .
Fundamentally , competition policy should be at the heart of the European single market and solid principles of competition should be built into all EU legislation .
Competition should create a stronger marketplace for EU citizens and allow the EU to be more competitive on a global basis .
In the latest wave of financial services legislation , there is a danger that this principle is being lost .
We must use every opportunity to create more competition in markets dominated by large market participants and create a more vibrant marketplace .
In the derivatives legislation currently being negotiated , we can ensure that we do not create or reinforce monopolies by supporting open access to CCPs and the like , and by ensuring the availability of important data streams to all players .
In the upcoming review of MiFID , we must remember its original purpose of opening up Europe 's equity markets to competition and , after its expansion to include new asset classes , we must ensure that the competitive principles are upheld , since a combination of these has actually significantly driven down trading fees for investors in the equities over the last three years .
When we consider reforms for auditors , credit rating agencies and other financial services providers , we can consider where the barriers to market entry lie , and work to break them down .
I believe that standing up for competition in key industries is the way that we will generate the true growth potential of the EU and reinvigorate our economies in this ever-changing world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , according to this report , the Commission is following a successful policy on competition .
However , we should not forget that unregulated competition can also lead to an increase in unemployment , so that the gap between the rich and poor grows ever wider .
In the European Union , free competition continues to take precedence over the social needs of our citizens .
A fervent belief in free markets cannot mask the fact that these markets not only fail time and time again , but are also incapable of bringing about lasting social justice .
A couple of procedures aimed at combating distortion of competition and price fixing will not be enough to resolve this problem .
A fair and social internal market will only work with strong and just regulation .
More work is urgently needed on this .
For example , it is not acceptable for more and more institutions providing services of general public interest to find themselves exposed to private competition .
The report sets down pointers for the Commission 's future policy on competition .
There is an urgent need for much stronger consumer protection and for services of general public interest to be shielded from the rules of competition and removed from the control of cartels .
It is also necessary to introduce a contractual clause that favours secure social progress and that is regarded with the same importance as the rules on competition in Europe .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , it is not often that I have any good words to say about Gordon Brown , but he did act swiftly , decisively and effectively to deal with the banking crisis in the UK , even though I must point out that it was largely made worse by his disastrous tenure as Minister of Finance / Chancellor of the Exchequer for ten years .
However , the bank rescue in the UK was less swift than it might have been because of the consequences of EU competition policy .
My distinguished colleague , Professor Tim Congdon , has written a pamphlet on this .
The fact is that these matters should be handled at the national level and not at the level of the Commission .
The Commission simply does not know what it is doing and should stay well clear .
In the last 15 seconds I have , I must address the singularly depressing speech made by Mr Lamberts when he talked about tax competition .
Tax competition is why we have lower taxes .
What he was advocating was an EU-wide fiscal policy , which would result in EU-wide higher taxes .
That is what it is , and I would ask Mr Lamberts and his colleagues to please call it that next time .
This is not so much a speech under the ' blue card ' procedure as a personal statement .
Mr Lamberts , I implore you to keep it brief , let us see if you can enlighten your colleague with your point of view in just thirty seconds , shall we ?
Mr President , Lord Dartmouth paints the Greens as advocates of high taxes for the sake of high taxes .
I just want to ask you , Lord Dartmouth , one very simple question .
If services like education , health and security have value , I guess that you have to find ways to finance them .
Am I correct ?
No , we are not going to enter into a discussion on this .
Mr Dartmouth , you may respond to Mr Lamberts later in the corridor .
However , what the regulations do not allow is for one question to be answered with another .
You have 15 seconds .
( opening words inaudible as microphone switched off ) ... the person who asked the question has the right to respond .
You have invented new rules - your own rules - as a chairman .
You are completely incorrect , sir .
Yes , I do invent rules .
We are inventing rules all the time and we are contributing to the progress of the democratic functioning of the Chamber .
Thank you for recognising that .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to begin by commending you for permitting such dialogue .
It is a little unfortunate that the Earl of Dartmouth did not understand that you had also allowed him this opportunity to reply .
I believe it is a very positive thing when someone like Mr Lamberts comes forward with such concrete proposals and when we have a chance to engage in lively debate , so that people get to respond in a more direct way , which is exactly what we want in this House .
Perhaps you will allow him the opportunity for a brief reply later on .
I would like to continue where Mr Lamberts left off .
There is no denying that we need transparency in the banking system .
The public is still quite unaware that these subsidies as a result of the financial crisis have actually done something quite unimaginable under EU standards .
They make it clear that competition per se cannot always manage without subsidies when there are higher objectives at stake .
However , what makes this entire business such a bitter pill to swallow is the fact that those banks that have received support are once again profiteering and , in some cases , actually going against common European interests .
That is enough about the financial market .
The second point I would like to discuss is one you have all heard from me before - the question of pharmaceuticals .
It find it very regrettable that we have still not made the progress that has been possible and necessary for decades .
It would indeed be a great step forward for Europe if citizens in my country , Austria , as well as in Germany and in other countries , only had to pay the same amount for pharmaceuticals as their fellow citizens in other EU Member States .
This is the work of cartels and big business .
I believe that the Commission has the opportunity and the duty finally to take action here .
The second aspect of this issue is pharmaceutical authorisation .
Unnecessary trials are still taking place , both on animals and on human beings .
A lot of work is duplicated unnecessarily .
In the context of the European internal market , this is something that should have been resolved last century .
I would once again call on you to take intensive action here .
Mr President , our eyes are currently on the summit between China and the US , because those two economies are seen as being the world 's two biggest economies .
We are discussing when China will become the biggest economy , but that is based on a false assumption , because we forget that the European Union is the biggest economy , but that China and the US have the bigger markets .
This is because of the lack of competition in the European Union across borders and within different areas .
It is a lack of competition that makes us look upon them , instead of us , as having the self-confidence of being in the lead .
That is why it is important , in the future , that the report on competition should also focus on the lack of implementation of the legislation which is already in place , and also on the lack of competition in the European economy .
We need to do that in a number of areas .
Also , to be the leading economy , we need to ensure that we are the most competitive economy .
Let me tell you a secret : we will never be the most competitive if we do not have competition .
State subsidies and regulations hindering new entrants are preventing the European economy from being in the lead .
That is why we must ensure that state subsidies are always there only in exceptional cases , where nothing else can be done , or when we can channel them in a way that supports the common good without distorting competition .
What we need to ensure is that we can allow for new entrants in as many areas of the European economy as possible .
Competition is not about out-competing others .
It is about allowing big companies to merge and grow bigger and bigger on the global scene , and about allowing new companies to open up to new innovations .
We do have a lack here and it is the responsibility of the Commission to demonstrate that , and to take action so we can proceed together so that in the future , we will be looked upon as the leading economy .
Mr President , competition policy is a cornerstone of European legislation .
We agree that innovation , creativity and being better necessarily mean market advantage , but we do not accept that , just because someone is bigger and stronger with better connections to information and , in particular , special connections to government , these kinds of advantage should apply on the market , and we are very happy that the Commission is on guard here to ensure that they should not .
I would like to mention once again a new phenomenon : it is not market players but rather governments which seem , from time to time , to be playing by giving special advantages , in terms of competition policy , to some of their favourite companies .
This is a very bad phenomenon and it goes back to party treasuries .
I would ask the Commission to move in this direction : let us have innovation , creativity and small and medium-sized enterprises , but do not allow any kind of misuse of information or power , either economic or political , on those territories .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Eppink 's report is quite remarkable , but I am a little afraid - and this has nothing to do with the rapporteur - that we are making the same points over and over again .
It is rather like flogging a dead horse .
Without doubt , I would join Mrs in ' t Veld and Mr Lamberts in saying that we need to have proper monitoring of competition , and to think about what is happening in the agricultural sector , which has very few buyers and a huge number of producers - something that has never worried the Commission before , whereas if this had been the industrial sector , it would have immediately thrown itself into the buyers ' cartel .
We also need new rules for the Internet sector .
However , our relationship with the Commission is tremendously boring .
It sends us a report which sweeps three-quarters of the subjects under the carpet .
We respond politely that it is interesting and that something should be added to it ; then everyone puts it away in a drawer .
I just wanted to say this today , and to repeat what Mr Hökmark said : the world is changing .
It is very nice of us to say that State aid is not good , but the fact remains that China , Korea , the United States and others give State aid .
I am not in favour of it .
I am not a grassroots protectionist Frenchwoman ; I am simply saying : let us open our eyes a little and stop dreaming !

( DE ) Mr President , recommendation number 4 requires the Commission to issue reports on how it handles all future recommendations and to explain any disparities that might arise .
I believe that this is a very sensible proposal and wish to make it more specific .
Last year , Parliament decided during the relevant debate that we wanted to focus on fair and non-discriminatory competition for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Commission has done nothing in the interim .
This recommendation is once again to be found in Mr Eppink 's motion for a resolution .
I would like to hear from the Commission whether it now intends to implement this reiterated recommendation or I would ask them , at the very least , to tell us what it is that is preventing them from taking on board the particular concerns of small and medium-sized enterprises in this way .
My second point relates to the commodities sector .
I am very pleased to find that this report deals with the lack of transparency in the commodities sector .
I also welcome the fact that it deals with the question of speculation in commodities .
However , I regret that it has not taken up the recommendation of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy as a whole , which suggests that we should not follow the proposal made by the French Presidency , namely , that the issue of speculation should be confined to agricultural commodities , but recommends that speculation in metals should also be included .
In my opinion , this is just as important .
Mr President , I would like to thank my colleague , Derk Jan Eppink , for his excellent report , but particularly to make a comment about the energy market , which the Commission is going to look at this year .
As other Members have pointed out , energy supply and pricing can vary greatly between different Member States .
In the region I represent , nearly a quarter of households have no access to mainstream gas , and the vast majority of those are reliant on domestic heating oil .
In the one month between November and December , pricing in that market rose by over 50 % .
Consumers are concerned ( and very cold ) - they are concerned about cartel pricing , and there are allegations of this .
It is right that this should be looked at by the domestic regulators first , but I am hearing similar concerns from other EU Member States .
So I would like to ask the Commissioner : when you are looking at the energy markets this year , please do not forget those who live in very rurally isolated areas .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you could see in our presentation yesterday , the strengthening of the internal market and the promotion of job creation are among the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
Since an EU competition policy based on equal competitive conditions applied in all sectors is the prerequisite of the aforesaid priorities , I am very pleased by the creation of this report .
However , ladies and gentlemen , this is now in the distant past .
Times have since changed .
Nevertheless , I believe it is important to draw the conclusions of this report , and I also find the fact that the European Parliament - that is , we , the Members - will be able to play a more active part in the shaping of competition policy in the future to be important .
In this , however , I request the Commission 's cooperation .
First of all , I request what I believe to be a necessity , that Parliament should be informed regularly about all initiatives launched in this field .
Secondly , I ask the Commission , as the only competition authority with EU-wide competence , to report to Parliament annually about the application of the recommendations made by it , and about any deviations from them .
I believe that it is important to realise - and in this I agree with my fellow Members - that competition policy cannot be managed vertically .
Coordination is also required in all functional and regulatory areas .
This , however , is the responsibility of the Commission .
For this reason , it is essential to harmonise EU policies and the priorities defined in the EU 2020 strategy , which is aimed at supporting growth and employment .
Lastly , I too would like to mention small and medium-sized enterprises , whose involvement is indispensable and unavoidable for the growth of the entire European economy , including , of course , employment .
However , the conditions of competition must be equal .
This must be guaranteed by competition policy .
I ask the Commission to pay special attention to SMEs and to provide equitable and non-discriminatory competitive conditions for them .

Mr President , first let me congratulate Mr Eppink on the detailed work he has done on this report .
Hopefully , he will continue to play a progressive role in this area .
I welcome this report on the state of play of competition policy for 2009 .
However , there are still elements of competition in the EU that need to be strengthened and clarified .
I would encourage more cooperation between the Commission and the European Parliament in this field .
That is the only way we will be able to maintain public confidence in the decisions that have been taken .
Furthermore , it is imperative that the European Parliament be kept up to date on the action that is taken by the Commission , with a particular focus on SME policy .
I look forward to the reports and the investigations that have been highlighted in this report - at the last count , 11 reports , six investigations into different fields and the re-establishment of DG Competition 's fiscal State aid unit .
In particular , I strongly welcome the reiterated request for the incorporation of the basis for calculating fines , which we have already discussed .
I think this is absolutely vital .
By the way , it was very interesting to hear earlier from the Earl of Dartmouth , speaking as he was as an aristocrat , about competition policy .
As everybody knows , aristocrats in the United Kingdom have a huge focus on land concentration .
Perhaps we ought to ask the competition authorities to look into that and see just how the aristocrats have been looking after their land across the European Union for all this time .
( PL ) Mr President , it is a pleasure to listen to this debate .
I would like to thank Mr Eppink for his report .
Knowing his approach , I look at the report with admiration and am pleased that it was he who drafted it .
It is also a pleasure to listen to the speeches of fellow Members , but there is something which I feel I must say .
We are concentrating , here , on the work of the European Commission .
We are accusing it of not having a strong position or a policy and of not fighting protectionism , but quite honestly , our opponent or our greatest problem - Mr Hökmark spoke about the fact that the European economy is not competitive - is the Member States .
Meanwhile , the European Commission very often has no option but - acting under pressure from Member States - to try to protect free competition as much as possible .
In this Chamber several weeks ago , we talked among other things about special legislation for the coal market .
On that occasion , however , we did not hear Members talking about free competition , but could only hear the voices of people demanding protectionist principles and the possibility of subsidising , for example , closed mines - that is what it was called - while in fact , the real issue was assistance for mines which are not going to be closed at all .
We must , therefore , be consistent in our work , and that consistency is often lacking in this Chamber .
We have been talking about assistance for the banking sector .
I fear that the European Commission , acting under that pressure from Member States , has only sanctioned that assistance , and today , when we talk about the report , which is , in fact , for 2009 - I agree , here , with the criticism - it seems to me that the report lacks an evaluation of the effects which that assistance has achieved and if , in reality , it has restructured the banking industry in a stable way .
I expect , Commissioner , that this aspect - the evaluation of an important policy - should be present in the report .
The report also talks about the fact that the Commission is fighting protectionism , among others when we talk about the automotive sector , but there are examples - I come from Poland - where the best factory in the Fiat group was closed - perhaps not closed , but production was reduced - and production was transferred to Italy .
This is obvious protectionism , and the European Commission should be fighting this problem .
I can give another example .
In 2009 , two Polish shipyards were closed .
I come from a shipbuilding city in Poland , but the problem is bigger than two Polish shipyards .
The problem is to do with the fact that , at world level , European competition policy forces the shipbuilding industry to fight mainly against the heavily subsidised shipyards of the Middle East , and today we have , in fact , closed down the shipbuilding industry in Europe through this competition policy , because we force them to compete against subsidised industries .
It should be important to us for the shipbuilding industry in Europe to exist .
Thank you , and I apologise for exceeding my speaking time .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would argue that developing an effective competition policy and implementing it correctly from a methodological point of view is an extremely delicate and complex task , particularly during a crisis .
It is delicate , because applying it too rigidly could genuinely affect the impact it has , and could have serious consequences for the social sphere and the economic cycle .
It is complex , because the parameters adopted may not necessarily apply across the board to all areas of the economy at such a delicate time .
Therefore , the Commission should be congratulated for its work on the subject .
It has managed to combine a rigorous method with the flexibility necessary in these economic conditions .
Indeed , making provision to evaluate the ad hoc tools adopted at national level to end the crisis is evidence of an approach that is not only highly professional , but also sensitive .
European competition law is both wide-ranging in scope and highly specialised .
This once again puts the European Union in the position of being a guiding light for its neighbouring countries , particularly the less developed ones .
This helps prevent a separation and divergence between the countries leading the way and those following behind .
Therefore , it is doubly important to ensure that this guiding light is not dimmed in any way .
In my opinion , special attention should be paid to evaluating the various post-crisis scenarios that should begin to emerge in 2010 .
It is very likely that this will mean re-examining the extent of the structural changes that we need to take into account and evaluating the current status of the various industries and sectors .
Caution has to be the keyword at a time of such uncertainty .
I would urge the Commission to focus both on small and medium-sized enterprises and on youth employment , which is once more making competition a European-wide problem .
Mr President , I would like to commend the report for including a very positive mention about SEPA , the Single Euro Payments Area .
Time and again this Parliament has demanded a rapid SEPA migration , and the reasons are simple .
The Commission 's impact assessment quotes a study that SEPA would save EUR 300 billion in the EU economy in six years ' time .
These savings are due to increased competition via common standards and processes .
This will also save time and stress for all Europeans who need to carry out payments in other countries .
I also strongly agree with the report when it states that the public economic support to banks and other companies in the economic crisis has distorted competition .
Like many of my colleagues here this morning , I urge the Commission to provide an analysis of these distortions .
Let me add one more thought on the need for common standards and processes .
A lot of inventions in the future will be based on information and communication technologies .
We need more competition in the ICT business , and this could be encouraged by increased use of open-source code in Europe .
I expect that Europe will , in this way , become more competitive in this crucial field in relation to the US and other major economic areas , as Mr Hökmark said previously .
( PL ) Mr President , the authors of the resolution under discussion rightly observe that the economic crisis was an exceptional challenge for EU competition policy .
National and political interests were repeatedly victorious , not only over the rules of the free market , but also over common sense .
The major economic crisis , the effects of which are still being felt to this day in the countries of Europe , was a significant determinant of competition policy in 2009 .
It was a period which saw the use of mechanisms and instruments whose main objective was to help troubled financial institutions as well as some large enterprises , and not to uphold the rules of a market economy , and the worst effects of this were felt by small and medium-sized enterprises .
Will what was done be effective in the long term ?
Only now are we finding out .
Therefore , we should call on the Commission to prepare credible analyses which show the effect of this aid on the economy .
This will not only allow an evaluation of what was done , but will also enable a rapid and effective reaction to similar threats in the future .
( RO ) Mr President , competition policy plays a key role in guaranteeing the European economy 's competitiveness , with the control of State aid being an integral part of this .
At the same time , during the current crisis , the European Commission has seen the need to approve State aid grants , especially for the banking sector , but also for other sectors which have encountered difficulties .
Member States have therefore granted sizeable sums in the form of guarantee schemes , recapitalisation schemes and other forms of financing banking institutions ' liquidity , with the aim of providing them with a source of funding and a guarantee against risks .
However , the European Commission must keep a close watch on the sector and submit plans for restructuring and regulating financial institutions to guarantee that they will not continue to adopt risky behaviour which jeopardises the European Union 's financial stability .
Otherwise , State aid is only helping perpetuate financial difficulties in the European Union .
( SK ) Mr President , the submitted report confirms the fact that we still have a long way to go in the EU as far as proper competition is concerned .
A good example of this is agricultural output , where both the EU and the individual states allow various subsidies and supports , thereby greatly distorting the competitive environment .
Agricultural enterprises from the new Member States in particular are suffering considerably as a result of the incorrect subsidy policy of the EU .
Transport is another area where it will be necessary to amend and improve the competitive environment in a fundamental way .
I therefore consider it very important to adopt the proposals of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which aptly draw attention to a distortion in competition between individual types of transport as well .
In any case , this is a good and inspiring report , and it is important for it to be employed effectively to improve the competition environment in the EU .
( HU ) Mr President , the situation created by the economic and financial crisis has left its mark on the tone of the Commission 's report .
Notwithstanding , it is a good report , as reflected by Parliament 's resolution .
However , there are points where work could be improved in the near future , primarily in the field of prevention and appropriate information .
Without cooperation , we will not be able to recover from the crisis , and it is therefore very important for the Commission to assure us that it will continuously provide us with information about results already achieved .
Compliance with , and enforcement of , EU competition policy rules is one of the keys to the success of the single market .
There are still raw material markets in the field of energy policy , for example , where transparency needs to be increased .
Similarly , competition is not fully guaranteed in every segment of the energy sector .
This is why it is urgent to implement the second internal market package and the third energy package .
Requesting a more thorough investigation of competition in another sector , namely agro-industry , is a very timely step .
Through a study , we must identify the major suppliers and distributors who are responsible for distorting competition in the market .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to stress how important it is to draft clear competition rules which are helpful and useful to SMEs .
They are especially important to the whole European economy , not to mention the huge innovation potential they offer .
In this respect , I think that it would be advisable to include a chapter devoted to small enterprises , with an emphasis on fair competition .
Competition policy should help promote and enforce open standards and interoperability .
This would prevent a technological lock-in being applied by market players .
I would like to end by saying that the implementation of a successful competition policy and the unrestricted operation of the internal market are prerequisites for sustainable economic growth in the European Union .
Mr President , let me concentrate on paragraph 90 of this report , which states that competition in agricultural production is a precondition for lower prices for consumers in EU countries .
A bit of it is true , but I am afraid it misses the point completely .
We are having a debate among ourselves , and in particular groups in this Parliament , about what is happening to the agricultural markets and why there is not fair transmission of the final price that we , as consumers , pay for food to those who produce the food .
It is a very serious problem at a time when we are reforming agricultural policy , threatening to cut the budget for agriculture and not looking at the imperfections in this marketplace .
So the report should say much more about that .
The Commission is urged to look at competition in the agro-industrial sector : yes , please , and look at it too in the retail sector but then stop looking and do something about it !
We are great at talking in this House , but we are not so good at action .
I have one other point in relation to competition .
I make some complaints to the Commission on behalf of constituents .
The small person gets no hearing against the state , and I would like the Commission to take this back : that there are some complaints which I , as a Member , have not ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you Mrs McGuinness .
It may be relevant in future debates of this nature to listen to the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also .
( PL ) Mr President , the internal market should be free , effective , dynamic and innovative .
Appropriate competition policy is the right tool for achieving this objective .
If competition is operating properly in the market for goods and services , we can guarantee better quality , lower prices and greater choice for the consumer .
It is good that we make these annual assessments of competition policy .
Such an examination , with the benefit of hindsight , is very instructive .
Effective use of the instrument of competition policy allowed an improvement in economic stability and moderation of the effects of the economic crisis for businesses and consumers .
It is necessary to improve competition in the markets for medicines and energy .
Let us remember that a monopoly , whether privately-owned or state-owned , restricts competition .
It is worth stressing that changes to the common agricultural policy mean that subsidies and external support do not now restrict competitiveness .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission notes Parliament 's call for more transparency , dialogue and information on competition policy .
We will continue to inform you about important policy decisions relating to competition and will endeavour to address your requests in our response to your resolution , either in the next Report on Competition Policy or on an ad hoc basis , as requested by Mr Bütikofer and other Members .
I note your call for sector inquiries in a number of markets .
Past experience shows that fair and firm enforcement itself produces positive effects on competition across a sector .
Sector inquiries are not always the best way to enforce our rules in a given sector .
They are very expensive in terms of resources and should be used only when the Commission 's policy objectives make an inquiry necessary .
I can confirm again that the temporary crisis-related State aid measures are indeed temporary .
I would like to pick up on a few of your questions in a really telegraphic way in the limited time available .
Firstly , on the investment and financial sector , consultation is ongoing on rescue and restructuring guidelines .
Secondly , on transport , the Commission is preparing a White Paper on the future of transport , which is due to be adopted in March 2011 .
This will outline several proposals for speeding up completion of the internal market for transport .
Thirdly , on services of general economic interest , the Commission will report on this in the first quarter of this year .
Fourthly , on the digital agenda , the Commission fully agrees with the importance of promoting a truly integrated digital internal market .
Fifthly , on SMEs , a level playing field for all companies , big and small , is essential for them to flourish .
The Commission 's enforcement of the competition rules is essential to enable this .
We also have targeted State aid rules for SMEs , innovation , research and development and green technologies .
Next June , Vice-President Almunia will present to you the Report on Competition Policy 2010 .
In the meantime , he will keep you informed on the issues you have raised and , in relation to paragraph 4 of Parliament 's report , the services of DG COMP will be instructed to respond to you in more detail .
We will finish with the speech by the rapporteur , Mr Eppink , whom , of course , we congratulate , as the majority of his colleagues have praised his work as author of this report .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner , who is standing in for his colleague , for being here .
I welcome the initiative of the Commission with regard to collective redress , which is a long-overdue initiative .
It is also mentioned in the report , and I think it is in the interests of the consumers - provided it is well defined and well legislated .
I think it is good .
We will start with the Green Paper to see what the different opinions are .
I welcome this .
In the banking sector , we have a very strange situation : State aid is on different levels in different countries , in different stages .
In some countries , such as Spain , in the banking sector , the regional banks ( cajas ) in particular are in difficulty , and here , life-support from the European Central Bank is needed - although the ECB , as Mr Lamberts pointed out in 30 seconds , risks having many bad assets .
This turns the ECB into a sort of bad bank - something we should not have .
In other countries , the states are trying to disengage from the banking sector , and here there is the danger of a dowry .
I expect that you cannot reply to this issue of a dowry - it is something for the Commissioner - but it would be very unfair to other banks that did not get State aid if some that have been recovered or needed resuscitation suddenly got one .
So here we have to look at the issue of the level playing field .
Finally , I come to the follow-up , because there were a few remarks by Mrs in ' t Veld , Mrs Gáll and Mr Bütikofer which were spot-on .
We had a report last year , we have a report this year and we will probably have a similar report next year .
It all stays the same .
It looks a bit like a Vatican-based ritual where we have the same things over and over again .
I think that we have to look into the follow-up to the questions we have asked , and I propose that the rapporteur and the previous rapporteur get in touch with the Commissioner and with the Director-General of DG COMP to see what happens with the request we made .
We need to have a report that is properly implemented in terms of information provision .
This is why I propose that we have a proper follow-up , in which Mrs in ' t Veld will certainly support me , to see what the Commission is doing .
Thank you , Mr Eppink .
I am sure you will have noticed the reaction of your colleagues , and that in all likelihood , your proposal will have the necessary backing .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Thursday .
A sustainable EU policy for the High North ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Gahler , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a sustainable EU policy for the High North .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , representatives of our Arctic neighbours who are following this debate , in my capacity as rapporteur , I am particularly pleased to be able to present to you today the result of over a year 's work , carried out in cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs , other colleagues in the EU Arctic Forum , and numerous experts and representatives , some of them from the Artic region itself .
We have achieved a broad consensus and believe that we have formulated a sustainable policy on the High North .
The report analyses the new significance of the Arctic region and describes how the EU 's policy in relation to our northern neighbours should be organised from the point of view of the European Parliament .
My guiding principle here is the offer of cooperation with the states and institutions of our neighbours in the High North .
We are aware of the bilateral and multilateral cooperation already taking place with the Arctic states .
Quite apart from the issues relating to the Arctic , Norway and Iceland are already closely involved in the European Economic Area and in cooperation under Schengen .
The EU is already an ad hoc observer in the Arctic Council , but I would like to make it clear that I believe it desirable that the EU should be given permanent observer status .
This is particularly the case because almost all policy areas of relevance to the region have been brought within the Community sphere in part at least .
This offer of cooperation is formulated in this way because we , the EU , cannot take action or initiate any activity in the Arctic in our own right .
We are largely dependent on the willingness of the immediately adjacent territories to cooperate with us .
In this report , I also focused on the human dimension .
In pursuing each individual area of common policy , all those involved must never lose sight of the fact that the concerns of those living in the Arctic must be given due consideration .
I am referring to the indigenous peoples in the countries , whose way of life and livelihoods follow the principle of sustainability , as well as for the other people living there .
We accept that these inhabitants of the Arctic region wish to develop their habitat ; in other words , they do not want to see a conservation order placed on the area as it currently stands , turning it into something like a national park .
That is why we are working with the partners to ensure that intervention in the ecosystem and in natural habitats always follows the highest possible conservationist principles .
The EU is an attractive cooperative partner for Arctic states because we have played a pioneering role in the relevant policy areas , such as protection of the environment and the combating of climate change .
Thus , the question of whether or not the world 's largest internal market pursues an ambitious environmental policy makes a vital difference for this region .
The EU is also an attractive cooperative partner because we are obvious customers for the commodities provided by the Arctic - not just oil and gas , but also rare ores , for example .
We should follow the good examples provided here , for example , in the cooperation between Norway and Russia in the Shtokman Field in the Barents Sea .
The highest Norwegian environmental standards are applied here as the partners cooperate in extracting these mineral resources .
I hope that the same will apply to the cooperative agreement reached between Russia and BP in recent weeks for exploration in the Arctic Sea .
In future , our monitoring satellites will provide valuable support , both in the environmental sector and in the opening up of new shipping routes , such as the Northeast Passage .
Cooperation in this area will make it possible to shorten shipping routes to Southeast Asia , for example .
For the EU , which accounts for about 40 % of the world 's commercial fleet , this is an important factor , particularly from a financial perspective .
Our Framework Programme for Research offers valuable support for further scientific cooperation between the various Polar institutes in their research stations in the Arctic .
Our neighbours in the High North know the EU to be a competent cooperative partner .
However , there is room for improvement when it comes to the formulation , coordination and implementation of our policies .
Improvement could be achieved by bringing together the responsible areas within the Commission under the Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries and by establishing an appropriate body in the EEAS .
In addition , an Arctic information centre to gather and evaluate all the relevant information would also further improve our database .
The development of a circumpolar cofinancing and programming mechanism involving all the partners in the High North would also be an important instrument for better , more efficient cooperation in respect of research and development .
I am confident that this draft policy document will provide better guidelines for a comprehensive and successful Arctic policy in the EU that will also benefit our northern neighbours .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , early last year , Vice-President / High Representative Ashton took the initiative of proposing a debate on the Arctic region .
The plenary debate has helped us to receive your views and to illustrate the importance we attach to Arctic cooperation as part of the external relations of the European Union .
We engage with the Arctic region on many levels .
Firstly , both the Union and Member States have active research policies in the region .
Secondly , we pursue solid environmental and maritime policies .
Thirdly , our diplomacy in the fight against climate change addresses the core origin of Arctic transformations .
And fourthly , we continue to take action in favour of indigenous peoples worldwide , including those living in the Arctic .
While we acknowledge that our dialogue with all circumpolar Arctic indigenous peoples could be improved , 2010 has witnessed the beginning of a fruitful and wider process of interaction , which we will certainly pursue in the years to come .
When dealing with access to the Arctic and the exploitation of its resources , we must live up to our reputation as a responsible consumer of raw materials and energy resources , adhering to the highest safety and environmental standards .
In parallel , we will firmly seek fair treatment of our interests , including those of our companies .
We are pleased to see that these areas are covered by Parliament 's High North report , along with valuable proposals on how to proceed in the future .
This report is an important contribution to the gradual building of the European Union 's Arctic policy , and I would like to thank Michael Gahler for taking this initiative forward .
The initiative is particularly praiseworthy , as the rapporteur and several other MEPs facilitated an interesting dialogue with Arctic third parties and civil society , in which we participated actively .
The various perspectives are present in the final report , demonstrating the European Union 's commitment to listen to , and work with , all Arctic stakeholders .
We are now opening a new phase in the development of EU Arctic policy .
Parliament 's report will become the third pillar of its basic architecture , following the 2008 Commission communication and the 2009 Council conclusions .
These three texts are consistent and offer a responsible and positive message to the Arctic partner countries and the people living across the region .
We seek to promote a safer , sustainable Arctic .
We respect the international agreements and arrangements , and would like to cooperate in their development and enhancement .
In particular , I would like to acknowledge the Norwegian-Russian delimitation agreement on the Barents Sea , which was signed last year , as a reference point for long-term peaceful cooperation in the overall circumpolar Arctic region .
The European Union would like to see a reinforced and efficient Arctic Council , in which key decisions on the future of the region are agreed and implemented .
We would like to participate in the Arctic Council as a permanent observer to share our solid experience in international regional cooperation , and we are particularly grateful for Parliament 's endorsement of this endeavour .
The High North report will give the European External Action Service and the Commission a robust stimulus in our external action concerning the Arctic region .
I believe that its messages and approach are timely and appropriate .
Parliament 's High North report will also inform our own progress report on EU Arctic policy , which the Council has asked us to deliver later this year .
Our reporting will be addressed to both institutions , Council and Parliament , and we hope that it will be to your joint satisfaction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank Mr Gahler for his carefully prepared report .
I am genuinely pleased that the European Union 's policy towards the High North is one of those areas to which the European Union has turned in relatively good time .
Significantly rich resources - around a quarter of the world 's unexplored oil and gas resources , biogenetic and fish resources , minerals - may be found in the Arctic .
It also offers new maritime transport opportunities .
Melting of the ice cap has resulted in a shipping route to the countries of Asia that is about 40 % shorter .
The potential of the Arctic is impressive .
That is why it must be husbanded responsibly .
Both irresponsible exploitation of resources and ill-considered transport flows can have serious ecological consequences .
At the same time , it has to be recognised that using the riches of the Arctic can open new possibilities for resolving not only energy problems , but also raw material and food-related problems .
There is stiff competition between the world 's great powers over who is to have the lion 's share in managing and exploiting these resources .
Although approximately 3.7 million people live in the Arctic , representing several tens of indigenous peoples , it can nevertheless be regarded to a certain extent as belonging to the world in common .
For the time being , the United Nations has not confirmed privileges for any nation in the Arctic and , hopefully , will not do so in the future .
That is precisely why our policy must be responsible .
The European Union must develop a specific , coordinated strategy for all spheres associated with the High North , and agree the funding for that policy and the sources of that funding .
Climate change , the welfare and development of the local population , and energy security issues must also be taken into account .
In order to implement that policy , permanent observer status on the Arctic Council would be important .
Although we have no direct sea frontiers with the Arctic , the European Union can become a leader in exploring the region in respect of both its resources and new shipping routes , and in securing a high standard of environmental safety . Thank you .
Mr President , to begin with , my sincere thanks go to the rapporteur , Mr Gahler , for his constructive cooperation .
Certainly the best acknowledgement of this came from Commissioner Füle , when he said that this report would become the third pillar of EU Arctic policy .
It is not any wonder that Arctic policy is becoming central to international policy , since , just as the Member who spoke before me said , the Arctic region has a third of the world 's as yet undiscovered natural resources : minerals , gas and oil .
Climate change and competition for these natural resources are issues that are connected , but what is really driving the trend is obviously the global economy .
Fortunately , developments in the Arctic region have been steady and based on a willingness to cooperate .
In the future , Arctic policy will be a test of whether together , we can increase stability or , on the other hand , cause new conflicts .
It is important that natural resources are exploited responsibly and carefully in order to avoid the ' gold rush ' phenomenon and catastrophes of the sort that occurred in the Gulf of Mexico .
It is important that we have a balanced report and the message that the Arctic Council should be reinforced and that the European Union will be more robustly involved there in its capacity as observer .
We should not just barge our way in , however , but exercise diplomacy , negotiate , engage in sound political cooperation and , above all , be at the forefront when it comes to assessing environmental impact .
I think that it is excellent that the report mentions the importance of an Arctic Information Centre and also states that the University of Lapland in Rovaniemi , Finland , would be a good place to locate it .
Mr President , I wish to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Gahler , as well as all the shadow rapporteurs .
We think that we have worked excellently together and it is important that the owninitiative report is adopted and that a proposal is made based on it .
The report argues strongly in favour of heavy future investment allowing people in the Arctic region to survive there , and investment in conditions of employment , transport and the environment .
I also think that the view it takes regarding the need to recognise the position of the indigenous nations , especially the Sami , is of particular importance .
The Sami are Europe 's only indigenous people and the EU , that is the Commission , Parliament and the Council , must cooperate equally with them .
The report also acknowledges the status of the Arctic Council , which Commissioner Füle even said the EU was willing to reinforce .
I was , however , really quite disappointed with Commissioner Füle 's appraisal that cooperation in the Arctic region was progressing gradually .
Of course , the EU must show drive , and there must be investment and a desire to step up cooperation in the Arctic .
That must not be allowed to progress only gradually , almost as if we were only using one hand : it must be one of the priorities .
Finally , I want to say that I am also pleased that there is to be investment in research into the Arctic region , and that the report mentions the University of Lapland as a possible centre for this .
The University of Lapland deserves praise for being the only university , the only agency , that has really worked to ensure that such a centre would be established , and has devoted much time and effort to this .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , firstly , I would like to express my gratitude and give my sincerest congratulations and compliments to the rapporteur and fellow shadow rapporteurs for their good cooperation and understanding .
I would also like to thank my fellow Green Members for their cooperation and contribution .
We can finally say that we have come up with a decent document allowing us , the European Union , to proceed in a fairly reasonable manner , taking into account all the interests of all stakeholders .
Even though the Greens justifiably think that we should be even more radical , we are still glad that this report takes our worries and concerns into account , such as the proposals we made to the rapporteur concerning the fact that scientific data clearly demonstrates that the Arctic ecosystem is currently going through massive climate-related changes and that this situation requires a precautionary and scientifically robust approach to be taken to any future development in the Arctic .
That is why we called for further scientific studies , within the framework of a multilateral agreement to be completed , to inform international understanding and decision making for the Arctic ecosystem before any further major development goes ahead .
We thank the other groups for accepting that .
This is an example of how to put things in a congenial form for our wide range of different constituencies .
There are some sceptics in this room who have stated that the Arctic region does not deserve our attention , but it does , particularly with Iceland likely to become the 28th member of the EU .
The Arctic is ' cool ' .
This is not because of climate change and the consequent warming up of the normally cold High North .
The Arctic is also ' cool ' because of the lucrative possibilities emerging on the horizon , even though they bring with them very complex and difficult problems .
That is why I think politicians who tackle these problems in a responsible and politically subtle manner are ' cool ' politicians , as are those of us who will vote for Mr Gahler 's report today .
Mr President , the Arctic is definitely changing .
The most obvious results of these changes are the possibility of establishing new transportation and trade routes , and the possibility , which is already clearly in view , of exploiting natural resources and extracting oil and gas .
World reactions to these changes are chaotic .
On the one hand , we have the very constructive Norwegian-Russian delimitation agreement on the Barents Sea , while on the other , we also have the Russians attempting to pursue a policy of faits accomplis .
I think there is a huge role to be played here by the European Union and the international community .
We give encouragement for this in the report , and it has been expressed well there .
The second matter to which we have drawn attention is the necessity of achieving a guarantee of equal , non-discriminatory access to transportation routes .
Neither regulatory nor financial considerations should be an obstacle in this equal access to routes .
This has all been expressed well in the report .
Therefore , we will be pleased to endorse the report in the vote .
Mr President , many thanks to Mr Gahler for his report .
It is clear , also from this report , that there is enormous interest in the natural resources of the Arctic region .
As a result of climate change , oil and gas and other resources can be extracted increasingly easily .
The issue of making better use of shipping routes has already been discussed .
The logical consequence of this is that pollution will increase in the region .
Industrial development - in particular , through the extraction of oil and gas , the expansion of commercial fishing and increased shipping traffic - will all necessarily lead to the disturbance , or perhaps even destruction , of this highly sensitive ecosystem , with devastating consequences .
Unfortunately , this report deals in generalities and does not contain any effective strategies for combating these dangers .
A point that is not mentioned is the fact that the EU is not alone in recognising the increased geostrategic significance of the Arctic .
The bordering states of Russia and NATO members USA , Canada , Denmark and Norway have already begun militarising the Arctic region and intend to protect their interests there .
Climate change has led to this situation in the Arctic .
We need to prevent the catastrophic progress of this change , something that can only be achieved through a rapid changeover to renewable energy sources .
However , this strategy takes a diametrically opposite approach .
We , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , demand that the Arctic should not be allowed to become the next geopolitical hotspot .
In common with numerous environmental organisations , we are calling for a moratorium on new oil extraction projects in the Arctic .
A treaty needs to be agreed - similar to the Treaty on the Antarctic - that prohibits the extraction of mineral resources in the region .
Last but not least , we are calling for the immediate demilitarisation of the region and therefore for the establishment of the Arctic as a demilitarised zone .
Because my group and I are unable to support the results of the own-initiative report presented here , the GUE / NGL has submitted an alternative report .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to ask how the representative of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left thinks it possible that we could achieve some sort of moratorium when none of the actors or countries in the region wants one .
How would the indigenous peoples view it if the European Union were to tell them what to do from above ?
Parliament has already committed one sin , the ban on the sale of seal products , which has angered them a good deal .
Why should we annoy them even more ?
Now it is diplomacy and cooperation that are needed .
( DE ) Mr President , I am not in favour of that and , of course , it is not possible to impose this from above .
The question remains , however : Who was consulted ?
Which states are involved ?
Which indigenous peoples are affected ?
Was there any consultation with the people who may benefit from the situation , or with those who may lose their livelihood ?
I think that further dialogue is needed .
The talks held so far are not enough .
We need to try to keep this dialogue as broad as possible , also consulting with wider sections of society , possibly including the indigenous peoples in particular .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to express my deep appreciation for the sterling work done by rapporteur Gahler .
The Arctic is of strategic importance , especially now that the warming of the Arctic region seems to have opened up opportunities for transport and resource extraction there .
It is also an area where the environment is very fragile , especially as a result of pollution from Europe , North America , Russia and China .
The fact that national claims to the Arctic are not always clear is a complicating factor .
Although the EU will not have access to the Arctic coastline before the accession of Iceland , the EU does have Member States in the Arctic region .
I therefore support an EU strategy for the Arctic regions which will position the EU squarely alongside the other major powers , in particular Russia , which is clearly bent on exploiting this region economically .
If the economic activities intensify over the coming years , then it will be important that we ensure a proper balance between the environment and economics and , in doing so , that we involve the local population .
Securing an observer status for the EU in the Arctic Council would be a good step in the right direction .
( DE ) Mr President , as we know , the Arctic 's untold mineral resources have made the area the subject of heated dispute .
It is estimated that 90 billion barrels of oil alone lie untapped under the ice .
Inevitably , there is a certain feeling of unease that British Petroleum of all companies , having caused the oil catastrophe in the Gulf of Mexico last year , is now to be allowed to extract resources in this sensitive natural environment , where conditions are far more extreme than in the Gulf .
After all , the fact is that the Arctic region already provides the final resting place for the world 's mercury emissions .
Nonetheless , in view of the global demand for energy , it is probably unrealistic to expect a decision to be taken to forego the Arctic 's oil resources .
It is to be hoped that the European Union , in its role in the Arctic Council , will ensure that better safety standards are put in place , so that the Arctic 's wildlife does not suffer a similar horrific fate to that in the Gulf of Mexico in the wake of the recent oil disaster .
In addition , from the EU 's perspective , the Arctic is also of essential importance for the development of new world trade routes .
If it were indeed possible to open up a new shipping route between Europe , Asia and North America , this would immediately circumvent piracy in Somalia , while also saving the EU a lot of money because the Atalanta Mission would no longer be necessary .
Of course , this is to assume that the indigenous Inuit populations would not be driven to similarly desperate measures such as piracy as a result of losing their livelihoods .
This is something that needs to be kept in mind both when planning shipping routes and when drilling for oil .

( PL ) Mr President , I too , of course , would like to thank Mr Gahler for his very good draft resolution and his fruitful cooperation .
For me , the most important matter during work on this report was the increased significance given to research into and monitoring of environment change , because the information gained is crucial in making political and economic decisions .
It looks as if economic matters like fisheries , transport and natural resources are the main object of the European Union 's interest .
This is a pity , because there is no doubt that science allows us to assess what influence economic changes have on the environment in the region .
An influence which is significantly greater than in other regions .
What exactly is this influence ?
Only the experts can tell us .
Unfortunately , the openness of research in the Arctic is being increasingly restricted by the states which have access to the Arctic Ocean .
Even in areas covered by international conventions and treaties , in the last two or three years , there has been a significant reduction in freedom of activity and research , often under the pretence of protecting the environment .
Climatic and oceanic processes in the Arctic have a significant effect on climate and environment change , so freedom of research is extremely important for understanding what is going on , not only in the Arctic itself , but more importantly here , where we are .
Furthermore , the work which has already been completed on these issues by scientists from countries outside the Arctic and the money which has been spent entitle us to make our voice heard on matters concerning the northern polar region .

Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Gahler for his very careful and detailed report , and indeed for his willingness to compromise .
However , I fear that we have produced the proverbial Christmas tree - albeit it post-Christmas - of wishes , and of wishes that obscure the main political point .
Our previous debates on Arctic policy in this Chamber provoked , indeed , the Commission communication .
We insisted very clearly then on the protection of the fragile Arctic environment in a coherent way - on protection of this last wilderness , which is now an environmental flashpoint .
There seems to have been a very subtle shift - an undertow - in our thinking , towards security : security of energy supply and security to use resources .
This has been confirmed by the agreement this weekend between Rosneft and BP - BP of Deepwater .
As the Commission and other commentators have persistently pointed out , there are many , many regulatory gaps in the Arctic .
The EU 's environmental footprint there is not light .
The regulation is piecemeal and unfocused .
The field is open to multinational companies .
We could do better .
We previously said we wanted to do better .
We wanted a more coherent approach .
I wonder what has changed , and I think our citizens might ask what has changed .
Mr President , I , too , congratulate Michael Gahler on a well-balanced , excellent report .
Despite the challenging nature of the environment in the Arctic , the rising price of oil has stimulated international interest in drilling in that zone .
We all know that oil was first produced in 1968 from Prudhoe Bay on the Alaskan North Slope , but many areas of the Arctic have not yet been explored .
A 2008 US geological survey estimated that areas north of the Arctic Circle have 90 billion barrels of undiscovered oil - technically recoverable oil - and 44 billion barrels of natural gas liquids .
Now this represents between 13 % and 20 % of all undiscovered oil in the world .
Needless to say , the recovery of so much oil will have a dramatic impact on the Arctic and may cause ecological disasters on a global scale , so I think we have to ask ourselves whether it is wise to embark on such a project at a time of determined efforts to sever our dependency on fossil fuels and to aim ultimately for a CO2-free society .
( DA ) Mr President , for some reason , reading the Commission 's communication on the Arctic makes me think of a cat licking its lips at the prospect of a saucer of cream .
Global warming and the melting of the ice at the North Pole are certainly opening up new opportunities : natural resources , oil , fish , shipping and so on .
We have heard all about this .
However , I think it is important for the EU not to get too excited , as it does not have any coastline along the Arctic Ocean .
As a Dane , it strikes me as rather pathetic that Denmark is being used as one of the justifications for the EU 's Arctic connections .
The fact of the matter is that Denmark 's only connection to the Arctic is via Greenland , which , in a referendum 26 years ago , decided to leave the European Union .
Likewise , the EU should not expect too much in relation to Iceland , either .
The decision on Iceland 's membership must be taken by the Icelandic people alone , without pressure from the EU .
There is absolutely nothing to indicate that there is a majority in favour of EU membership there .
Thus , instead of seeing ourselves as a potential Arctic power , the EU should perhaps recognise its geographic location and instead work to attain good neighbourly relations with the countries that are actually situated in the Arctic .
This includes our friends in the western Nordic countries , Norway , Iceland , Greenland and the Faroe Islands .
It should be the job of the European Parliament , in particular , to ensure this .
( FI ) Mr President , this is an important issue , and because Finland is situated in the north , I am familiar with these matters .
For once , I can agree with my Finnish fellow Members that they in Lapland and at the University of Lapland in Rovaniemi know about these things .
I also agree about the position of the indigenous peoples .
I will vote in favour of this report , although my biggest criticism is targeted at the climate change claims , according to which we should have an agreement based , as it were , on the views of the EU .
Emissions trading in the EU has failed completely .
In 2008 , it was revealed that there had been abuses , VAT swindles and many other scams to the tune of EUR 5 billion .
Furthermore , these have grown steadily in number .
Emissions trading simply does not work ; it is harmful .
To take its place , we need a system of specific emissions , as there is with vehicles , where one can measure who is doing the emitting and what is being emitted , and not engage in an international trade in indulgence where people buy the right to pollute .
This is an important matter .
The Arctic issue is also important , though I am not very sure how it will progress when I consider the recent action taken by the EU .
The things that the EU touches do not necessarily go ahead .
The Danish Member spoke here sensibly about the regions which are there .
They are regions with sovereign rights , which they may exercise to take decisions on their own matters .
( RO ) Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate my colleague , Michael Gahler , for the excellent report he presented .
This report encourages the Council and Commission to outline a specific EU Arctic policy , while highlighting that Iceland 's possible accession to the European Union would turn the Union into one of the Arctic 's coastal entities .
As this Parliament 's rapporteur for Iceland , I would like to stress that this country has Arctic priorities compatible with the European Union .
These are strengthening the Arctic Council 's political and administrative role , followed by ensuring the region 's sustainable development and , lastly , I would like to remind you about supporting the indigenous populations ' rights .
The fact as well that both Iceland and the European Union are currently in the process of devising an Arctic strategy may provide an opportunity to coordinate both policies , among other reasons , with regard to the European Union 's application for permanent observer status in the Arctic Council .
I wish to conclude by saying that the European Union can obviously contribute to effective multilateral governance in the High North .
I would also like to tell Mr Søndergaard that I listened very closely to what he said about the majority in Iceland .
I believe that we are facing a lengthy process which could go through numerous changes .
In my view , we are in the position to encourage a responsible pre-accession process and a mainly balanced debate in this country about the European Union .

( LT ) Mr President , I would like to offer my compliments to my fellow Member , Mr Gahler , who , despite coming from southern Germany , has demonstrated a remarkable knowledge and love of the Arctic and the High North .
Some colleagues have said that countries should deal with problems that arise individually and that there is no need for so much coordination here .
I categorically reject this opinion .
It is precisely the European Union , which has the greatest experience of how to work together and really go into unchartered territory , which should play a very important role in this region .
It is , after all , clear - either confrontation , an uncertain scramble and conflicts , or peaceful cooperation and a region that could be an example to other countries around the world .
One other dimension - profit , or economic benefits , or the environment and conservation .
I believe that the European Union , which always led the way in the fight against climate change , must continue to place more emphasis on the second dimension when harmonising both approaches .
( GA ) Mr President , the Arctic area is changing significantly as a result of climate change , with ice and snow melting .
New shipping routes are opening up , fishing grounds are available and there are more and better opportunities for viable oil and gas exploration .
The EU is playing an active role in Arctic issues .
For example , the EU is a major contributor to research and development funding via the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development .
The European Parliament is actively involved in ongoing dialogue with elected representatives from the Arctic through the Standing Committee of Parliamentarians of the Arctic region , and as chairman of the SINEEA delegation , I represent the European Parliament on this important body .
In September , Parliament hosted the biannual meeting of the standing committee for the first time .
The conference was a great success , which enabled the European Parliament to deepen and to strengthen its relationship with the Arctic nations .

( HU ) Mr President , I do not speak as a Member living at the Arctic Circle either ; I only wish to warn everyone that the North Pole does not only hold economic heritage and energy heritage , but it is also one of the greatest examples of our natural heritage .
It is therefore very important that the companies that are going to conduct explorations and drillings in that area do not go there with the profit-mongering mindset of the gold diggers of old , but instead with the sense of European responsibility that took shape by the 20th and early 21st century .
Let us not forget that work there will have to be performed under extremely harsh weather conditions and through the use of new technologies .
It is of the utmost importance that we do not make concessions in this , and that we apply rules , standards and requirements to these companies , which enable the technical management of this issue at the most up-to-date technological standard , while financial funds should be available to prevent any kind of natural disaster , such as the one we have seen in the case of Deep Horizon .
It is extremely important to stick to the proper order : Planet , people and product ...
planet , people and product . The product in this case is , of course , the gas and oil reserve .
Thank you very much for your attention and congratulations to the rapporteur .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Gahler , and all the shadow rapporteurs .
It is quite true to say that Europe needs to adapt continuously to new realities and to deal with changes in the balance of political power .
In relation to Arctic policy , this means : we must understand that the Arctic states wish to develop the region themselves , but that they are open to cooperation .
They are not interested in new treaties , but want to see existing regulatory treaties being developed further .
Climate change and new shipping routes do not solely entail risks , but can also offer opportunities .
In relation to the Arctic , this means the EU has an opportunity for greater cooperation and development .
After all , no one can combat the effects of climate change on their own , just as no one can develop the potential of the Arctic region on their own .
In addition , the European Union has a sustained interest in the safe development ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Mr President , the riches of the Arctic are not just its huge energy resources and new shipping lanes , but also its indigenous peoples .
It is not an Arctic museum , but home to three and a half million people .
That is why they need to be listened to .
No one has the right to rape and plunder that region .
In the future , we will obviously see a lot of mines , industry and ships there , and with them a growing threat of environmental disasters .
We need to prepare for these responsibly .
It is a challenging task there to salvage nature , which is especially vulnerable in the region .
New research at the University of Lapland shows that , surprisingly , the EU already has a lot of power in the Arctic region .
That is why it should be more active and responsible .
It should invest in the region financially and tangibly .
This will also depend on Iceland 's possible future membership .
I , too , think that the University of Lapland in Rovaniemi is the best place for an Arctic Information Centre .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for producing an excellent , balanced report .
The global interest in northern regions has increased a good deal in the past few years , reaching new levels , as has been said .
Consequently , it is vitally important that the European Union also takes an active role in this and , furthermore , actively endeavours to acquire a role as a permanent observer in the Arctic Council .
As has already been mentioned , these regions have enormous potential , as regards their natural resources , for example .
We need a bold vision and cooperation , but also financial investment , so that the people who live in the region can sustainably exploit what it may have to offer .
Like many of my fellow Members , I am also very pleased that the report makes special mention of an Arctic Information Centre , the skills and expertise of the University of Lapland and the excellent facilities that exist there .
( LV ) Mr President , I have no doubt that the subject we are discussing today is very significant , and as I see it , this century will witness a struggle - between nations , between governments - to gain benefits from the Arctic .
In this respect , then , I approve of our discussing such a question today .
On what do I base such a conclusion ?
We observe that China is even now building an icebreaker .
We observe that a whole string of nations that do not border on northern seas want to become members of the Arctic Council , and I am pleased that the European Union is and will become such .
There are two aspects , however .
The first , to my mind , is that I would recommend that the Commission takes care , in the days to come , that the region does not become militarised , for already ...
( DA ) Mr President , this report contains fine words on climate concerns and environmental considerations , but in reality , it is about the EU 's hunt for resources in the Arctic .
It talks about the expected quantities of oil , gas , minerals , forests and fish that the EU will be able to exploit in the near future .
It states that the EU has large areas of land in Sweden and Finland , but does not mention that these are Swedish and Finnish areas .
It also claims that the Union has exclusive competences with regard to the conservation of marine biological resources .
I am not sure that the Greenlandic , Russian and Canadian Inuits would agree with that .
Just because the Arctic is sparsely populated does not mean that anyone can go there and help themselves .
The area cannot support mass tourism , overfishing and the plundering of raw materials on a massive scale .
The Arctic is an extremely sensitive area with a tradition of cooperation , and the majority of the Arctic countries are simply not members of the EU .
In fact , Greenland actively withdrew from the EU , as Mr Søndergaard just mentioned .

( SV ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Gahler for an excellent initiative and an excellent report .
I think it is well-balanced and takes into consideration those who want to exploit natural resources as well as those who are seriously concerned about the impact on the climate .
I believe that the best form of protection for the Arctic would be a global climate agreement , but in the meantime , we must draw up more short-term solutions in order to limit the warming of the Arctic .
I would like to see the European Parliament acknowledge that emissions of carbon black are contributing , to a large extent , to the warming of the Arctic .
I would therefore like to call on the Commission to make the necessary amendments to the directive on national emission ceilings for certain pollutants to also include carbon black emissions .

( EL ) Madam President , I agree with numerous fellow Members , especially Mrs Herczog and Mr Repo , who referred to the environmental importance of this area and the importance of protecting the rights of nationals .
This is a virgin area a long way away .
However , there are people living there , people with a culture .
The environment in this area is extremely important .
It is a crucial area in terms of combating and adapting to climate change .
I am truly saddened when I see the European Union participating in this race to see who will be the first to exploit the oil reserves in this area , now that the ice is melting .
The fact that others are doing so does not justify our doing the same .
Our voice must always express our values and we must always take action to protect these resources and achieve a low carbon economy .
( CS ) Madam President , there are three main issues arising in relation to the Arctic .
The first is the issue of energy , and there has been talk here of oil and gas , and in the future , there will be methane as well , since there are about 300 years worth of reserves of usable methane in the permafrost .
EU bodies have , in the meantime , not looked into this issue in any way .
The second issue is transport .
The opening up of the northern route shortens the journey to the Far East .
From Hamburg to Seoul will take 21 days .
If this possibility is taken into account , it will greatly reduce costs , and contribute to closer contacts between the two regions .
The third issue is the environment , because the exploitation of energy resources and greater transport volumes will bring a series of environmental risks to this region .
In my opinion , it would be good to draw up a plan ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( LT ) Madam President , I would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Gahler , on initiating a very important and necessary European Parliament report on the High North and on responding to the European Commission 's recommendation for the formulation of an EU Arctic policy with very specific and all-embracing proposals : from the inclusion of local inhabitants in the dialogue and stability and security in the region to future projects , environmental dimensions and climate change .
A fifth of the world 's undiscovered resources lie in precisely this region .
Reckless competition for access to the Arctic 's natural resources is most undesirable , but real .
It is therefore important to broaden the dialogue so that the Arctic region does not become the arena of a competitive struggle among countries and oil companies , the victims of which would , above all , be local inhabitants and the particularly sensitive Arctic ecosystem .
The report states that in the Arctic region , where the effects of climate change are especially visible , drilling projects will increase over time .
I therefore believe that it is right and particularly important to note that an environmental impact assessment ...
Madam President , I think it is good that the European Union is developing policies and strategies for broad regions such as the Baltic , the Danube and my own region , the Atlantic , and today discussing the High North .
But in dealing with the High North , it is important that we are seen to be diplomatic , not didactic ; cooperative , not coercive ; and explorative , not exploitive .
Because of the importance of the indigenous people , they must be given primacy of consideration , and there are companies and countries out there which are casting their greedy eyes on the North now because of its resources in terms of fossil fuels , fish and - probably - maritime transport possibilities .
The European Union , because of its treaties and because of its raison d 'être , is not in a position to strike the balance .
One other point I would make is this : I am a member of the Delegation for relations with Canada , and we could also establish a collegial approach with Canada and like-minded countries to ensure fair play for the High North , and particularly the indigenous people .
( DE ) Madam President , the plundering of commodities , strategic interests , climate change and , not least , increasing tourism are driving this sensitive ecosystem to the brink of destruction .
However , the ecosystem of the High North is relatively self-sustaining and therefore extremely sensitive .
For this reason , it is important to strike a balance between exploitation , on the one hand , and maximum protection for this sensitive system , on the other .
However , this cannot be achieved without imposing restrictions on the extraction of commodities and the methods used in this extraction , as well as stricter rules for tourism and commercial shipping .
News that major mineral oil company BP and the Russian state-run enterprise Rosneft have drawn up joint plans for extracting oil and gas would not seem to point in the direction of the prudent extraction of commodities - quite the opposite in fact !
It is therefore clear that the protection of the Arctic is an issue that goes beyond individual national strategic and economic interests and must be a central concern for the EU .

( FI ) Madam President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Gahler , and the shadow rapporteurs , for an excellent , diverse report , which raises various issues in a balanced way .
These include the Arctic region 's potential , its vast natural resources , the raw materials and energy resources , and the new traffic lanes and tourism , but also , at the same time , the vulnerability of the delicate Arctic environment , and the rights of its indigenous peoples .
In the north , we need to behave very responsibly indeed , and to have a good Arctic strategy .
I also agree with my fellow Finnish Members who have expressed their satisfaction with the report , in that it has positively taken account of the initiative of the University of Lapland to establish an EU Arctic Information Centre on its premises .
I look forward to the Commission 's report on Arctic policy , as promised by Mr Füle .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this has indeed been an interesting debate showing how many important subjects are covered by Arctic cooperation , and how varied are the sensitivities in our society when discussing the Arctic 's future .
Let me address five specific issues raised in this morning 's discussion .
Firstly , the Arctic Information Centre .
Both the Commission communication of 2008 and the Council conclusions of 2009 ask the Commission to explore the possibility of establishing a new Arctic Information Centre .
We are thoroughly examining the various possibilities in the European Union , including the centre in Rovaniemi , Finland ( Lapland ) and , above all , the role of this possible centre .
Secondly , the European Union is the only Arctic stakeholder to have recognised upfront that , as an industrialised entity , it is responsible , along with other industrialised areas , for the changes happening in the Arctic .
The Commission communication gives priority to environmental protection , and the prominence of this point was maintained in the Council conclusions of 2009 .
Thirdly , we are proud of our Sami EU citizens , and we are proud of the different provisions in the EU treaties and in the EU regional policy addressing the Sami people .
Our cross-border cooperation and European instrument for democracy and human rights programmes are supporting the Sami people of north-west Russia and other indigenous peoples of the Barents region .
Fourthly , the European Union and Member States are a leading force for Arctic research in the world , and we are proud of it .
This area has been mentioned in the framework programme .
Altogether , through the fifth , sixth and seventh framework programmes , the European Union is investing EUR 200 million in this field .
However , trying to be the prominent and unilateral leader in overall Arctic politics and policies , while not being an Arctic coastal entity , will not be a wise policy to pursue .
Fifthly , the Commission adopted in 2010 a communication on offshore drilling , which should guide our actions across the world , including the Arctic region .
It promotes a cautious approach that we will also apply in the Arctic .
This is totally in line with the EU principles of protecting the Arctic and firmly asking for the highest environmental standards .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Parliament 's High North report gives a comprehensive overview of the European Union 's activities , responsibilities and interests in the Arctic region .
It also consolidates the EU 's balanced approach to the Arctic , combining its protection and its sustainable development .
We are convinced that this is within our reach and that the European Union will become an unavoidable and positive reference for Arctic circumpolar cooperation .
Madam President , I would also like to thank all the speakers .
Commissioner , when I referred to a policy in relation to our neighbours in the High North , I did not wish to imply that you were engaging in a dispute over authority with Baroness Ashton .
I just wanted to clarify that .
Almost all the speeches we have heard have made one thing clear : the challenge confronting us is to demonstrate through our policy that different interests and activities are reconcilable or must be made reconcilable .

I believe that this can be seen in microcosm in Norway , for example : they catch fish , they drill for oil and gas , they practise the highest environmental standards on land and sea and they develop their northernmost regions for the people who live there .
If we can apply this principle to the region as a whole through cooperation with local communities , then we will become a role model for other sensitive regions .
What has changed in the political reality is the fact that we do not believe that we can compel people to comply with our wishes , but that we must accept the challenge of achieving all our goals at the same time : we need a high standard in environmental protection , a clamp-down on climate change , a sustainable fisheries policy , secure shipping route development and acceptable development for local communities .
If we try to work together to set these targets and then to achieve them , then we really will achieve something important in cooperation with our partners for the benefit of the region and ourselves .
Once again , I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs in particular .
I look forward to further debate on the basis of this report .
The vote should not mark the end of this issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place later .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
An EU Strategy for the Black Sea ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Ungureanu , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on an EU strategy for the Black Sea .
rapporteur . - Madam President , exactly three years ago , the European Parliament endorsed the Black Sea Synergy .
This was the first step towards a coherent policy in one of the most sensitive areas in Europe , and it was a step in the right direction because the Black Sea is now widely analysed - and feared - as a converging space of political , strategic and security hopes , strengths and ambitions .
Today , our policy in the area can be further developed .
This House can play a crucial role in upgrading EU policies to a fully-fledged EU strategy .
This is actually the main idea in the report I initiated with the support of my colleagues from the Foreign Affairs Committee and Parliament as a whole .
But why a new report on the Black Sea and why an EU strategy for the Black Sea ?
Some people would say that the Black Sea is a small sea .
Indeed it is , but if we exchange this map for a strategy map , the Black Sea becomes huge .
There is also another factor : the Black Sea is getting blacker and blacker .
Since the accession of Bulgaria and Romania , the Black Sea is now partially an internal EU sea .
However , developments in the region are often unpredictable : tensions accumulate and misunderstandings abound .
A summary analysis of the Black Sea region leads to the conclusion that the negative challenges in this area persist or are , indeed , gaining in intensity .
The Georgia-Russia war of 2008 , the unsolved and so-called ' frozen ' conflicts , and the worrying deterioration of democratic rule in Ukraine and Russia are all very serious developments and vivid examples of the security risks in the area .
If we examine the current results of EU involvement in the region , they seem at least mixed .
The EU policy approach towards the Black Sea lacks mechanisms for monitoring , evaluation and follow-up .
The Black Sea region is not visible enough in debates in Brussels , and EU funding for the region is fragmented and complicated .
While building upon the merits of the Black Sea Synergy which we adopted three years ago , a new EU strategy for the Black Sea should put in place a stronger policy and concrete tools .
Let me mention just two of the recommendations in the report .
The first concerns adequate resources : if the EU wants to play a key role in the Black Sea region , it needs to devote adequate resources , both financial and human .
The creation of a separate budget line in the EU budget is vital .
The second recommendation is for the elaboration of an EU action plan with clear objectives and tasks , including regular ministerial-level meetings of the relevant countries .
The EU strategy for the Black Sea should not underestimate , or overestimate , any state in the area .
The principles of inclusiveness and regional ownership should be reflected in an important role for Turkey and Russia , but also for all the regional partners , in the success of regional cooperation .
To conclude , I should like to thank all my colleagues for their very positive contributions to the final version of this report .
I think we all agree that this House expects the Commission and the Council to turn this report into reality .
The strategic and beneficial involvement of the EU in the Black Sea region should become a fact .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very glad that the Black Sea region is high on the agenda of the European Parliament .
This region is important for the European Union and we need to focus on it to reflect its extreme sensitivity for us .
I want to thank and congratulate the rapporteur for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Mr Traian Ungureanu , on an excellent and very substantive report .
The report and its recommendations are interesting and innovative on the many issues .
Since the latest enlargement , the Black Sea is also an EU sea .
We have responsibilities towards it , just as we do to all other basin regions that border us .
We have to tackle this new responsibility resolutely .
As part of the European Neighbourhood Policy , we already have an initiative targeting this region : the Black Sea Synergy .
However , we must admit that its implementation has proved much more difficult than we had thought .
Not everything we want to do is being welcomed with enthusiasm by everybody in the region .
Precisely for these reasons , Parliament has chosen an approach based on regional ownership and fostering dialogue .
I believe that this is now the right approach for us to pursue , but these commitments can only be credible if and when they bring concrete improvements to the peoples in the region .
Thus , the report on developing a new European Union strategy for the Black Sea represents our commitment to the region and to our Member States who belong to this area by giving them our full support in facing the challenges linked to their specific geographic situation .
We understand that a strategy for the Black Sea region should not be interpreted as a replacement for existing efforts , particularly the Black Sea Synergy .
It should rather be a comprehensive framework where guidance can be found for all European Union activities in the region .
The Black Sea strategy can provide an ideal occasion to review our interests in the region , including strategic , political and economic interests , and to discuss how best they can be achieved .
Parliament has identified the appropriate fields in which the strategy should be developed , like governance , security and energy , transport , environment , trade , local economic development and social and human development .
Developing this strategy can also provide the opportunity to add a maritime dimension to ongoing activities in the region .
The Commission is currently developing a comprehensive package that will address maritime policy initiatives , management of natural resources and the fight against illegal fishing activities .
We can draw on our know-how from other strategies , such as the EU strategy for the Baltic Sea region and the EU Danube strategy .
Indeed , the Danube strategy will require obvious interactions with the Black Sea .
However , we are aware that each European basin region is different .
Accordingly , we need to ensure that all future EU strategies should be adapted to their own sectoral characteristics , economic and social development , environment and energy , infrastructure and natural resources .
The report on developing an EU strategy for the Black Sea region offers an overview of the future challenges for the region , but it will also be relevant for establishing solid channels with the state partners in the region to ensure its smooth and effective implementation .
We need to use this opportunity to consult extensively with all stakeholders , starting with our partners in the regions and with the involvement of Parliament .
Again , this report is welcome and we are keen to draw on its recommendations .
The External Action Service and the relevant Commission services will be committing their efforts to prepare a Black Sea strategy for which we will seek your and the Council 's support .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Ungureanu and , as rapporteur for the Committee on International Trade , I am pleased that some of our proposals have been included in the main text of the report .
I am pleased that , as has already been mentioned , after the accession of Bulgaria and Romania in 2007 , the Black Sea , to put it figuratively , became a ' European ' sea and requires an overall European strategy involving quite a lot of administrative and financial resources , as well as good coordination and accountability .
A key task is to incorporate a project approach into the new strategy .
Special attention has to be paid to areas of common interest , such as the environment , energy , transport and infrastructure , which are of decisive importance to the region 's sustainable development .
Intensive cooperation at parliamentary level is also necessary , for example , with organisations such as the Parliamentary Assembly of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation and the WTO , and with the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank .
Finally , I also believe that we should consider other regional initiatives , but not allow the strategy to drown in them .
Madam President , the Committee on Industry , Research and Industry supports full market and regulatory integration on the basis of EU energy legislation and encourages the participation of countries in the wider Black Sea region in the Energy Community Treaty , as well as EU , EIB and EBRD assistance for the modernisation of the energy infrastructure in this region .
We stress the European added value and importance of the Southern Gas Corridor as a means of enhancing the European Union 's supply security .
Projects such as the Nabucco pipeline , a priority project for the European Union , along with the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline , the Pan-European Oil Pipeline , the Turkey-Greece-Italy Interconnector , or the Azerbaijan-Georgia-Romania Interconnector , emphasise both the importance of the EU 's commitments in the Black Sea region and the further need to step up cooperation between the countries in the region .
We stress the importance of establishing a regional research and education network in the wider Black Sea region and its link to GEANT , and call on the Commission to continue to support research projects in the region .
I am ending , Madam President , with a call to the Commission to devise a European Union strategy for the region , along with an action plan .
We stress the need to establish a link between this and the European Union 's Danube strategy .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - Madam President , Commissioner , the importance of the Black Sea region for the EU from the transport , energy , stability , security and environmental point of view is evident .
It is for this reason that the EU strategy for this region will certainly have a very positive impact on the area and on the EU as a whole .
The Committee on Regional Development believes this strategy can bring growth and sustainable development for the region .
But also it is of the opinion that for full effectiveness , it is necessary to involve all the states of the region , no matter whether they are Member States or not .
This strategy needs actions to be coordinated - but how could this coordination exist without the proper involvement of all countries ?
Coordination is certainly needed with the Danube strategy , which is soon supposed to become a major priority of the Hungarian Presidency .
The use of an integrated approach and cross-border cooperation between the regions should be promoted in all fields of the strategy but , in particular , those of transport , energy and the environment .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the excellent work he has done , bringing many ideas together in a comprehensive form , something that will help us in our future efforts .
We must understand that this cooperation in the Black Sea region should not be confused with the Eastern Partnership or with our strategic relations with Turkey and Russia .
These are different matters and this cooperation does not replace them .
On the other hand , I find hugely exciting that it is possible to bring these divergent groups together on certain issues in order to produce a coherent policy that is in our own interests , as well as helping the relevant countries too .
Such cooperation may possibly help to bring together conflicting political and economic interests , so that future disputes will be less dramatic and dangerous and so that , for example , our work in the Eastern Partnership is not construed as being directed against any particular individual , but rather that everything is understood to be complementary .
However , when it comes to a European perspective , this cooperative stance should not preclude us from expecting that the Eastern Partnership with these countries will produce different results from development strategies with Russia , for example .
We must be permitted to make such distinctions and the Commissioner is no doubt well aware that this should be the case .
However , for this reason , Black Sea cooperation is in the interest of the European Union , in the interest of Russia , in the interest of Turkey and in the interest of the remaining countries in this region - most of whom are members of the Eastern Partnership .
I could imagine that this will contribute significantly to the economic and political stability of Europe and hope that we can work closely with the Commissioner in order to drive this forward .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , the Black Sea is a gate to and from Europe , and therefore it should be addressed as such .
It is not a far distant place of little relevance which occasionally comes to our attention .
The truth is that the area has already put - and will continue to put - items on our agenda , be it through the interruption of gas transit as in 2006 and 2008 , or the Georgian war in 2008 .
However , in spite of the evidence and its recognised importance , the Black Sea area still does not enjoy the attention it deserves from the EU - an EU which was , in a way , compelled to address these problems once Bulgaria and Romania had become members in 2007 .
The Black Sea Synergy , elaborated not long after the admission of those two countries , appears to have been , in retrospect , a hastily put together document designed to cover a ' blank spot ' or ' black hole ' - depending on your preference - which the EU had to deal with almost overnight .
The fact that nothing of importance has happened since the first review of the initiative in 2008 - and we are not very far advanced in its implementation as mentioned in the report - is indicative of that .
To my mind , there are two main reasons for this .
First , there is an apparent disinterest and unwillingness on the part of EU Members to address the area decisively .
Moreover , now that money is short , there is even less willingness to do so than before .
Secondly , the initial assumption on which the synergy was based , namely , that the area should become a coherent and cooperative region in order to qualify for EU attention and material support , has ignored the simple truth that just 20 years ago , the area looked completely different .
To expect an area so complex and different to become coherent and get an individual identity in such a short time is either unrealistic or - I hate to say - ill-intended .
Perhaps , in the context of a revisiting of the Eastern Partnership , things would improve .

Madam President , the report which my fellow Member , Mr Ungureanu , has prepared in such a committed way and in a manner that paves the way for cooperation , for which I thank him , brings our attention back to a region characterised by diversity .
The diversity of political systems , cultural traditions , religions , statuses and ambitions in terms of moving closer to the European Union , the level of economic development , the availability of natural resources and , of course , the new situation which has arisen because , today , three Member States of the European Union form part of the region that we are discussing .
For us , the Black Sea region is particularly interesting because of its geostrategic position , which brings with it either added value or serious risks to our security interests .
In this context , I emphasise , in particular , energy security and ensuring a sustainable energy supply for the European Union , infrastructure and opportunities for us to have an influence in the resolution of conflicts and unresolved issues in the region , as well as developing partnerships with Russia and Turkey .
All of this can be achieved with a deeper engagement of the countries in the region and with the participation of all Member States of the European Union and other organisations and networks present in the region , including networks of civil society organisations ; it is precisely they that require our special attention and recognition .
We do not need new institutions for any of this ; what we need to do is ensure regular funding and greater political engagement .
Commissioner , I believe that you will be able to put this report to good use and I look forward to working with you .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if the Black Sea region is to develop into an area of stability , security , democracy and prosperity and if these opportunities and challenges are to be fulfilled , we need an all-embracing strategy .
This resolution pursues that objective and is therefore supported by my group .
This is also because a number of our proposals have been included , for example , dealing with the unresolved conflicts in the region , improving cooperation in civil society , support for people-to-people projects and the promotion of small projects in the context of cross-border cooperation .
We also want to see a sustainable energy policy , greater energy efficiency and the establishment of academic and student networks .
However , what I would criticise is the lack of a coherent position in relation to the question of the energy infrastructure in the region - I would mention Nabucco and South Stream in this context .
I fail to understand why our call for stricter monitoring of oil rigs in the Black Sea has been rejected .
This is absolutely essential following the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico .
It is for this reason that we are presenting this amendment once again today .
Madam President , Commissioner , I think the document which has been drafted deserves to be endorsed , so on behalf of my group , I endorse it .
I would like to emphasise that the Black Sea Synergy needs rethinking , today .
Noble intentions have not always translated into effective use of the Synergy , and it is very good that the rapporteur stresses this .
Therefore , I think the most important task today for Mr Füle is to try to sort out our initiatives in this part of Europe and show that our priority is Neighbourhood Policy , and that other issues should be given second place in this context .
I think this way of thinking guarantees that the Black Sea Synergy will be effective in the future , especially in the field of energy .
The Synergy could also be a good instrument , for example , if we are talking about supporting Georgia in the democratic and economic transformations it has been going through in recent years .
However , the first and essential step , today , is to organise initiatives in this part of Europe , so that we can not only be proud of them , but that they will really be effective in achieving some specific objectives .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , in discussing the Black Sea area , one word leaps to mind , and that is ' caution ' .
All must tread carefully here .
The Black Sea area is Russia 's backyard .
It has its fleet anchored in the Crimea at Sebastopol , close to the bloody battlefields of the Crimean War .
We have seen the unfortunate conflict in Georgia , where there was fault on both sides .
Had Georgia been in NATO , the consequences could have been disastrous .
Whilst I support Georgian independence , it is unwise to goad the Russian bear in its own lair .
Then there is Turkey which the EU is playing with by offering membership despite the reality that members such as France will veto an application .
Turkey has just 4 % of its landmass within Europe .
It should not be in the EU .
There are real dangers in leading Turkey on .
Disappointment could drive Turkey into the hands of Islamic extremists .
Finally , underlying all of this is the fact that the Black Sea is the hub for vital Caspian oil and gas .
Tread carefully indeed .
( BG ) Madam President , I would like to join the majority of the opinions expressed in this House and congratulate the rapporteur on what he has achieved with his report .
Pontus Euxinus , as the Black Sea was called in antiquity , has always been of a major geostrategic and economic significance for Europe .
It still has this significance in our times .
That is why it is very important for this strategy to be translated into real action , because we are having a debate again , and I remember us having a similar debate quite recently .
That is why I want to basically draw a line under what has been said by the members of the socialist group , and to lend my particular support for the point that envisages a separate budgetary item to implement the strategy .
So I call upon the Commission to act .
It is only with adequate funding that we will be able to translate the words spoken in this House today into action that has an impact on European citizens .

Madam President , I should like to start by congratulating Mr Ungureanu on his initiative in carrying out the report on the Black Sea .
I also welcome the endorsement of several of the previous speakers , my distinguished colleagues , who have committed themselves to promoting a new European vision for the Black Sea region .
The Black Sea has indeed become a partially internal sea of the European Union .
Its geostrategic importance can hardly be overstated , considering the regional stability , the democratisation processes , and the related energy security , economic and commercial issues .
I strongly believe that we , the EU , should benefit from the potential of the Black Sea region and not others .
To achieve this goal , the European Union has to rely more on its Member States belonging to the region , has to give up any anchorage in the past and has to show more dynamism , leadership and vision .
Without touching on the issues related to the enlargement process , I would like to address a message to all the Black Sea sceptics .
Any slowdown in the EU integration process of the region will have a throwback effect on the democratic evolution of the area .
The risk is medium and long-term instability , whose implications would be hard to evaluate , and even harder to manage , for the European Union .
In conclusion , the EU needs its internal Black Sea and we need an integrated strategy for this region .
The Black Sea strategy should be drafted by the Commission , relying on the recommendations reached by our rapporteur .
Today , this House should offer its wholehearted support for the strategy .
( EL ) Madam President , we are debating a very important report today on a particular area close to the European Union : the Black Sea .
The area combines EU Member States and countries which are important to regional cooperation .
We therefore have a common need to safeguard the existence of an area of peace , democracy , security and stability around the Black Sea .
We have a stable framework for cooperation through the Black Sea Synergy , which was put in motion some time ago , although not with tangible results .
Its successful implementation through action by all participating countries will further strengthen our relations on the basis of common values .
It needs to complement the established European Neighbourhood Policy and the Eastern Partnership .
Stability and security around the Black Sea have a direct impact on Europe .
Consequently , the European Union shares responsibility for supporting the peaceful resolution of conflict and building confidence .
This area is important to the Union , especially by reason of its energy and transport links .
Strengthening democracy and a strong rule of law system will facilitate trade , investments and the free movement of people .
I absolutely endorse the view that a special line should be set up in the budget for the Black Sea Synergy .
This will provide effective help in modernising the area .
It is up to us to use our policies to bring these countries even closer to Europe , for the mutual benefit of all .
Madam President , since 2007 , we have acknowledged the importance of the Black Sea region , yet the impact of our approach has been modest to say the least : no concrete projects , no concrete results .
We need a realistic and financially sound action plan with clear objectives , priority actions and benchmarks , and a better division of tasks and coordination with the Eastern Partnership and the Danube strategy .
We need to launch the energy and transport partnership alongside the environment partnership .
Only through such a project-based approach , focused on small-scale specific projects , can we overcome the issue of the very diverse and complex interests in the region .
We need to get past our fragmented approach in terms of finance as well .
So far , we have had various financial instruments and little visibility .
That is why we should make the Black Sea joint operational programme our central instrument for implementing the Black Sea strategy , using it as seed money to attract institutions ready to invest in the region and , hence , promote cooperation .
( CS ) Madam President , the slow tempo of project implementation , the non-existence of action plans and assessment reports , the absence of high-level meetings , the risk of duplicity with the Eastern Partnership and many other problems indicate that the decision for Member States to take a leading role in implementing the Black Sea strategy was ill-advised .
It appears that the European Commission should play a more significant role as the secretariat and facilitator of this strategy for the Black Sea .
I also firmly believe that this strategy , just like the other macro-region strategies , should remain neutral in budgetary , institutional and legislative terms ; in other words , that it should not involve the expenditure of further additional resources , the establishment of new institutions or the drafting of new legislation .
There is no need for new operational programmes and specific budgetary items , but there is a need to focus on implementing specific projects , in which the states affected will have a real interest .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is merely a formality nowadays to emphasise that the Black Sea is an area of strategic importance to the European Union .
How could it be otherwise , now that , following the accession of Bulgaria and Romania , it is practically an internal sea within the European Union ?
Energy , security , stability and , of course , democracy are sectors of prime importance to us in this area .
Since 2007 , when we started our policy in this area , which is crucial on several counts , we have made some progress and achieved some successes .
However , unfortunately , we have also seen delays and fragmented approaches and periods of inertia .
It is unfortunate that no ministerial meeting on this policy has been organised since 2008 .
This situation falls well below our initial ambitions and , given the geostrategic , geopolitical and economic importance of the area , we only have one choice : to strengthen our policy and action on the Black Sea .
I therefore unreservedly support the proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Ungureanu , to upgrade European policy on the Black Sea to an integrated strategy supported by a separate budget line .
Within this framework , I wish , as a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , to highlight the importance of these two sectors , which must be constituent components of a European strategy for the Black Sea .
Finally , there is no need to emphasise that the EU 's Integrated Maritime Policy could also make an essential contribution to uniform , viable development of the Black Sea area .
This needs to be done now .
However , enlargement is another matter and requires a great deal of careful study .
Madam President , with the accession of Bulgaria and Romania , the Black Sea region became an EU neighbouring region .
It is a strategic bridge connecting Europe with the Caspian Sea and Central Asia .
Its geopolitical and economic importance for the EU is constantly increasing in terms of security , stability and energy .
The Union should therefore step up its presence , develop active policies and find lasting solutions to the existing problems in the region .
It is not only the littoral countries that show a big interest in multilateral regional cooperation - which is crucial for solving urgent issues of regional and European importance such as ' frozen ' conflicts , trafficking and other security-related issues .
What is currently needed is a focus on several issues of concern that are of pragmatic interest to all the littoral states .
One such issue is maritime security .
In recent years , there has been an increase in accidents involving loss of human life and environmental damage in the Black Sea .
The EU should reduce the risk of civil accidents by providing assistance to search-and-rescue operations within the framework of the European integrated maritime policy .
We expect to vote soon on the report by our colleague , Iliana Malinova Iotova , which deals for the first time with EU fisheries policy in the Black Sea .
This could also offer a good basis for multilateral cooperation in the region .
EU support is also desirable for ongoing projects like the Black Sea Ring Highway , Pan-European Transport Corridors 8 and 9 , and the transport connections between the Black Sea ports .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for supporting my amendments and for his excellent oral contribution .
( PL ) Madam President , when we are talking about the Black Sea region , it needs to be said that there is no place like it around the European Union where there are such extreme differences , so many intense conflicts - including bloody conflicts - and so many conflicting interests .
So we should not delude ourselves that by formulating any kind of policy , we will be able to resolve matters which other policies cannot resolve .
This is not a radio request show , and we cannot solve energy problems when Russia does not want the pipeline but we do want it .
We cannot resolve regional conflicts , either .
In fact , it is a very limited policy , but for all that , it is worth applying it .
Since we are talking about synergy in relation to Black Sea policy , we should bear in mind that synergy means a certain added value .
I would like to ask , for example , why the European Parliament is not working with organisations which exist in the region , such as the Parliamentary Assembly of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation ( PABSEC ) .
They want to work with us .
The European Parliament thinks it is too big and too important , and is not seeking this cooperation .
I propose we begin this cooperation and act together with others .
( RO ) Madam President , the Black Sea region is strategically important to the European Union .
However , we note the lack of a structured approach to this region .
No action plan has been drawn up for the Black Sea Synergy and funding is provided via several uncoordinated instruments .
This makes it imperative to devise an EU Black Sea strategy , with the same level of priority as the European Union 's other regional strategies and focused on three main areas : economic , social and human development ; energy , transport and environment ; security and good governance .
Certain key projects for the European economy , such as the Nabucco pipeline , which would allow greater energy independence , or the development of the Black Sea ports , require immediate impetus , which can only be achieved on the back of a common strategy .
( EL ) Madam President , the Black Sea is very important to the energy security of Europe .
Commissioner , there is the major issue of the Nabucco pipeline , on which the energy security of Europe depends in large measure .
However , as far as the supplier of this large pipeline is concerned , the information is very unclear .
Yesterday , the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , told us that he had been in Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan and that discussions had gone very well .
What does that mean ?
At some point , we need to set a time limit .
When will we know whether or not the Nabucco pipeline is viable , so that we do not waste energy and can look for alternatives ?
The issue of the Nabucco pipeline , which is one of the core issues in terms of Europe 's energy security , is extremely important and needs to be clarified .
Do we have a supplier or not ?

( RO ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Ungureanu , for the particularly fine job he has done on this report , which is extremely important both from a geopolitical and economic perspective .
The region offers considerable potential for energy production and provision and must have greater attention focused on it , particularly with a view to ensuring the Union 's energy security .
Given that , up until now , the actions taken by the EU have not been clarified sufficiently and the Black Sea Synergy has not achieved its expected potential , I sincerely hope that the European External Action Service will have available the human and material resources required to complete the implementation of the three partnerships : environment , transport and energy .
I think that the European Union should not ignore this region .
On the contrary , it must make its presence felt through consistent , long-term actions which will allow development opportunities to be utilised .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as a Hungarian Member , I add my thoughts to the strategy for the Black Sea because I seem to notice two goals in the report which are identical with the main priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
The first one is the fact that the report makes a commitment to regional development between the European Union and this region .
For us Hungarian Members , this is particularly important with a view to support for the Danube strategy , as any request for support for the Danube strategy can only be credible if we remain open to supporting other strategies as well .
The second one is energy security itself .
Other than its intention to ensure peace and stability in the region , perhaps the most important objective of the strategy for the Black Sea in the field of energy security is to ensure energy security itself , and as was said yesterday , energy security is the other main priority of the Hungarian Presidency , and is thus in all our interests .
( NL ) Madam President , the Black Sea is on our doorstep and , when looked at from the energy perspective , it is also genuinely European .
As shadow rapporteur of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and as coordinator for regional policy , I would like to endorse that view once again .
The Black Sea offers a great opportunity .
What is key in this respect is cooperation .
We have just talked about the investments around Nabucco ; these things can work only with stable relations .
Yesterday , Mr Barroso reported the results achieved in Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan .
In brief , the added value of such strategies is beyond dispute ; that is very clear and , incidentally , Mr Brok has highlighted that .

As far as I am concerned , diversifying our energy flow would be paramount as part of a much broader framework .
I also wish to thank rapporteur Ungureanu for this compelling and necessary report .
( RO ) Madam President , the Black Sea is important to the European Union in terms not only of its strategic location , but also of the economic opportunities available and the conditions for stronger regional development .
The benefits of the strategy for this region derive from its contribution to diversifying economic activities between the countries bordering the sea , increasing education and research cooperation , as well as strengthening cooperation in the region to provide important protection for the natural resources .
I think that the European Union must encourage the countries in the Black Sea region to make sufficient use of the natural environmental resources , ensure the region 's sustainable development , improve the quality of life in this region and establish local and regional partnerships .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , at this point , I shall make just three remarks .
The first I have expressed already at the beginning of our debate , which is appreciation for this timely report on the Black Sea region .
Second , let me welcome the clear evidence , as shown in our debate , of the importance you attribute to this special region , which is shared by the External Action Service and the Commission .
My third remark is that I am looking forward to cooperation with the House on the Black Sea strategy and its subsequent implementation .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I am very lucky I can be short , not only because of the noise , but also because I was lucky enough to be supported on both sides , largely speaking , of this House .

I think that , as Mr Brok stressed in his brilliant remarks , the report which we are preparing to vote on today is a very good example of cross-party cooperation in this House ; I have to give special thanks to Mr Paşcu , who proved to be a very active and honest supporter of this report .

I do not want to bring in other names , as this would be unjust because everybody had something important to say regarding this report : regarding the uniqueness of the Black Sea space , regarding its fragility as well and regarding the need to exercise caution when we formulate policy in the Black Sea area .
Of course , it is vital to remark on the necessity of the Nabucco project and its pan-European importance .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Füle for his remarks , especially for mentioning the maritime dimension , which the Commission is shaping right now and , of course , for making the necessary link between the Black Sea strategy and the Danube strategy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few moments .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would first of all like to congratulate my colleague , Traian Ungureanu , for drafting this report , which is especially important to Romania .
My country is the most active EU Member State in promoting the Black Sea 's strategic importance and the need for the Union to increase its role in this region .
The region 's importance has been outlined in several instruments supporting the EU 's eastern neighbours .
However , the Black Sea Synergy has produced limited results .
I think that the EU 's priorities must be aimed at consolidating a stable , democratic region .
Unresolved conflicts have become the sore point in the Black Sea region .
They can reignite at any time , posing a threat to regional security .
The Black Sea is also of particular importance to EU energy security .
The European Commission must continue to focus , in particular , on planned energy projects in this region .
The confused objectives and duplication of forms of cooperation are at risk of depriving the EU 's Black Sea strategy of any substance .
The situation is unlikely to improve due to the differences in status of the countries involved in relation to the European Union , to the frequently differing interests of the actors involved in this cooperation and due to a lack of vision , which is also evident in the Ungureanu report .
If we want to speed up the process of settling the unresolved conflicts in the region , we need to start from the observation that this action has been greatly delayed by sponsors of the various plans vying with each other , thereby holding the process up for more than 15 years .
Indeed , this competition betrays their varying interests , most often linked , whether explicitly or implicitly , to control over the transport routes in the region .
I believe that a clearer picture will emerge only when it is patently obvious what is going to happen with Turkey 's accession to the EU and what status Russia will have in relation to the Union .
It is only when these matters have been clarified that the unresolved conflicts will be settled and long-term stability established in the region .
The strategy for the Black Sea is expected to play an increasingly important part in the future of the European Union .
This is illustrated quite well by the joint declaration signed by the European Commission and Azerbaijan last week , in which Azerbaijan made a written commitment to making a large quantity of gas sources available to Europe .
I am pleased to note that the European Commission is finally taking concrete steps to promote the Nabucco project , because ensuring access to the sources of gas located in the Caspian region should be considered a special priority .
Meanwhile , however , we must not forget about the transportation of gas to Europe , which can only be realised through the countries of the Black Sea .
The intensification of dialogue between the EU and the countries of the Black Sea could represent a major advancement in guaranteeing the security of European energy supply as the construction of the Nabucco pipeline will also provide Member States currently characterised by a very poor diversity of resources with access to new sources of gas .
However , the establishment of the pipelines will also require active contribution on the part of the countries involved .
A transparent , non-discriminatory transport framework and a business environment that supports investments are not only important for the supply security of EU Member States , but are also crucial for the stability and prosperity of the region .
In my opinion , the Black Sea region can only benefit from the construction of Nabucco : the pipeline will provide a predictable source of income for countries in the region , and will , at the same time , provide them with direct access to the world 's largest gas market .
The author of the report under discussion clearly indicates that what is called the Black Sea Synergy , which was adopted in 2007 , has not completely fulfilled the hopes which were placed in it .
The enlargement of the Union with Bulgaria and Romania meant that this region found itself at the centre of our attention .
After the situation in Central and Eastern Europe had stabilised , it seemed the time had come for the Union to concentrate on the Black Sea region .
However , the global economic crisis made this subject literally disappear from the European agenda .
We must not forget that the Union is not only the Baltic or the Mediterranean basin .
Of course , current events in Tunisia show that these regions , too , require our attention .
However , we must start to realise that the Black Sea region is slowly becoming pivotal from the European point of view .
It is there that the solution to our energy problems is to be found .
It is there that communication routes are located which are important to our economy .
It is there that sources of instability , too , are to be found , which may , for us , represent a significant danger .
For all these reasons , it is necessary to agree with the rapporteur that the time has come to develop a comprehensive EU policy for the Black Sea region .
What is more , it seems that changes brought in by the Treaty of Lisbon may contribute to the effective introduction of such a plan .
Furthermore , the establishment of a suitable unit in the European External Action Service could solve most of the imperfections of the current Black Sea Synergy .
The European Union strategy for the Black Sea region resembles a yeti .
Everyone talks about it , but no one has seen it .
This belief of mine is strengthened by some of the contradictions I can see right at the beginning of the resolution .
First , there is the definition of the Black Sea region .
It is rather curious that Azerbaijan , a country on the Caspian Sea , is included , while Macedonia is not , although its two closest neighbours , Bulgaria and Greece , are included in the Black Sea region , ' in accordance with the European Commission definition ' .
I had no idea that Greece stretches all the way to the shores of the Black Sea .
The 13 areas of cooperation where greater EU involvement is anticipated in the region comprise a very extensive list .
It seems that the Commission did not previously appreciate the importance of this region .
Ultimately , given that EUR 1.5 million was taken from a pilot project on the environment and the development of the region in the spring of this year and redirected to a project on bananas in the ACP countries , I would have to query the information on which the Commission based such a decision .
It is curious that the author ' failed to notice ' the South Stream gas pipeline , yet mentions the controversial and not fully funded Nabucco project .
I would like to emphasise that the opportunity to enter into partnership relationships with various EU regions will be very important for the further development of the region , excluding the area mentioned before .
The conclusions from the last debate on suspending visas with Ukraine are missing .
in writing . - ( RO ) We are debating today a project which is important to the European Union 's future from several perspectives .
The accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU has brought added value with the provision of access to the Black Sea , a region which also brings together countries neighbouring the Union , including strategic partners .
Drawing up a common Black Sea strategy will enable us to make significant progress towards creating an area of stability , security , democracy and prosperity .
In this context , we can regard the common , integrated initiatives adopted by the countries in the region as a preliminary step towards the reunification of our continent .
As both a Romanian and a member of the Committee on Regional Development , I support the link being made between the future Black Sea strategy and the Danube strategy , recently launched by the European Commission .
I think that the EU needs to be involved more in the Black Sea region and to cooperate with third countries , as our regions are interlinked territorially and economically .
This will enable us to ensure greater energy security for the future , by implementing infrastructure projects such as the Southern Corridor or liquefied gas terminals and diversifying supply routes and sources .
Furthermore , we must give due importance to coordinating the financial instruments available for the Black Sea region , develop and modernise its ports , and reduce pollution in this area .
The Black Sea Synergy is a further example of a missed opportunity in the area of relations with regions which are geopolitically and strategically important for its future .
When the strategy was adopted , construction of energy interconnections between the Black Sea countries and the European Union was set as a priority .
The main investment which will enable achievement of this objective is the Nabucco gas pipeline .
Unfortunately , we have , for a long time , been seeing a lack of determination from Brussels on this .
Neighbouring countries which are interested in the construction of the pipeline are also saying so .
For a year now , Azerbaijan has been signalling the need for action from the Union in order to contract gas from Kazakhstan and Tajikistan , because without their involvement , construction of the pipeline will not be financially worthwhile .
Meanwhile , a competing project which by-passes the Caucasus countries - the Russian South Stream pipeline - is being given tacit consent for its construction .
We must not work like this .
The provisions of the energy report are insufficient .
They should be made more specific by the addition of information about the means earmarked for investments of strategic significance for the future of the EU .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
1 .
EU-Libya Framework Agreement (
2 .
Situation of Christians in the context of freedom of religion (
Before the vote on paragraph 14 :

( DE ) Mr President , with the agreement of the other groups , we wish to make a clarification : It is not our wish to change the EEAS system , but rather to extend the capacities .
Accordingly , the wording we have chosen is more precise and we would ask our fellow Members to accept this .
We have also used the correct official title for the European External Action Service .
3 .
Situation in Belarus (
Before the vote on paragraph 2 :
Mr President , we suggest one important and short addition to paragraph 2 : ' is particularly concerned about the health of Mikalay Statkevich , who has been on hunger strike for the last 31 days ' .
Mr President , this is a very similar amendment to the one by Justas Paleckis .
Since the resolution is not only a political statement by Parliament , but also offers moral support for those who are jailed , we would like to propose the inclusion in our resolution of the names of four former presidential candidates who are still in the custody of the KGB .
They are Vladimir Nekliayev , Andrei Sannikov , Nikolai Statkevich and Alexei Mikhalevich , as well as two leaders of the democratic opposition parties , Pavel Severinets , co-chairman of the Belarusian Christian Democrats , and Anatoly Lebedko , the leader of the United Civic Party .
We would ask for your support , colleagues , for those six names to be included in paragraph 3 .
Mr President , it would be appropriate to keep in mind , or maybe to include in the text , in paragraph 9 , the following idea : ' at the same time , the Commission should finance the reprinting and distribution of poetry books by Uladzimir Niakliayeu , which were recently confiscated and thrown into fires by the Belarusian authorities ' .
If possible , please do not oppose this .
Mr President , we would like to move an oral amendment and to add the words ' no later than ' after the words ' Eastern Partnership activities ' in paragraph 13 .
We need this amendment because we need fast decisions concerning the relationship with Belarus and especially concerning the decision on the Eastern Partnership and continued Belarusian participation .
We would like to ask for your support .
4 .
Report on competition policy 2009 (
Before the vote on paragraph 105 :
( DE ) We would propose making the following insertion in paragraph 105 :
' Calls on the Member States and the Commission , during the transitional period ' .
5 .
A sustainable EU policy for the High North (
6 .
An EU Strategy for the Black Sea (
Before the vote on paragraph 13 :
Mr President , I would like to move an oral amendment to paragraph 13 .
After the second sentence , which reads , ' is convinced that an institutional dialogue bringing together the EU and the BSEC could constitute a step towards creating a genuine partnership in the region ' , I would suggest including the following sentence : ' to this end , calls for a joint working group between the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Parliamentary Assembly of the BSEC to be established ' .
This would provide us with a proper instrument with which to put in place the general idea , which apparently is agreed .
I have talked to the rapporteur , who seems to support and accept this amendment .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Mrs Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienhas asked to table a procedural motion .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this year , 13 January marks the 20th anniversary of an event which brought down the walls of the Soviet empire .
In 1991 in Lithuania , an unarmed crowd of several thousand people resisted the aggression of the Soviet army and defended freedom and independence .
The bloody events of the night of 13 January stunned Europe and the whole world .
Countries , international organisations and individuals reacted to the violence of the occupying forces , sending messages of support to Vilnius .
On behalf of all the people of Lithuania , I would like to thank the European Parliament for the resolution adopted on 24 January 1991 , supporting the Baltic States , and condemning Soviet aggression .
We thank the countries you represent which did not desert us .
As a symbol of our thanks , you will find a commemorative publication in your boxes , in memory of those events .
So that such a tragic story is never repeated , we must ...
Thank you , Mrs Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienė .
I would ask you to stop speaking now , because we allowed you the floor even though it was not a procedural motion that you were tabling .
I did not want to interrupt you out of politeness and because you were making some valid points .
Thank you .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( DA ) Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to express my views on the agreement that the EU has entered into today with Libya , with regard to which I have to say that there is one thing that is seriously lacking .
It is strange to see that what is probably the most important element as far as Europeans are concerned is completely absent from this report , namely , the fact that illegal immigrants make enormous use of Libya as a transit country for entering Europe from all over Africa and from Asia , in other words , from large parts of the world .
It is well-known that the EU is a magical land where the streets are flowing with riches and honey .
It is therefore a huge magnet for an incredible number of people wanting to escape from the prison , poverty and misery that their own countries represent .
It is also clear that the very fact that Libya , along with other North African countries , is patently used as a transit country is an enormous challenge for us in the EU .
This ought to have played a much greater role in the discussions we had with the Libyan authorities - a much greater role with regard to the requirements we are imposing to prevent this pressure on Europe 's borders .
It is good that we have initiated talks , but it is frustrating that the talks are not permitted to deal with what is important .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , anti-Semitic and anti-Islamic feeling still exists to one degree or another in many parts of the world today , as do hostility and ill feeling towards Christians .
The events that have taken place recently , including violent attacks against Christians living in Pakistan , Iraq , Egypt , Nigeria and Cyprus , must be condemned in the strongest terms .
A mutual understanding of other people 's values is the very cornerstone of religious freedom , and it must not be restricted in such a serious way .
People 's fundamental freedoms must therefore be safeguarded , whether they are Christian or of other faiths .
At the same time , the European Union cannot and must not waste substantial resources on promoting other religions , particularly at this time of economic crisis .
The Commission has spent an incredible EUR 4 million on promoting Islam .
These funds could probably have been used for other important purposes .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that what we have approved today is fundamental .
Religious freedom is the mother of all freedoms .
It is one of our fundamental , inalienable human rights and is included in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
These rights include freedom to change religion or belief , and freedom , either alone or in community with others , and in public or private , to manifest religion or belief in teaching , practice , worship and observance .
However , the massacres of recent months that have claimed victims from among the Christian minorities are the culmination of an offensive that is being conducted against Christians in many parts of the world with a systematic and indiscriminate degree of violence .
Unfortunately , as these events show , the right to religious freedom is today being called into question .
This is creating intolerance , which is often encouraged and manipulated for political and financial ends .
What is most striking in this current climate is the fact that the institutions are saying nothing .
Any quiet protests are easily silenced .
( DA ) Mr President , I share the concerns and views expressed by previous speakers .
However , there is one particular aspect that has , in fact , been given far too little attention in this report .
This is paragraph 7 , which concerns the condemnation of the way in which the Turkish authorities are behaving in Northern Cyprus , which , according to all international rules , is unlawfully occupied by Turkey - by Turkish troops - and therefore by a country that is both formally and , in reality , negotiating its accession to the EU .
We are seeing how the Greek-Cypriot inhabitants who want to return to their churches , monasteries and sacred buildings in Northern Cyprus are being hampered when they want to come back , how they are being prevented from entering and simply restoring their churches and how they are being prevented from coming back and reclaiming the property that is rightfully theirs .
What we are actually witnessing in Northern Cyprus is the violent discrimination against , and suppression of , Christians , with the direct support of an EU candidate country , namely Turkey .
That is unacceptable , and the European Parliament should therefore act in a way that is consistent with paragraph 7 and recommend that the negotiations with Turkey be stopped , at least until there is order in Northern Cyprus .
( PL ) Mr President , in view of its roots , Europe has a particular obligation to protect all Christians throughout the world .
This resolution is , of course , an expression of that obligation .
Naturally , I endorsed it .
However , Europe is also under an obligation to take steps which will , in future , protect all Christians throughout the world and not allow similar tragedies to occur again .
( PL ) Mr President , recently , in several countries of the world , chiefly in countries where there is a very large Muslim majority , we have been seeing brutal acts of persecution of Christian minorities .
We cannot stand idly by in the face of such events .
The issue of religious freedom , as well as other civil liberties , continues to be a priority of the European Parliament 's work .
This is why I fully endorse the statement made by the President of the European Parliament , Mr Buzek , in which he condemns these crimes .
I appeal , too , to the European Union to take all available diplomatic steps in order to secure religious liberties for minorities , particularly in countries whose citizens violate these rights .
In the report on human rights in 2009 which was adopted recently , we emphasised the need for the Union to play an active role in efforts to improve human rights and democracy around the world .
We called for the appointment of a special EU representative on human rights .
Today 's resolution is the perfect starting point for the next stage of our fight for these rights to be respected .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express my delight at the adoption of the resolution on the persecution of Christians , of which I was also co-author .
In addition , I would like to express my thanks to Mrs Ashton for her reaction to the situation of Christians in Alexandria .
We remember the visit of the Syriac bishops from Iraq and their tragic accounts of the situation of Christians in Iraq .
I would also like to mention , here John Paul II - in several months we will have the joy of his beatification - who was a great advocate for peace and dialogue between Christians , Jews , Muslims and followers of other religions .
We remember the meetings in Assisi and John Paul II 's visits both to a mosque and a synagogue in the name of respect and love to fellow men .
The situation of Christians around the world needs action from the European Union .
It is our duty .
We should use all political means , but we should also help those who have suffered materially because of persecution .
Mr President , as one of the co-authors , I voted for this historic resolution , but there are two important messages to the High Representative and the Commission which should be carried out as soon as possible .
Firstly , the Commission should develop , as a matter of urgency , an EU strategy on the enforcement of the right to freedom of religion , including a list of measures against states which knowingly fail to protect religious minorities .
Secondly , the Commission should develop a permanent system within the Human Rights Directorate of the External Action Service to monitor governmental restrictions on religious freedom and to report annually to Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , religious freedom is the basis of civilisation .
Without it , democracy is crippled and society is forced into a belief that denies humanity and human dignity .
This is what is happening in various parts of the world .
Extremist and fundamentalist beliefs are triggering deadly acts of violence against Christians , who are becoming true modern martyrs .
The intolerance that is giving rise to this violence is generated by a fundamentalist culture .
This is why any manifestation that denies other people 's religious or cultural identity must be immediately and unfailingly condemned .
The international community and its institutions have a duty to safeguard respect for religious faith .
They have not always taken swift action when Christians have been the victims of massacres .
The Chaldeans in Iraq and the Copts in Egypt are in danger of disappearing from regions in which they have lived for centuries .
Once again , I would like to thank President Buzek for enthusiastically embracing the idea of a torchlight procession , a light for Christians in memory of all the victims of fundamentalism .
Religious freedom must become a banner of the human community , and my wish is for everyone to enjoy faith , hope and charity , but also justice and freedom .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , voted in favour of this resolution , because the issue of protecting religious minorities around the world is now more crucial than ever .
It is extremely worrying that in 2011 , people are still being persecuted for their beliefs .
Article 10 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union leaves no room for interpretation .
It clearly lays down the right to full freedom of thought , conscience and religion .
The attacks against certain religious communities that have taken place over the last few weeks are yet another indication of the urgent need for all governments to adopt effective measures to protect religious minorities , whatever the difficulties or threats .
The European Union 's aim must be to foster inter-faith dialogue through greater cooperation between countries in Europe , but especially in countries where religious freedom is unfortunately not yet guaranteed .
The right to religious freedom must be respected and guaranteed everywhere , without exception .
( FI ) Mr President , this is an historic , excellent resolution .
We need to focus attention on freedom of religion in Europe .
It is important for us to remember our roots , which are to be found in Judaeo-Christian values .
Fundamental European values and rights are built on this heritage - on these roots .
Perhaps what happened to the Coptic Christians in Egypt made us sit up and take note .
Christians need protection in different parts of the world , and not just in Egypt : similar things have taken place in Turkey and Assyria .
We Europeans should also take a particular interest in the fact that there are situations in the European Union in which we should intervene .
People are becoming victims of persecution because of their religion .
This , in turn , is due to a misplaced fear of Islam .
We have forsaken our values and therefore trampled on Christian values at its expense .
We should not act in this way ; instead , we need dialogue and freedom of religion .
We need to ensure that we maintain our European cultural heritage , our Judaeo-Christian values , and defend them boldly .
These values are a crucial part of our European identity .
( NL ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the situation of Christians in the context of freedom of religion and I am happy that it has been adopted , but I still have some reservations about the use of veiled language .
For example , it has not been unequivocally stated anywhere that the greatest problems Christians face are occurring in Islamic countries .
There again , in recital N , it is stated that Europe is not completely innocent when it comes to violation of freedom of religion .
That may well be the case but , by saying that , we are putting occasional and isolated problems in Europe in the same category as structural discrimination of , and attacks against , Christians in Muslim countries .
Besides , this is not just about bomb attacks and other forms of physical violence committed by Muslim extremists ; in many Muslim countries , there is also an official policy that is directed against Christians .
Just take the supposed unavailability of resources for renovating Christian churches in Turkey , or the difficulties surrounding the succession of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople .
The behaviour of the Turkish occupation forces in Cyprus is also a real scandal .
( GA ) Mr President , I attended the debate here yesterday .
It was very interesting and very important .
I also attended the candle lighting ceremony outside Parliament yesterday , and I thank our President , Jerzy Buzek , for the leadership he showed in that parade .
The persecution of Christians in recent times is reminiscent of the days of the Roman Empire when Christians were seen to be fair game for murder and attack .
This has to be brought to an end .
It is important that the European Union play its part here , and I think we are doing so , to ensure freedom of expression and freedom of practice for religious groups not only within the Union but also in applicant countries .
That is a very important point around the world .
( GA ) I am delighted that this historic resolution was adopted today , and especially that it was adopted unanimously .
( PL ) Mr President , this resolution is very important , because it is first and because it comes at a particularly important moment .
We know of the massacre of Christians in Iraq .
We know what is happening in Egypt , and what has not happened there in recent years .
We know of individual cases - but they are still important - of the murder of Christian clergy - and not only clergy - in Turkey , Syria and Pakistan .
We know , too , what is going on in certain countries in Africa where there is a Muslim majority .
In view of this , I am greatly surprised by the silence of the President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso .
For a week , he did not comment .
Only when pressed by the Prime Ministers of Member States - although not by the Prime Minister of my country - did he make a statement on this matter .
It is good that Mrs Ashton has said something about this , but still. the head of the European Commission should have intervened immediately in this matter .
He did not do so , and this is to be regretted .
Mr President , I am delighted that this House is cognisant of White Russia 's slide into autocracy .
The regime in Belarus represents a system of government that this continent ought to have put behind itself 20 years ago .
Nonetheless , I hope that this motion might prompt among some colleagues a measure of self-analysis .
Look at it from the point of view of a former Soviet apparatchik analysing the European Union .
I put it to you that he might find a few things that would make him feel rather at home .
He would see that we are governed not by an elected president or an elected system , but by a 27-member Politburo called the European Commission , he would look and see this rubber-stamp Parliament that would make him feel a little nostalgic , he would see the series of five-year plans by which we administer our affairs , he would even see the fleet of special limousines and even special reserve shops for employees of the system and members of the nomenklatura .
Above all , he would see what Engels called ' the doctrine of false consciousness ' - that when people vote , they do not understand their true interest and it is for us to impose a better system on them .
I am reminded of that terrifying closing scene of Orwell 's ' Animal Farm ' where the animals look from man to pig and pig to man and find that they cannot tell which is which .
( FI ) Mr President , I also voted in favour of this resolution , which was , at the very least , necessary .
In my opinion , the European Union should be particularly vigilant regarding the human rights violations that occur in its neighbouring regions .
I would have liked to see more regarding the problems faced by youth .
Youth organisations in Belarus are not allowed to act freely ; instead , they have to go underground .
For more than a year now , young people in Europe have been in the habit of organising street events where they have gagged important statues in European capitals , because they are mute .
This is a protest against the lack of freedom of speech in Belarus .
I hope that young Europeans will not have to gag the European Parliament or keep us mute , but that we can courageously defend our values and democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament supports the resolution tabled .
We believe that it will be an important signal both to the Belarusian authorities and to civil society , the media and everyone fighting for the country 's democratic development .
We hope that the measures proposed in the resolution will be given careful consideration and be discussed by the Commission and the Council , and will be implemented as fast as possible to have an effect .
In fact , the inauguration ceremony for the re-elected President Lukashenko scheduled for tomorrow will not stop the issues that have been raised about him , the legality of the elections and the way in which the results in these elections were recorded .
Up to now , the European Union has used various policies and mechanisms to influence Belarus and the Belarus leadership , with modest results .
Perhaps it is time to consider new options or whether we do not have a new situation in the region which will allow us to apply other mechanisms .
Something that was alluded to in the resolution , which we consider extremely important and which has not been tried so far , is coordinating our policy and relations with Belarus with its immediate non-EU neighbours , that is to say , Russia , which is our strategic partner , and Ukraine , which is part of the Eastern Partnership .
I think that through joint and coordinated efforts , we could achieve , if nothing else , at least an environment which would be politically more conducive to fair and democratic parliamentary elections , elections which are scheduled for next year .
The European Parliament also has to make fullest use of the options that are there .
Today , we decided to send a delegation to Belarus , and I believe that allowing this delegation to visit the country and giving it the necessary assistance and contacts will be a test for the Belarus leadership .
It will also allow us to get a clear idea and to see for ourselves the options the situation there holds .
( PL ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to express my indignation at Mr Hannan 's comparing Belarus to the European Union .
His nonsensical statement was all the more unpleasant because it was applauded by some of my fellow Members from Poland among the European Conservatives and Reformists .
The Lukashenko regime should be isolated .
The current policy of believing that the regime will gradually become open to democracy has turned out to be a miscalculation .
The sanctions which should be imposed on Lukashenko 's regime should be harsh , for among other reasons , that it is a country which is an immediate neighbour of Europe .
In relation to such countries , we should expect the same standards as for the Member States of the European Union .
In particular , I would like the European Commission to support independent media such as TV Belsat , Radio Racyja and others .
They are important for spreading information so that it reaches the citizens of Belarus .
( PL ) Mr President , the events in Belarus associated with the presidential elections have once again shaken public opinion in Europe .
After a period of relative calm , President Lukashenko is again using force against opposition activists .
He has turned again to the most shameful features of his dictatorship .
The brutal clash with the participants of a peaceful demonstration and the arrest of opposition leaders and opposition candidates in the elections is a clear violation of human rights and signifies the abandonment of measures intended to improve relations with the democratic countries of Europe .
Therefore , I endorse in full Parliament 's resolution calling for the immediate release of political prisoners and for the elections to be repeated .
I strongly condemn the dictatorial practices of President Lukashenko 's regime .
I believe that pressure from European institutions will help ease the repression of Belarusian citizens .
I also endorse all measures which support the development of civil society by relaxing visa policy , awarding grants to students and academic staff , and providing funding for independent organisations and media .
( DA ) Mr President , there is no doubt that Belarus is something of a headache for Europe , and it is right that we should take every opportunity to criticise the regime as - fortunately - the last Communist dictatorship .
We have a saying in Denmark that those who live in glasshouses should not throw stones , and therefore it is perhaps worth taking a look at what the EU looks like from the point of view of Belarus .
Well , the EU is governed by a Commission made up of officials with absolutely no popular mandate , and it is only this Commission , made up of people with no popular movement behind them , no one to report to and no mandate from the citizens , that can table proposals .
Once those proposals have been put forward and adopted , who is it who , with enormous political influence , ultimately decides how the EU legislation is to be implemented in the Member States ?
Again , it is people who have not been democratically elected , it is judges who sit at a nice comfortable distance from reality .
The same can be said about this Parliament , where the vast majority are very comfortable inside the glass palaces where they have been placed , with no one to answer to at all and no understanding of the enormous concerns , opposition and agitation there is among the European citizens .
If we look at the EU from Belarus 's point of view , we may see many frightening similarities to the dictatorships that we are trying to fight against .
( PL ) Mr President , I endorsed the resolution , being aware of the fact that the situation in Belarus is a very specific one .
We are facing a fierce intensification of repression directed against human rights defenders .
On the other hand , there is a sense in which this is happening as a result of the very thoughtless policy of some of the European Union 's Member States , because it is certain that it was absolutely unnecessary to lend credibility to Mr Lukashenko in the eyes of Europe and the European Union as has been done by Mr Berlusconi , who has visited Belarus , the President of Lithuania , Mrs Grybauskaitė , and the foreign ministers of Germany and Poland .
We need to fight , today , for civil liberties in Belarus , although we should do this while trying to avoid pushing Belarus into the arms of Russia , because this , too , is very important .

( SK ) Mr President , experience from a number of Member States shows that , six years after Council Regulation No 1 / 2003 , there had still been no positive movement over the consistent application of competition rules .
When deciding on disputes , national courts are not making use of the possibility of requesting information or an opinion on a given case from the European Commission , nor are they making use of the right to turn to the European Court of Justice with a preliminary question , and nor is the Commission making use of the right to intervene as an amicus curiae .
Practice points to considerable problems with judicial application in this area , including major deviations from the settled case-law of the European courts .
I have therefore called on the Commission to pay attention to the decisions of the national courts , and to take the measures necessary for achieving this objective .
This call has been written into the Report on Competition Policy , and I have supported the final text of the report .
( DA ) Mr President , there is no doubt that European competitiveness is under considerable pressure .
We have to question whether there really is a will among the Member States to do something about this .
One thing is clear , however , and that is that we have created a currency , a common currency , that is proving disastrous for the economy in the whole of southern Europe .
One reason for this is that the majority of those countries cannot keep up and have completely failed to implement the reforms that are necessary if we are to cope with future competition with China , India , South America and others .
However , even in those areas that we would like to regard as areas of low-hanging fruit , as easy areas , it is impossible to reach agreement .
One example is a clear initiative like the common European patent .
It is appalling that , in this area , which is simply a matter of technicalities , we have not once been able to reach agreement . This is an example of how ineffective the EU is .
In an area that could so easily be so beneficial , we have allowed language differences to get in the way of us reaching agreement .
In reality , this probably speaks volumes about the false foundation on which the whole of this cooperation is based .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I appreciated the flexibility the Commission showed in drawing up the temporary State aid measures , which were introduced as a response to the financial and economic crisis .
I also agree that it is a good idea to prepare a detailed evaluation of the decisions taken , in order to ensure equal conditions of competition within the Union .
I agree with the call for the Commission to ensure that banks reimburse the exorbitant levels of State aid they received , thereby ensuring fair competition within the internal market .
I was one of the people who criticised the vast amounts of aid provided using taxpayers ' money .
I believe that public money should have been used to promote growth .
I hope that this will be the last time that taxpayers ' savings are used to benefit bank shareholders and careless managers , and that new controls will be put in place to prevent speculation from damaging the economy again in the future .
I welcome the willingness to support the use of aid to promote common-interest projects , particularly those involving renewable energy .
( GA ) Mr President , I was pleased to support this resolution as well .
I would say that one of the primary functions of the European Union is to guarantee fair competition for all , and particularly for SMEs and , of course , consumers .
There has long been suspicion that people are exploiting the market and , at this moment , in my country , people are alarmed at the uniform and systematic rise , for instance , in petrol and diesel prices at all pumps throughout the country .
Likewise , farmers have long been suspicious that there is a cartel operating , particularly when it comes to uniform and speedy reduction of cattle prices at the slightest whim .
And , of course , recently we saw that the European Court ruled against telecommunications companies regarding roaming charges in Europe .
So we have to be constantly vigilant and be prepared to take firm and immediate action whenever there is unfair competition .
( PL ) Mr President , this is an important report , which has been written by someone with huge experience in the area .
I think it has to be said very clearly that the European Union deserves to have greater openness and greater competition .
We should not be afraid of this .
It fosters Europe 's development in a situation when , speaking very frankly , we are behind when compared to America and Asia .
A resolution of this kind serves to make the European economy more effective , which is why it is so important and so necessary , and therefore I voted in favour of its adoption .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Gahler , for this excellent report .
It takes excellent account of the needs of the European Union 's High North , and the sustainable development that is needed there .
Because I myself come from a northern area , it gave me great pleasure to follow this process .
I found that the report took into consideration issues relating to climate and livelihood to a satisfactory degree .
For example , it considered the issue of reindeer husbandry , which is a very important source of livelihood in this region .
Mr Gahler also took excellent account of the sole indigenous European people , the Sami .
I especially want to praise and thank Mr Gahler for giving attention to the amendment I tabled concerning the establishment of an Arctic Information Centre at the University of Lapland , and , furthermore , for mentioning it in the report .
That is very important .
I am pleased that the Finns are demonstrating crossparty cooperation on this matter .
This is about the future of Finland 's northern dimension and the whole of northern Europe , one in which we want to see sustainable development .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament believes that the report on the Black Sea strategy really is important and timely , because it provides an assessment of what has been achieved in the Black Sea region so far and gives a number of recommendations as to what the European Union can still do in this respect .
We believe that the political coordination among partners who have highly differentiated levels of cooperation with the European Union is difficult , but not impossible .
It also makes sense at a political level to try and combine our efforts , bearing in mind that three of the countries are European Union Member States , one is a strategic partner , and others are part of the Eastern Partnership , while Turkey is a candidate for membership
The European Union 's inability to engage more energetically in the region has , at least hitherto , deprived us of the development and opportunity to use a great potential , and in this sense , we should say at the present time that the Black Sea Synergy , which , from the outset , was assessed as an insufficiently ambitious initiative on the part of the European Union , has to be developed into a proper strategy for the Black Sea .
We already have models of interaction that can be applied successfully , provided , of course , that we adapt them to the region .
An example is the Baltic Sea strategy , which , at macro level , has been successful in developing regional cooperation .
We believe that several steps - not all of which were included in the report - need to be taken right now .
First , at a practical level , within the framework of the neighbourhood policy review being done at the moment , we have to consider a greater coherence between the Black Sea Synergy and the Eastern Partnership , as almost all countries of the Eastern Partnership save Belarus are also part of the Black Sea Synergy .
The second aspect is that political dialogue needs to be strengthened at ministerial as well as parliamentary level , and we should try and find a greater coherence between the Danubian strategy and future initiatives for the Black Sea region .
All this should result in a strategy that can go on stream with separate budgetary funding in the next budget framework .

( PL ) Mr President , the proposal contained in Mr Ungureanu 's resolution , which has now been adopted , for Black Sea policy to become a fully-fledged strategy , is worthy of widespread support .
The fact that Bulgaria and Romania are EU Member States , the Eastern Partnership - the special relations with the countries of the Eastern Partnership and with Russia - and the negotiations being carried on with other countries in the region on EU membership all justify the region 's political significance for the European Union .
The Black Sea has become an important region for the transit of energy resources and for promising projects which are important for the Union , such as the Nabucco project , which is strategically important for the diversification of gas supply .
I fully share , too , the opinion of Mr Ungureanu , whom I congratulate on the report , that the strategy must ensure the recognition of all actors in the region , and not just of the biggest states , and that it must fit in with other strategies , such as the strategy for the Mediterranean Sea .


( HU ) Mr President , with the accession of Romania and Bulgaria in 2007 , part of the Black Sea became an inland sea of the European Union .
The region is of exceptional strategic importance and our involvement there needs to be intensified .
To this end , it is vital for Parliament to draw up a new strategy , in addition to providing financial and human resources , in the form of a separate item of the EU budget .
The new strategy must serve to ensure the peace , stability and prosperity of the Black Sea region , and to guarantee the energy security of the EU .
The diversification of supply lines and resources must be given even higher priority , and I would therefore like to stress the importance of the planned development of liquid natural gas terminals at Black Sea ports .
The transit routes crossing the region could also significantly improve supply to the EU .
Further intensification of cooperation with the countries of the Black Sea is a vital element of the success of Nabucco , the Trans-Adriatic pipeline and the Pan-European oil pipeline , which are of special significance to the EU .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the report .
( RO ) Mr President , just as in the case of Belarus , I wanted to give my reason for the way I voted on the EU 's Black Sea strategy .
I want to start by saying that the timing of the idea from my colleague , Traian Ungureanu , to draft an own-initiative report is extremely apt when the European Union is strengthening its regional policy by devising strategies for coastal regions such as the Baltic Sea , the High North and , in this instance , the Black Sea .
I also wish to say how pleased I am that the amendments which I tabled have been included in the resolution text .
These amendments highlighted the need to create a network of NGOs in this region , encourage programmes promoting intercultural and inter-religious dialogue , as well as initiatives such as the Black Sea Universities Network .
In my view , all these measures are good examples of the way in which interaction between civil societies can generate positive synergy in the region .
Finally , I wanted to stress not only the need to strike a balance between economic development and environmental protection , but also the need to implement fully the Convention on the Protection of the Black Sea against Pollution .
I hope that this initiative adopted today in Parliament will receive the attention it is due from the Council as well , which ought to deal with this matter as a priority issue for the European agenda .
Written explanations of vote
Taking into account the geographical situation of Libya and the economic interdependence between the EU and Libya , the pursuit of an EU / Libya strategic partnership is in the common interest .
Nevertheless , we cannot forget the dictatorial regime that rules this country , with a lack of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
In spite of the clear interest of many Member States in pursuing a framework agreement with Libya , the EU cannot forget the fundamental values it defends and subordinate itself to economic interests only .
A partnership is needed in order to implement legal reforms with regard to human rights in the country and , at the same time , enable the diversification of the national economy , bearing in mind some progress that has already been made , such as giving up its nuclear programme , or even international obligations that the state has with regard to human rights , in spite of sanctions applied by the UN .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution on the negotiations on the EU-Libya Framework Agreement .
Libya remains an authoritarian regime , its population does not enjoy basic human rights , and capital punishment is regularly carried out .
The state institutions are not democratically accountable and state power is not anchored in the rule of law .
Nevertheless , Libya has expanding commercial and political relations with EU Member States , and the country is strategically important for the EU .
Negotiations on an EU-Libya Framework Agreement started in November 2008 .
However , the development of relations must ensure full respect for European values and principles , and it is important to request firmly that the Council and the Commission take necessary steps - such as strongly recommending that Libya ratify and implement the Geneva Convention on Refugees of 1951 and its 1967 protocol ; requesting that the Libyan authorities sign a memorandum of understanding granting UNHCR a legal presence in the country ; encouraging Libya to commit to a moratorium on the death penalty , etc . - in order to protect European values .
I welcome the commitments made under the framework agreement being negotiated at the moment , which covers a vast range of issues , from strengthening political dialogue to managing migration , from developing trade and economic relations to energy security and improved cooperation in a number of sectors .
I believe that the framework agreement could be an opportunity to strengthen the political dialogue between Libya and the EU .
I would highlight the role of the framework agreement , which includes measures to assist the development of institutional capacity as a means of reinforcing civil society , aids modernisation , encourages the introduction of democratic reforms and the creation of independent social communication and the rule of law , and supports other efforts aimed at opening up space for companies , academic institutions , non-governmental organisations and other Libyan players .
The economic partnership between Europe and Libya is already a reality .
Libya holds the largest confirmed oil reserves in Africa and is Europe 's third largest energy ( oil and gas ) supplier .
What is more , the EU is Libya 's biggest trading partner ( with 70 % of its total trade in 2009 ) .
Europe has to recognise that Libya plays an important role in the field of regional and world security , both in the context of containing Islamic extremism and also in the context of regional stabilisation .
Therefore , it is to be welcomed that a partnership framework agreement is being negotiated but , as is quite clear in the report , it must not leave aside certain questions that I consider to be fundamental : the progressive democratisation of the regime ; greater respect for human rights , in particular , freedom in its various forms ; a progressive change in the criminal law system , aiming to abandon the death penalty ; acceptance of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court ; and ratification of the 1951 Geneva Convention .
The opening of negotiations between the European Union and Libya constitutes an opportunity to guarantee better economic development conditions for both parties and , at the same time , promote a serious change in the Mediterranean region and in Africa with regard to respect for human rights , to their contribution to global peace and stability , and to combating climate change .
Libya has 6 million inhabitants , 2 million of whom are foreigners .
It has the largest proven oil reserves in Africa and is Europe 's third most important supplier of energy , in the form of oil and gas .
The EU is its biggest trade partner : transactions between the two parties represent almost 70 % of Libya 's trade in 2009 .
The framework partnership agreement with the EU must be seen as an opportunity to demonstrate the advantages of human values and democracy in terms of sustained and diversified development .
As this report points out , this process cannot be dissociated from the fundamental values of the EU , such as combating the death penalty and discrimination against minorities , immigrants and refugees , such as promoting public health , and such as the need for political democratisation .
Implementing a framework agreement designed to promote cooperation in the fight against illegal immigration and aiming , at the same time , at political dialogue based on human rights , is one of the priorities for the Union 's Mediterranean policy .
Even though the final text contains a few inaccuracies , I think we should support it , in the hope that it will spur the government in Tripoli to greater efforts in the fight against trafficking in human beings in the region , and also make it take stock of the situation in order to become a responsible partner in other areas , such as security and energy .
Libya is a country which requires a great deal of work .
A dictatorship , ignorance of human rights , lack of a migration policy and a poorly developed health service are just some of the problems which Libyans and foreigners living in Libya have to face up to every day .
On the other hand , the potential , the rich natural resources and the cultural heritage of this region of Africa are values which can enable Libya to achieve economic development , an improvement in the quality of life of the people who live there and the opening up of the country to international markets .
Hammering out suitable conditions for the EU-Libya agreement , which means persuading the Libyan authorities to end practices which violate fundamental human rights , to change migration policy and to accept legal responsibility , will bring mutual benefits and contribute to the region 's development .
The report adopted today contains proposals that the European Parliament considers indispensable in order to wind up the ongoing negotiations between the European Union and Libya aimed at the conclusion of a cooperation agreement .
The conclusion of the framework agreement would provide an opportunity to tackle important issues such as political relations , immigration and security , energy , public health , development , trade , climate change , energy and culture .
At the same time , it would be a decisive step towards achieving the more general aim of improving relations between the Mediterranean area of the European Union and Africa .
As an Italian MEP , I have to emphasise the historical and economic reasons that have led to Italy 's favourable relations with Libya over the years .
At the same time , I have to emphasise the importance of strengthening cooperation between the EU and Libya , and by this I mean cooperation not just in economic matters , but also from the point of view of safeguarding human rights .
It is my hope that the European Union can play a leading role in the reception of migrants and in supporting the fight against trafficking in human beings .
This report is astonishing in its contradictions .
It welcomes negotiations on the EU-Libya Framework Agreement with a view to eventually bringing Libya into the Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area ( EMFTA ) that eurocracy has been preparing for the past 15 years .
However , it also lists a whole series of violations of human rights and democracy by a regime it describes as authoritarian .
Meanwhile , the common position against Cuba is being maintained .
This is a case of double standards .
For today 's European Union , the prerequisite for trade is not respect for human rights and democracy but rather the establishment of a market economy and free , distorted competition .
The Union represents cowardly imperialism , as evidenced by its belated response to the situation in Tunisia .
We are all aware that Libya is persisting in a dictatorial regime , and is systematically violating international conventions on fundamental rights and freedoms .
In spite of these facts , Libya has been expanding its trade and political relations with a number of EU Member States .
The role of Libya , as partner on many issues in the Mediterranean region and in Africa , has been found to have a major impact on the security and stability of the region , in particular , on migration , public health , development , trade and economic relations , climate change , energy and cultural heritage .
In this context , the framework agreement being negotiated at the moment is important , but we must not fail to respond to several fundamental issues , in particular : the progressive democratisation of the regime , respect for human rights , changes to the criminal justice system , with the abolition of the death penalty as a first priority , and signing up to the Geneva Convention .
On account of their complexity and significance for Europe , relations between the European Union and Libya must be considered objectively .
Naturally , respect for human rights play an important role , which is why it also makes sense for Brussels to call on Libya to ratify the Geneva Convention on Refugees of 1951 or to urge a moratorium on the death penalty .
However , we must also consider the fact that Libya is an important transit country for illegal mass immigration from Africa to Europe .
For this reason , no purpose will be served by a general rejection of a readmission agreement with Tripoli , as contained in the report from the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
If we do not get a readmission agreement with Libya , the pressure on Europe as a destination for immigrants will increase even further .
Because illegal mass immigration is a vital issue in relation to the survival of Europe as an historical entity , the EU would be well advised to take a differentiated view of its relations with Tripoli and to include Libya in its strategies for controlling the flow of migration .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the negotiations on the EU-Libya Framework Agreement .
I fully support the key points made by Mrs Gomes in the report , i.e. the need for Libya to introduce a moratorium on the use of the death penalty , to ratify the Geneva Convention on Refugees , to actively fight trafficking of human beings , to guarantee fair agreements for illegal migrants and to adopt modern asylum laws .
I would like to add that on several occasions , we have requested that the European institutions be allowed to check the actual conditions in refugee camps in Libya before a framework agreement is reached .
Parliament should take immediate action to raise the issue more vigorously .
As far as I and many of my fellow Members are concerned , we will be unable to support the framework agreement unless the requirements made by Mrs Gomes in the report adopted today are met .
The current negotiations between the European Union and Libya to finalise a framework agreement designed to promote political and economic relations between the Member States and this Maghreb country are of crucial strategic importance to the Union 's cross-border relations .
I therefore voted in favour of the European Parliament recommendation to the Council .
The primary aim of the agreement is to improve the lives of the Libyan people in political , social and economic terms through the promotion of fundamental rights as the founding basis of the agreement .
The agreement will seek to make up for Libya 's shortcomings by providing greater protection of human and democratic rights and developing commercial cooperation , as well as by establishing strict joint controls over illegal immigration .
The green light has reluctantly been given for the negotiations between the EU and Libya to continue , as a means of strengthening our relationship .
However , it is anything but a blank cheque .
Our energy security , our commercial and economic interests , and our cooperation in managing migratory flows should never conceal the continual disregard shown by the Libyan authorities and Colonel Gaddafi for the most basic human rights .
Colonel Gaddafi is a dictator who has been in power for 41 years , and who said just a few days ago that he regrets the departure of his Tunisian counterpart , Mr Ben Ali .
It is a repressive regime : death penalties ( 506 in May 2009 - of which 50 % were foreigners ) , executions and corporal punishment , illegal detention and inhumane treatment of migrants crossing its territory to reach Europe .
Our resolution particularly stresses this point by recalling that any common migration policy must be conditional on more stringent safeguards for the protection of migrants and other fundamental freedoms .
Similarly , any readmission agreement with that country should automatically exclude asylum seekers , refugees , or those in need of protection , and should avoid collective expulsions .
in writing . - For over 40 years , Libya has been ruled by a dictatorial regime in which power is concentrated in one man , Colonel Gaddafi , the longest serving African and Arab leader .
Libyans enjoy free education and healthcare and subsidised housing , benefiting from some degree of social distribution of the oil income .
Yet , despite the GDP growth rates , development lags behind that of other oil-rich countries and Libya is one of the less diversified economies in the region , foreign investment remaining at the mercy of the unpredictable decisions of the ruler .
The Libyan people do not enjoy basic human rights and freedoms , despite the fact that their state has specific international obligations to respect human rights , having been recently elected to the United Nations Human Rights Council and having ratified a number of legally binding international instruments .
Capital punishment is regularly carried out .
In conclusion , Libya 's strategic importance and the many challenges it poses underline the need for a comprehensive EU policy towards Libya .
The EU needs to engage with Libya across a broad range of issues .
This framework agreement must also be a substantive tool to promote the rule of law , respect for human rights , protection of migrants and refugees and sustainable development in Libya .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe that it can help the Libyan people to improve their living conditions , which are often conditioned by a lack of respect for human rights and the most basic freedoms .
Cooperation between the EU and Libya may be a decisive factor in boosting the potential of the country , which is currently having to get to grips with a very complex situation .
Prisoners often suffer torture , corporal punishment such as flogging , beating , electric shocks and the deliberate withholding of medical assistance .
There are no asylum laws in Libya and , as a result , there is no legal recognition of the need to guarantee protection for refugees .
As if this were not enough , the death penalty still applies to a large number of crimes , and death sentences continue to be handed down by the Libyan courts , in breach of international standards concerning the right to a fair trial .
The European Union must conclude the framework agreement as soon as possible .
It will be the first proper agreement between Libya and the EU , and will therefore bring real benefits to the local population in terms of their fundamental rights as well as in political and socio-economic terms .
Today 's vote on the EU-Libya Framework Agreement is the result of some tough negotiations , particularly on the issue of migrants .
In Libya , the situation regarding human rights for refugees and asylum seekers is extremely dangerous .
They have no legal recognition and there is no system in place to protect them .
I hope that their fundamental human rights will be safeguarded , along with their right to asylum .
Libya has not ratified the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 or the Protocol of 1967 relating to the Status of Refugees , and at the moment , does not intend to do so .
However , in 1981 , it did ratify the 1969 Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa .
It is therefore bound to comply with the principle of non-refoulement of migrants requiring international protection , who must be identified in accordance with criteria that are no less strict than those established by the Geneva Convention itself .
Under international law , people from countries such as Somalia , Sudan , Eritrea and Ethiopia have the right to humanitarian protection and political asylum , and I hope that the Libyan authorities will agree to cooperate with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this important resolution as we have to condemn in the strongest terms the recent attacks on Christian communities around the world - be it in Egypt , Pakistan , Iraq or any other country .
Christian communities have been living in various Muslim countries of the Middle East since the early days of Christianity .
It is therefore totally unacceptable that , after centuries of peaceful cohabitation , Christians should be forced to flee these countries or be closed up in ghettos .
This is yet another reason to continue our struggle against Islamic fundamentalists who distort reality and want to portray our global action against terrorism as an attack on the Muslim world .
It is precisely the Islamic fundamentalists who are seeking war between religions and civilisations .
We must therefore do everything possible to root out these religious fanatics and to marginalise them in their respective societies .
This has to be done in cooperation with the moderate elements of Muslim societies .
We should therefore welcome vigorous public reactions in certain Muslim countries , such as Egypt for example , where the general public strongly condemned terrorist attacks against Christians and demanded action against those responsible .
We were all very shocked at the recent terrorist attack against the Syriac Catholic cathedral in Baghdad .
This attack comes on top of a series of grave events , all of which were religiously motivated .
This is a very sensitive subject .
The European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is very attached to secular principles and is in favour of respect being shown for all religions in Europe , including Islam .
This being so , we cannot remain indifferent to the fate awaiting a number of Christian communities throughout the world .
Every religion must be shown equal respect , and that is why I endorsed this European Parliament resolution .
All of the events that Parliament is condemning took place in Muslim countries , where particular attention must be paid to the fate of Christians .
Hence , we must all work towards ensuring respect for different religious beliefs , and I believe that this text is in keeping with that approach .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the situation of Christians in the context of freedom of religion , which condemns the deadly attacks against Christians in the East .
The attacks against Christians in recent months are a tragedy for the many victims , particularly in Baghdad and Alexandria , but also for their co-religionists .
Christians have lived in the East for 2 000 years ; they are inscribed in the history of their country .
Today , however , they are fleeing the region en masse .
Because of this forced exile , these countries are losing a substantial proportion of their human resources .
The Near and Middle East regions have always been an area of diversity and cohabitation of religious minorities .
The terrorists behind these attacks are trying to instigate a clash between East and West , pitting the Muslim world against the Christian world .
All of this has been fiendishly planned .
Christians in Iraq and Egypt may be feeling abandoned and betrayed .
It is important that the Egyptian and Iraqi authorities find and harshly judge the authors of these massacres .
I support the motion for a resolution on the situation of Christians in the context of freedom of religion , because European politics should not ignore the escalation of violence that has taken place in recent months .
Europe must not be overcautious and afraid to support the right of Christian communities in the Middle East and around the world to profess their faith and religion freely .
Dialogue and mutual respect are inalienable values for the European Union , and it is essential for the High Representative , Catherine Ashton , to become a spokesperson for this position , and to strongly uphold it in our bilateral relations with other countries .
I congratulate the European Union on having repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to religious freedom , freedom of conscience and freedom of thought .
Governments have a duty to guarantee these freedoms throughout the world , bearing in mind that the development of human rights , democracy and civil liberties is the common base on which the European Union builds its relations with other countries , and which is provided for in the clause relating to democracy inscribed in the agreements concluded between the EU and third countries .
in writing . - We have all witnessed the plight of Coptic Christians in Egypt in the last months .
Such acts of violence should be condemned in the most absolute of terms .
It is not only intolerance towards Christians that should be condemned but rather any form of intolerance towards the exercise of a person 's religious freedom .
I believe that this resolution was well balanced and I have thus voted in favour of the resolution .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has debated and adopted a resolution condemning the recent attacks on Christians .
Religious freedom is one of the main fundamental human rights ; one that is generally recognised by national constitutions and international conventions .
The existence of so many standards at various levels of governance , both national and international , and all over the world , shows that there is unanimous consensus about the importance of religious freedom .
However , legislation is not enough .
It is the foundation on which to build effective policies .
Over the last 50 years , the globalisation process has brought distant civilisations into contact with each another .
In order to make sure that such contact does not turn into conflict , it is not enough just to condemn the recent attacks .
We need to reaffirm our commitment to the creation of policies that encourage religious pluralism and ensure that different groups learn to be tolerant of each other .
It is not just fundamentalism that is the threat .
Today , religious freedom is also under attack from widespread secularism , which is trying to eliminate the spiritual world of the individual from public life .
Religious freedom concerns all religions ; it even concerns atheists .
This is because , when there is acceptance of religious freedom , there is also acceptance of its opposite , in other words , the freedom not to profess any religion .
The increase in attacks against Christians requires a common stance on how to protect them .
In order to increase religious tolerance , the relevant governments must guarantee that the perpetrators of the attacks are identified and brought to justice by due legal process .
Protection must be afforded to Christians on the basis of equal respect for any denomination .
In the situation where respect for human rights and civil liberties , including freedom of religion or belief , are fundamental principles and objectives of the European Union and provide common ground for relations with third countries , it must reaffirm its support for any initiative aimed at promoting dialogue and mutual respect among religious and other communities .
Last but not least , religious authorities are called on to promote tolerance and adopt initiatives against hatred , violent radicalisation and extremism .
I was one of the earliest supporters of this motion for a resolution , whose description of the situation endured by Christian minorities in some countries of the Middle East I believe to be timely and accurate , to a large extent .
One of the most noble functions of the European Parliament , as regards external action , is the defence and promotion of the values in which we believe : in this case , we are specifically referring to freedom of thought , freedom of conscience , freedom of expression and freedom of religion .
These freedoms have clearly been called into question through the cowardly attacks of religious fanatics , who have murdered innocent people , sometimes on a massive scale , in a way that I consider both inhuman and incomprehensible .
I hope that this resolution , supported by all the parliamentary groups , will help to increase awareness among members of the public , and among senior government and public administration figures in the countries concerned of the importance of the full exercise of fundamental freedoms in their countries and of bringing murderers and agitators to justice .
These are important in order to promote both inter-religious and inter-cultural dialogue internally and between our societies , which , despite living on different continents , share quite a number of common values and visions .
As of 2011 , the Christian community is the most persecuted in the world ; fortunately , European Member States have noticed and are beginning to respond .
Our condemnation of the attacks is fair and necessary , but insufficient : the principle of reciprocity does not appear in this resolution .
Moreover , the EU 's half-hearted condemnation of Turkey 's actions in the area of Cyprus that it occupies militarily , alas , will not be followed by the results that the French people have been hoping for - the cessation of accession negotiations with Turkey - and will provide no incentive whatsoever .
I support this resolution in support of Christians murdered around the world , but nevertheless regret certain omissions and inconsistencies .
Attacks on Christians are increasing throughout the world .
This worrying and deplorable fact has to be deeply regretted , particularly since Christianity preaches peace and understanding between men , regardless of whether they are Jews or Greeks , as St Paul would say .
What is being threatened is the religious freedom and peace of communities that have existed for centuries .
They have lived peacefully alongside other religions in the areas where they are settled and are the subject of indiscriminate violence simply because they believe in Christ .
The question goes much further , however .
Apart from the attacks that have been made , the Christian faith and its manifestations are also being attacked in Europe itself , often in the guise of the corruption of such concepts as secularity and the neutrality of states and institutions .
In this respect , I must deplore the recent attacks on the celebration of Catholic mass in Barcelona and call on the Spanish Government and the European institutions to condemn and combat the Christophobic atmosphere that seems to be on the rise .
Those who deny their own roots deserve little respect from anyone else .
Everyone has the right to freedom of religion , conscience and thought .
This right confers the freedom to practice your own religion or beliefs , individually or together with others , both in public and in private , through worship , rites , practices and teaching .
Statistics on religious freedom show that the majority of acts of religious violence are against Christians .
In fact , it is well known that innocent lives have recently been lost in bloody attacks against Christian communities in Nigeria , Alexandria , the Philippines , Iraq and Syria .
In addition , the Iranian Government has intensified its campaign against Christians in the Islamic Republic .
In Vietnam , too , there is severe repression of the activities of the Catholic Church and other religious communities .
In addition to condemning these attacks and urging governments to guarantee freedom of religion , conscience and thought , the Council , Commission and also the High Representative of the EU for Foreign Affairs must dedicate greater attention to the issue of religious freedom and take specific , urgent measures , including measures against the countries that deliberately do not protect religious confessions .
The resolution voted on today showed great concern for the rising intolerance , repression and acts of violence against Christians .
I think it is crucial to condemn the recent episodes in countries which are far away but have an established Christian community .
The events in Egypt , Nigeria , Pakistan , the Philippines , Cyprus , Iran and Iraq are even more serious when you consider that religion is being exploited merely for the sake of wielding power .
The European Union , through its High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , should make freedom of religion and belief and the security of religious communities , including Christians , a priority in the Union 's international relations .
This priority should be reflected in international agreements and in reports on human rights .
I am convinced that religious freedom must be strenuously defended , even at the cost of inflicting heavy sanctions on countries which fail to respect this fundamental principle .
As the resolution states , the promotion of democracy and respect for human rights must be considered to be among the most important aims of the European Union .
In recent months , we have witnessed an upsurge of violence against Christian minorities around the world , particularly in countries where Islam is the majority religion .
This can no longer be tolerated .
I support this resolution , in the hope that the European institutions will fight religious intolerance more firmly and use all the means at their disposal to ensure safety and freedom of worship for the millions of Christians scattered around the world .
Next week , we celebrate Holocaust Memorial Day , which , of course , will take us back to the past , and Auschwitz .
It was a good thing that the resolution that we have adopted brings us to the present time , to consider the martyrs of today .
The premise is that freedom of religion must apply to all religions .
Since we raise the issue separately of the persecution experienced by Christians , this does not mean that we are biased .
It is because this , the largest group of those suffering persecution , is the one that tends to be the easiest to forget about in Europe .
It is time to put this right , for we know that in the last century , more Christians died because of their faith than in the previous 1 900 years .
Of those killed now because of their religion , 75 % are Christians .
Open Doors International has listed the 10 countries where Christians encounter most violence in the world .
They are North Korea , Iran , Saudi Arabia , Somalia , the Maldives , Afghanistan , Yemen , Mauritania , Laos and Uzbekistan , but the list goes on .
Approximately 100 million Christians every day suffer violence because of their religion .
Obviously , something concrete must come from the resolution that we have adopted .
The European External Action Service must show determination and address these failings surrounding freedom of religion .
Our foreign policy agreements with third countries must include a clause on freedom of religion and reciprocity .
From the perspective of the promotion of human rights , it is crucially important to speak about freedom of religion , because that is the human rights litmus test : freedom of speech and expression and freedom of association lie at the heart of human rights .
In recent years , 75 % of terrorist attacks of a religious nature have been against Christians .
In the last few months in particular , there has been an increase in the number of attacks , including direct attacks on churches while services were being held .
It is unacceptable in the 21st century for religious communities to have to be afraid to practise their faith freely .
The principle of the freedom of religion must apply to everyone throughout the world .
I therefore support the proposal to develop a strategy to actually enable the right to freedom of religious expression to be exercised .
My Christian roots cannot but condemn any act of violence against Christians and other religious communities around the world .
Likewise , this condemnation extends to any kind of discrimination and intolerance based on religion and faith against practitioners of a religion .
I believe the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion is a fundamental human right , which we hope to protect by means of this resolution .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which strongly condemns all acts of violence against Christians and other religious communities , as well as all kinds of discrimination and intolerance based on religion and belief , against religious people , apostates and non-believers .
The resolution stresses that the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion is a fundamental human right , and it expresses concern about the exodus of Christians from various countries , especially Middle Eastern countries , in recent years .
I urge the authorities of states with alarmingly high levels of attacks against religious denominations to take responsibility for ensuring normal and public religious practices for all religious denominations ; to step up their efforts to provide reliable and efficient protection for the religious denominations in their countries ; and to ensure the personal safety and physical integrity of members of religious denominations there , thereby complying with the obligations to which they have already committed themselves in the international arena .
As socialists , we support human rights as one of our basic policies .
Religious rights are an integral part of this policy and that is why we are in favour of strengthening them .
The events at Christmas , when the occupying forces interrupted mass in Rizokarpaso in occupied Cyprus , were an abomination .
State terrorism is being imposed in Turkish-occupied Cyprus by Turkey and the occupying army , at the expense of the Orthodox Christians , especially the few remaining Greek Cypriots trapped there .
The French Republic 's concept of secularism is the separation of church and state .
It guarantees freedom of conscience and of worship .
Religious violence is rooted in the dogmatism that is inherent in all religions .
We must therefore protect people against the violence generated by these religions .
Despite its implicit references to the criminal theory of a ' clash of civilisations ' and to the blind claims of the Catholic church , this text is a means of demanding religious freedom around the world and the protection of practising individuals against fanaticism .
I shall vote in favour , out of compassion and conviction .
We must vehemently condemn the various attacks against Christian communities throughout the world but , in particular , in Africa , Asia and the Middle East .
The proliferation of these episodes of intolerance , repression and violent acts directed at communities must concern us all .
The authorities of the countries concerned have made every effort to identify the perpetrators of and those responsible for such attacks against Christian communities .
Those responsible for these attacks and other acts of violence against Christians must be brought to justice and duly judged .
The lip service paid by the European Union to religious freedom is not enough .
In Islamic countries in particular , Christians are seen as fair game for suppression and , frequently , murder .
Despite this shocking situation , the EU , as a lofty community of values , has mostly chosen a policy of polite silence .
All in all , it would seem as if the political elite in Brussels , which is indifferent to Europe 's Christian roots , has also forgotten the fate of Christians in Islamic countries .
Instead of demanding an end to the persecution of Christians , we take refuge in political correctness , preferring to concern ourselves with the welfare of those Muslims living in the EU , who enjoy a level of religious freedom that most Christians in the Islamic world can only dream of .
In future , the plight of Christians must play a special role in the management of the EU 's foreign relations with Islamic countries .
The EU has sufficient ways and means to help improve the situation of Christians .
For example , development aid and other financial supports should be made conditional on allowing religious freedom for Christians .
I have voted accordingly .
It was with some determination that I voted today to condemn violence against Christian communities and religious minorities .
Respect for human rights and religious freedom must be a cornerstone of relations with other countries .
I have personally experienced the Turkish occupation of Northern Cyprus , a situation to which Europe has turned a deaf ear , even though Cyprus is a Member State .
In occupied Cyprus , most of the churches have been destroyed , the statues of saints have been disfigured , and on Christmas Day , Turkish soldiers prevented the celebration of Mass in two Orthodox churches .
Our freedom , the survival of a culture and a way of life based on the absolute value of the human person and equality of everyone before the state , equal rights for women , democracy and social justice are all in danger today .
Religious intolerance is becoming an increasingly frequent phenomenon in various parts of the world , and the terrible attacks against Christians in Egypt and Iraq over the last few weeks are the latest dangerous challenge posed by fundamentalist terrorism .
All of us in Europe need to open our eyes and take action to safeguard freedom of religion .
Recent attacks against Christian communities in Egypt , Nigeria , Iraq and Pakistan have made European intervention necessary , and the EU has strongly condemned the persecutions and mobilised its High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the situation of Christians in the context of freedom of religion because I feel we are , unfortunately , faced with a worldwide attack on Christianity , in which religious violence is being used for political purposes to block growth and development , encourage social hatred and destabilise the system in the countries where these attacks take place .
I therefore believe it is important for Europe , the promoter of respect for human rights and civil and democratic freedoms , to strongly condemn these violent attacks , which are putting the world back centuries and cutting off any hope of intercultural dialogue , tolerance , growth and social wellbeing .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the situation of Christians in the context of freedom of religion .
The joint resolution , following the attack against worshippers praying in a Coptic church in Alexandria in Egypt on 1 January 2011 condemns all forms of violence against citizens , regardless of the religious group to which they belong , and expresses its concern at the increasing number of cases of religious aggression .
I would remind the House that Greece is particularly sensitive on this issue , having mourned victims of a similar attack against Greek tourists by fanatical Islamists in Cairo in Egypt on 18 April 1996 .
in writing . - The European Union has repeatedly expressed its commitment to freedom of religion , freedom of conscience and freedom of thought , and has stressed that governments have a duty to guarantee these freedoms all over the world .
The development of human rights , democracy and civil liberties is the common base on which the European Union builds its relations with third countries , and it has been provided for by the democracy clause in the agreements between the EU and third countries .
Article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights declares that everyone has the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion ; and freedom of thought , conscience and religion applies not only to adherents of religions but also to atheists , agnostics and people without beliefs .
Thus , we condemn the recent attacks on Christian communities in various countries and expresses solidarity with the families of the victims ; we express our deep concerns about the proliferation of episodes of intolerance and repression and violent events directed against Christian communities , particularly in the countries of Africa , Asia and the Middle East .
We are debating the persecution of Christians around the world , but while we are talking about the violence that has taken place in Iraq , Egypt , the Philippines , India and elsewhere , we continue to ignore what has happened closer to home .
I am talking about the occupation by the Turkish army in 1974 of around one third of Cypriot territory .
This military occupation is still ongoing .
Thirty-eight thousand Turkish soldiers are garrisoned in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and the island is divided in two by walls and fences that even divide towns and villages .
Over the years , 520 Christian churches and monasteries have been systematically destroyed and replaced by minarets .
The artworks in these churches have been burnt , desecrated or plundered ; the cemeteries have been destroyed and Christian bishops are prohibited from holding Mass .
On Christmas Day , Turkish police officials prevented Mass being celebrated in Karpasia at the Church of St. Synesios in Rizokarpaso and the Church of the Holy Trinity .
However , the most incredible thing is that there are many Members of Parliament who defend Christians around the world , and yet they are in favour of Turkey joining the EU .
We hear of the persecution of Christians with increasing frequency .
The statistics provided by international organisations are appalling - they say that around 150 000 Christians are murdered worldwide every year .
We must not be indifferent to such disregard for human life .
The European Union , as a guardian of fundamental democratic values and human rights , should maintain better monitoring of the situation in third countries , and in the Middle East in particular .
Our efforts should be unequivocal and more resolute .
Freedom of religion is a fundamental human right , and religiously motivated discrimination and violence are inconsistent with our values .
By respecting these rights , we set an example to other countries , but we should be equally effective in exacting the same respect from others .
Human rights are universal and should be respected everywhere , and we should react decisively to any kind of expression of intolerance and , in particular , to religious intolerance .
The Union has suitable instruments at its disposal which permit us to force the governments of countries with which we maintain political or commercial relations to act properly and to respect civil liberties , including freedom of religion .
In Muslim countries , but also in countries such as China , India and Nepal , churches and chapels are burned with impunity , people are turned out onto the street , tortured or even killed and women are forced to undergo abortions .
In the name of correct economic relations , these things are not brought up at the negotiating table .
Europe must not remain silent .
I wholeheartedly support this resolution , which strongly condemns the growing number of attacks against Christian communities .
We cannot stand for such barbaric acts : they are expressions of hate and intolerance .
I condemn the violence and the loss of human life that have plunged numerous families and all Christian communities throughout the world into mourning .
To attack these communities is to undermine our most fundamental values .
Respect for religious diversity and religious freedom is a universal principle that must be upheld .
These attacks , carried out in the name of some extremist obscurantism from another era , are designed to create a climate of fear , and in the end , it is the survival of these ancient communities that is directly under threat .
The EU must show solidarity with the victims and must support the authorities , which are committed to pursuing the perpetrators .
This demand must be at the heart of our relations with our partners , in the same way as the human rights clauses .
Tolerance and peace are intimately linked , and I shall , as always , support the European Union 's actions to ensure respect for and the promotion of our values , freedoms and rights throughout the world .
This joint resolution deserved support because the number of attacks on Christian communities throughout the world grew in 2010 .
In the European Union , religious freedom and freedom of expression are intrinsic to our European identity .
At the same time , Christianity is of key importance in this context , as well as a significant component in European culture .
In the EU , Article 10 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 9 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms govern religious freedom .
The European Union must use all the firmness required in its relations with Belarus , the last regime in Europe and an anachronistic example of political state violence , which is totally incompatible with minimal western standards of democracy and freedom .
In this resolution , Europe is once again adopting a position of firmly condemning the events that occurred during the recent elections , while also renewing its condemnation of what has been happening in Belarus for decades , with censorship of information , the arrest and imprisonment of dissidents , and everything else that a deplorable dictatorship like that of Minsk does every day to keep civil society in check .
I am wholeheartedly voting in favour of the joint resolution .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the situation in Belarus .
Over 700 persons were detained for their participation in the demonstration on 19 December in Minsk , most of whom have been released after serving short administrative sentences , while 24 opposition activists and journalists , including 6 presidential candidates , have been charged for ' organising mass disorder ' accompanied by violent attacks and armed resistance that could carry prison sentences of up to 15 years .
We condemn the use of brutal force by the police and KGB services against the protesters on Election Day .
Such behaviour represents a severe violation of basic democratic principles , such as freedom of assembly and freedom of expression , as well as of human rights .
Given the current situation in Belarus , I would urge the Commission to continue to provide financial aid to the European Humanities University ( EHU ) based in Vilnius , Lithuania , to increase the number of scholarships for Belarusian students , repressed for their civic activities and expelled from universities , and to contribute to assistance for the organisation ' Solidarity with Belarus ' .
in writing . - The state of affairs in Belarus has deteriorated over recent months and is now of great concern .
It has been shown that the elections that have been carried out in no way satisfy the requirements of free and fair elections in a democracy .
The arrest and continued detention of Presidential candidates as well as the violence shown to protesters must be condemned .
The EU should do everything within its power to demonstrate that such events will not be taken lightly and possible measures should certainly include the consideration of economic sanctions against Belarus .
It is for these reasons that I have decided to support the joint motion for a resolution .
The decision made by the Belarusian authorities to terminate the mission of the OSCE Office is regrettable .
They have been requested to rescind this decision immediately .
On the very same lines , action to block several major websites on the day of the elections is deplorable .
Current media legislation in Belarus does not comply with international standards and therefore , the Belarusian authorities are called to revise and amend it .
Following an assessment of the political situation in Belarus , a serious violation of democratic rights and regulations has been observed .
As a result , we cannot but condemn the acts of repression against peaceful protesters , leaders of the democratic opposition , as well as numerous civil society activists , journalists , teachers and students .
I view the prevailing political and social situation in Belarus with a certain amount of apprehension but , I should say , also with a great deal of hope .
That is why I unconditionally support this joint resolution signed by five parliamentary groups , not including the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
However , as well as expressing my regret about what is happening , which is well described in the resolution , I would like to emphasise the specific measures targeted by this resolution , which I think that both the Council and the Commission should put into practice immediately : the application of economic sanctions ; the freezing of all financial aid granted through the International Monetary Fund and also through the European Investment Bank and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ; support by all possible means for the efforts of Belarusian civil society with a view to achieving a society with greater freedom and democracy ; restoring the ban on awarding visas to the main Belarusian leaders , extending it to top officials ; suspension of the participation of Belarus in the activities of the Eastern Partnership at the Eastern Partnership summit to be held in Budapest ; and , finally , intensification of the work relating to the directives for negotiating agreements for facilitating visas and readmission , with a view to strengthening contact between populations .
Belarus is the only country in the world where police are still operating under the name KGB .
This simple fact is symbolically illustrative of the type of regime in force there .
The citizens of Belarus are demanding and deserve effective changes that will improve their living conditions , effectively promote democracy and allow them full political self-determination .
I hope that the democratic countries will realise how incapable the Belarusian regime is of promoting the democratisation of the country and will openly oppose its repressive means and methods .
Based on the preliminary results and conclusions of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and of the OSCE / Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights , the presidential elections on 19 December 2010 failed to satisfy the international standards for free , fair and transparent elections .
Therefore , new free and democratic elections must be held soon , in accordance with the OSCE standards .
In addition , the brutal use of force by the police and the State Security Agency of the Republic of Belarus against demonstrations on the day of the elections is unacceptable .
I must express my serious concerns about the attempts by the Belarusian authorities to place in state custody Danil Sannikov , the three-year-old son of Andrei Sannikov , presidential candidate , and of Irina Khalip , investigative journalist , both held since the elections on 19 December .
All repressive measures must also be condemned and the Belarusian authorities urged to cease immediately all forms of persecution , intimidation and threats against civil activists .
I think that the Council , Commission and the High Representative of the EU must review EU policy relating to Belarus , including the possibility of applying specific economic sanctions and the freezing of all macro-financial aid .
Irrespective of our analysis of what is happening in Belarus , we cannot be complicit in this blatant attack on the independence and national sovereignty of this country , encouraging direct interference in its internal affairs and manipulating events that only the Belarusians and the authorities of the country are entitled to resolve , in order to try and align the state and its authorities with the interests of the European Union .
This resolution is a parade of unacceptable actions , the objective of which is to install in Minsk a regime that is open to the interests of the EU .
Let us look at a couple of examples :
it calls on the Commission to support , with all financial and political means , the efforts of Belarusian civil society , independent media ( including TV Belsat , European Radio for Belarus , Radio Racja and others ) and non-governmental organisations in Belarus to promote democracy and oppose the regime ;
it calls on the Commission to develop a mechanism of registration of NGOs that are denied registration in Belarus for political reasons , in order to enable them to benefit from EU programmes .
Therefore , we did not vote in favour of this resolution .
in writing . - ( LV ) The European Union must actively declare its position on events in Belarus .
We must condemn the violent repression of the opposition and the falsification of the results of the presidential election .
Liberty is one of the fundamental values of the European Union , and we can successfully develop cooperation only with those states where these values are respected .
That is why release of political prisoners is one of the preconditions for the resumption of dialogue between the European Union and Belarus .
With this declaration , the European Parliament must send a clear signal to the government of Belarus that we want cooperation , but that we shall never be prepared to ignore the political freedom of individuals or the falsification of election results for the sake of economic interests , especially because , more than 20 years ago , a significant part of the Members of the European Parliament were fighting for freedom themselves .
Sanctions must be introduced against the Belarusian regime , but they must not impact on the Belarusian people to whom we must open a window to Europe .
European universities must accept those young people from Belarus who are excluded from universities there on account of their political activity and who will never again be able to obtain an education in a Belarus led by Lukashenko .
We must consolidate our collaboration with the representatives of civil society in Belarus , support their struggle and share experiences with them .
I am convinced that the people of Belarus deserve a democratic state where human rights are respected , where fair elections take place , and where freedom of speech prevails .
If the government of Belarus wants cooperation with us , then it will be obliged to respect these conditions .
A situation in which , on our very doorstep - in Belarus , manifestations of democracy in both political and NGO respects are brutally suppressed is unacceptable .
I supported this resolution because I believe that the support of the Western allies is essential for the opposition to the authoritarian regime in Belarus .
This is an opportunity for the Union to forge a common foreign policy and defend those values for which it stands as a matter of routine .
At the same time , the European Union must introduce sanctions against the authoritarian government of Belarus and give both moral and financial support to the democracy movement in Belarus .
in writing . - I voted for the joint resolution on Belarus , being one of its initiators on behalf of the PPE Group .
The resolution addresses in a clear and unambiguous way the tragic situation in Belarus , created by its dictator , Lukashenko , since 19 December 2010 .
Therefore , I would like to stress paragraph 15 , which invites the EU Member States not to weaken EU joint actions with bilateral initiatives that could undermine the credibility and effectiveness of the European approach .
Also , I see not holding the 2014 World Ice Hockey Championships in Minsk as being one of the most efficient levers in the proposal for exerting influence on the Belarus authorities to abandon their repressive politics .
The European Union has always considered humanitarian policy and the protection of fundamental human rights to be its priorities .
Its vocation , which today allows it to play a leading role on the world stage and export beyond its borders the principles of democracy , respect for human rights and legality , enables us to understand the reasons behind the proposal for a joint resolution aimed at calling on Belarus to respect all the efforts that have been made on matters of international law and human rights .
The events that occurred during the elections on 19 December are , sadly , well known .
They were characterised by the brutal repression of popular demonstrations complaining about a number of obvious cases of vote rigging , carried out by the police and secret service agents .
Such unacceptable events have led the European Parliament , acting on statements made previously by its President , Mr Buzek , to call on the Union to impose heavy sanctions on Belarus and to launch an enquiry by external , impartial authorities to reconstruct what happened and ascertain who was responsible .
The countries of the former socialist bloc understand the political situation in Belarus very well - restrictions on personal freedom and on freedom of the press and the media , and an undemocratic system of government .
In view of the recent events in Belarus following the presidential elections , I would like to draw attention to the steps which the European Parliament will take together with the Commission and the Council to intervene in this matter .
After all , we must talk about measures for helping Belarusian democracy and seek effective ways of reconsidering EU policy towards the Lukashenko regime .
In the present situation , we must put pressure on Minsk and request the release of political prisoners and cessation of the persecution of journalists .
This is why I voted for the adoption of the resolution . Thank you .
in writing . - The situation in Belarus is intolerable and I join my colleagues in condemning the use of brutal force by the police and KGB services against the protesters on Election Day , in particular , over a brutal attack on Mr Niakliayeu , among many cases of severe violation of basic democratic principles , such as freedom of assembly and freedom of expression , as well as of human rights , and express my concern at the attempts of the Belarusian authorities to take into state custody Danil Sannikov , 3-year-old son of the presidential candidate , Andrei Sannikov , and Irina Khalip , an investigative journalist , who have both been jailed since the 19 December election .
I join the call for the Commission to support with all financial and political means the efforts of the Belarusian civil society to promote democracy and oppose the regime .
We should not just close the door and thereby reduce the chance for improved dialogue .
The introduction of strict sanctions might , through its impact , create a barrier and isolate this country even more .
In the final analysis , the greatest impact would , in all probability , be felt by persons other than the ones targeted .
Communications between the EU and Belarus should continue intensively , making use of all the possibilities of diplomacy , and reviewed regularly .
As far as effectiveness is concerned , it should involve establishing a different kind of dialogue , held in a different form and at different levels , including a balanced , rather than a one-sided , assessment .
The cornerstone , however , should be a careful assessment of experience to date in mutual communications between the EU and Belarus , on the basis of which the experience could be incorporated into a strategic plan clearly reflecting EU foreign policy on this country .
This could lead , in the long-term , to improved relations and the start of new cooperation projects , contributing to the further development of this country and preserving its sovereignty .
The Eastern Partnership can play a significant role here .
A general consensus has emerged from the debate in this Chamber that Europe needs to react strongly to the recent events that took place in Belarus following the presidential elections there .
Personally , I believe a coordinated approach should be adopted : while , on the one hand , Europe wants to put some kind of pressure on the Belarusian Government , on the other , it must not completely cut off cooperation with the Minsk authorities , without thereby endorsing their policy .
Such an approach would , in fact , only hurt the people of Belarus .
That is why we need to continue to support all the measures that favour civil society and protect the opposition , independent mass media and non-governmental organisations .
It appears , therefore , that the cooperation mechanisms between the European Union and Belarus should not be interrupted at all , since they alone can make a real contribution to the country 's wellbeing and to its social and democratic growth .
I would therefore argue that the ' critical dialogue ' that the 27 Member States of the EU have already put in place should be maintained , in order to convince Belarus that it must strengthen its resolve to move towards European standards in terms of respect for democracy and protection of human rights .
What is happening in Belarus must be of concern to all those who believe in democracy and the rule of law .
The citizens of this country are living under a regime that does not respect human rights and maintains an extremely savage political police force .
The EU must support all efforts made leading to the democratisation of this regime and an improvement in the lives of its population .
It is necessary to put an end to the repression still in force in Belarus .
We can only condemn the use of force and violence by the police and the KGB against protesters on election day .
Over 600 people were arrested and imprisoned .
Arrests , searches and further convictions continued over the next few days .
This unacceptable attitude towards the opposition should be of great concern to us .
Anyone arrested for political reasons should be released immediately .
There must be no further persecution of the opposition , democratic forces , or civil society representatives .
The position taken by the authorities is also puzzling because it runs counter to that adopted during the election campaign , during which we witnessed the emergence of pluralistic forces , the formation of a real opposition and an active civil society .
The EU has not recognised the official poll results .
Whether or not measures should be taken against the government , these measures must not penalise the people , NGOs or civil society .
The Foreign Affairs Council of 31 January 2011 will have to decide on appropriate measures .
There are comments in the media claiming that the reintroduction of the sanctions against Belarus ' President Lukashenko , which were relaxed more than two years ago , would be tantamount to admitting that our longstanding efforts at rapprochement have failed .
The fact is that these efforts had failed before now , for example , at the time of the presidential elections and , if not sooner , they had certainly done so by the time the OSCE offices in Minsk were closed and accusations of attempted destabilisation were made against Germany and Poland .
However , in many instances , the resolution exaggerates the issues , making what is basically a good text susceptible to criticism .
For example , a call to ban all government officials and representatives of the justice system from entering the EU will not achieve the intended objective .
The cancellation of the 2014 World Ice Hockey Championships would be a similar example of excessive megaphone diplomacy .
It is for that reason that I have abstained from voting .
I agree that there should be a fundamental review of EU policy on Belarus at the next Foreign Affairs Council .
I believe that not just in the European Parliament and the Commission , but also at ministerial level and the level of Heads of State , constant attention needs to be paid to Belarus and the situation in it , because Belarus is a country that shares a border with the EU .
The appointment of EU coordinators for Belarusian affairs might ensure united action by the EU as regards this country .
I support the provision that the EU should freeze the visa ban for an extended list of Belarus officials but , at the same time , unlock contacts and travel within the EU for ordinary Belarusians as much as possible .
Lithuania is following this route , having signed an agreement on streamlined cross-border movement with Belarus , and issuing free visas to Belarusian citizens .
I also support the objective of establishing the ' most sensitive areas ' and reaching a decision on the application of targeted sanctions , while directing and adapting EU assistance to Belarusian civil society .
I call on the Commission to find ways of increasing access to independent information for the Belarusian population .
The European Humanities University in Vilnius is one of the most successful long-term development cooperation projects as regards Belarus .
Faced with such an internal situation in Belarus , where all roads to becoming a critical , conscious and free citizen have long been blocked , the EHU is becoming not just an island of free Belarusian thought , but also a breeding ground for future Belarusian leaders .
EU assistance for this university should therefore not only be maintained , but increased .
That is logical and something we should welcome .
The motion for a resolution contains some very excessive demands , such as visa restrictions for state officials and members of the judiciary .
There is also an intention to boycott the World Ice Hockey Championships in 2014 .
Therefore , I have abstained from voting .
Following the presidential elections in Belarus on 19 December 2010 , which resulted in the re-election of President Lukashenko , there were protest demonstrations that were violently suppressed by the police .
Many demonstrators and opposition leaders were arrested and could face severe sentences .
The European Union cannot stand by and watch that happen : we all need to focus our attention on securing the release of those people after what happened following the election .
That is one of the reasons why my vote in favour is intended as a gesture of assent for a joint resolution to provide support for Belarus to participate in the process of cooperating with the European Union .
In my view , we need to address this issue quickly and practically in a coordinated approach that actively supports civil society and protects the opposition and their families .
My vote in favour is based on the need , which is now strongly felt in the EU , to convince Belarus that it must move towards European standards in terms of respect for democracy and protection of human rights .
in writing . - With this resolution , Parliament clearly considers - in line with the preliminary conclusions of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly and OSCE / ODIHR - that the presidential elections of 19 December 2010 failed to meet international standards of free , fair and transparent elections ; considers this vote as yet another missed opportunity for a democratic transition in Belarus ; and calls , in the light of numerous and serious irregularities reported by OSCE / ODIHR , for new elections be held under free and democratic conditions , in accordance with OSCE standards .
It also condemns the use of brutal force by the police and KGB services against the protesters on election day and , in particular , expresses its indignation over a brutal attack on Uladzimir Niakliayeu - examples of the severe violation of basic democratic principles such as freedom of assembly and freedom of expression , as well as of human rights , and it expresses its concern at the attempts by the Belarusian authorities to take into state custody Danil Sannikov , three-year-old son of presidential candidate , Andrei Sannikov , and investigative journalist , Irina Khalip , both of whom have been jailed since the 19 December election .
The EU 's policy on Belarus , a policy of dialogue and an outstretched hand , has proved ineffective .
The time has come , therefore , for difficult but determined decisions to be made , which , on the one hand , will mean sanctions against the regime , but which , on the other , will mean openness to Belarusian civil society , because without its support , the changes which are needed will not take place in Belarus .
The resolution speaks about this .
I welcome this report , the Commission having reacted to the crisis and , at the same time , applied competition policy measures .
I advocate Parliament playing its role as colegislator as regards competition policy and , since this is not possible , I call on the Commission to inform Parliament in detail on the follow-up given to its recommendations and to justify any deviations from them .
It is regrettable that it has still not been possible to improve the competition framework within the single market to make it more favourable for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the Report on Competition Policy 2009 .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that Parliament should have a more active role in the shaping of competition policy through the introduction of a colegislative role .
In order to achieve this objective , Parliament must be informed regularly of any initiatives in this field .
I have no doubt that Parliament 's active role in the shaping of EU competition policy will be a significant contribution to the successful implementation of competition policy and the unrestricted functioning of the internal market , which are essential preconditions for sustainable economic growth in the European Union .
One of the principles of the Treaty on European Union stipulates that Member States must adopt an economic policy ' in accordance with the principles of the open market economy , based on fair competition ' .
The purpose of the competition policy is to create genuine competition on the single market using measures relating to the market 's structures and the behaviour of its actors .
Free competition fosters innovation , reduces production costs , increases economic efficiency and , consequently , boosts the level of the European economy 's competitiveness .
The report covers both antitrust policies and State aid control policies .
It also features rules and procedures for combating anti-competitive behaviour in companies and prevents governments from granting State aid which distorts competition in the internal market .
I voted for this report as I regard competition policy as a key instrument enabling the European Union to have a dynamic , efficient and innovative internal market , to be globally competitive , as well as emerge from the financial crisis .
Consumers gain most when competition policy is applied effectively .
Every year , the European Commission 's Directorate-General for Competition publishes its report on EU competition policy .
The European Commission is equipped with very broad powers in this area so that it can ensure the proper functioning of the internal market .
The year 2009 was marked by tough crisis conditions , which the European Commission had to take into account when supervising the practices of undertakings .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution because it appeals to the European Commission to ensure that MEPs are more involved in the decision-making process concerning this policy , that more consideration is given to services of general interest , and that its services pay more attention to the activities of undertakings in the financial sector .
Had there been an electronic vote on the Report on Competition Policy 2009 , I would have abstained .
Indeed , there were some good things in this report ( assessment of competition policy , consumer rights , innovation and a greater role for SMEs ) , but I deplore the general angle from which it was written : a kind of suspicion in relation to State aid - which is presumed to conflict a priori with competition policy - and a way of advocating the early liberalisation of certain sectors of the economy , particularly the rail sector , which seems to me inappropriate .
We need to change that angle and place the citizens back at the heart of the problem .
We can see , particularly for public services , that rules on State aid are inadequate to the tasks performed by a public service and should therefore be rewritten , considering citizens ' needs and social cohesion above all else .
I voted in favour of this report on the Report on Competition Policy 2009 .
The European Commission was quick to react to the economic and financial crisis , and competition policy measures were adapted effectively .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that Parliament should participate more actively in the shaping of competition policy through the introduction of a colegislative role .
Furthermore , Parliament must be informed regularly of any initiatives in this field .
An EU competition policy based on the principles of open markets and a level playing field in all sectors is a cornerstone of a successful internal market and a precondition for the creation of sustainable and knowledge-based jobs .
I would like to stress the need to draft clear competition rules that are helpful and useful for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , because the successful implementation of competition policy and the unrestricted functioning of the internal market are essential preconditions for sustainable economic growth in the European Union .
I would urge the Commission to focus more on ensuring fair competition within the internal market , and a level playing field with regard to exit conditions .
in writing . - It is crucial to note that due to the exceptional circumstances that have been witnessed because of the financial crisis , a degree of flexibility has necessarily had to be exercised in the context of EU competition policy .
Nevertheless , it is crucial to understand that the principles upon which the policy is based are those of open markets and the ensuring of a level playing field .
These are essential conditions for a successful internal market .
It is my opinion that this report has adequately tackled the issues of concern that have arisen as a result of the crisis .
The report has also been successful in setting out the best way forward .
I have therefore decided to vote in favour of the report .
The Report on Competition Policy is an important document , emphasising that in times of crisis , it is essential not only to ensure financial stability and re-establish credit flows , but we must also guarantee , in particular , that all the conditions and verification and control mechanisms are in place for the markets to operate efficiently .
On the other hand , in such circumstances , competition rules must be applied flexibly when necessary , without compromising on the principles which the policies in this area are based on .
We must not forget that during the crisis , quite a few voices have been heard calling for the introduction of protectionist policies , which would only serve to deepen and prolong the crisis .
Competition policy is a key instrument enabling the EU to have a dynamic , efficient and innovative internal market , which is globally competitive .
This is why the observations and recommendations made by the report on sector policies in this area are welcome , as are those concerning the scope and destination of State aid .
EU competition policy is not just a fundamental policy that truly underpins the European legal framework , but it also constitutes the basis of a successful internal market and a sustainable and competitive economy .
That is why I consider it important that the Commission informs Parliament on its development and application .
As we are all aware , 2009 was an extraordinary year for a variety of reasons .
It was the year that followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers ( September 2008 ) , which meant that various exceptional measures were introduced with regard to competition , in particular , concerning State aid , the four communications relating to the financial sector and the provisional framework directed at the remaining sectors .
Therefore , I consider it essential to carry out an in-depth analysis on the impact that these measures have had on the economy and finances of the various states and to examine their effectiveness so that the necessary conclusions can be drawn .
This resolution is on 2009 competition policy and contains a global perspective of all state support of the transport sector within the EU , which is fundamental for the existence of a market without borders and for the free movement of people , goods and services .
The economic crisis of the last few years is reflected in the bankruptcy of many businesses and it is imperative to adopt regulatory measures that prevent the distortion of this activity , namely , by regulating support to the sector .
Moreover , the peripheral countries of the EU have seen increased costs in this field , when funds to minimise this situation have been necessary .
Therefore , I welcome the adoption of this resolution and welcome the creation of a set of market monitoring measures , the environmental concern about CO2 emissions , and the incentivisation of research into ways to improve competitiveness in Europe , namely , through the recommendation that the Commission and the Member States should provide 3 % investment in this area .
It is unacceptable that , at a time when the financial and economic crisis is deepening , the European Parliament should approve a report on Competition Policy 2009 that defends competition and insists on new liberalisation measures , particularly in the railway sector , when it states that it is necessary to complete the single railway market by opening up national passenger transport markets .
The same occurs in connection with the pharmaceutical sector , when it asks the Commission to expedite the completion of the internal market in medicines , as well as in telecommunications , etc .
What we have , then , is a report that intends to expand liberalisation in basic sectors in order to improve people 's living conditions , but without thinking about the effects on employment , prices and people 's lives .
It is only interested in the profits of the economic and financial groups , even if it occasionally refers to small and medium-sized enterprises , which the neoliberal policy of the European Union is putting in jeopardy .
It always overlooks the fact that this so-called free competition merely allows large companies to crush small ones , when those suffering the consequences are workers , consumers and small entrepreneurs .
Therefore , we voted against the report .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because protectionism and non-enforcement of competition rules would only deepen and prolong the crisis .
Competition policy is an essential tool to enable the EU to have a dynamic , efficient and innovative internal market and to be competitive on the global stage , as well as to overcome the financial crisis .
Competition is still imperfect in the energy sector , agricultural production and other sectors , and Parliament should therefore participate more actively in the shaping of competition policy through the introduction of a colegislative role .
Parliament 's active role in the shaping of EU competition policy will be a significant contribution to the successful implementation of competition policy and the functioning of the internal market , which are essential preconditions and premises for sustainable economic growth in the European Union .
On the issue of the report on competition policy for 2009 , I would like to reiterate the importance of the follow-up actions to assess the effectiveness of the State aid provided .
It is vital for the European single market that the Commission conduct an in-depth analysis of the consequences of the review of the state assistance mechanism carried out in response to the crisis , and with regard to healthy competition and ensuring a level playing field in the EU , financial reform and job creation .
We must not forget that the process of reviewing the mechanisms for providing state assistance was initiated for one purpose only : to help the Member States ' economies recover from the crisis .
By monitoring the outcomes of the provision of state assistance , the Commission must satisfy itself that the measures taken do not exceed the initial aim , because the essence of EU competition policy is equal participation in the single market .
We have voted on a crucially important document on EU competition policy .
Competition is essential for the healthy functioning of the economy .
Competition should be looked at worldwide as well as inside the Union .
In the worldwide approach , we have to concentrate , among other things , on the rules of play in the market , and also at the cost side of competitive producers from outside the European Union .
This concerns Chinese and Korean producers in particular .
I welcome the call for completion of the single railway market throughout Europe .
Healthy principles of competition can contribute to revitalisation of the railways and increase their share of the transport market .
This may bring us closer to the idea of a European railway system , similar to the road or aviation system .
The year 2009 was a difficult year for the European Union , marked by the especially serious financial and economic crisis , and it was not alone in this .
The negative effects of this crisis hit the economy and business environment hard , as well as decision makers .
While decision makers have tried to draw up policies that will minimise the impact of the crisis on the real economy , the European Commission , together with Member States and central banks , has worked hard to stabilise the financial system .
This year 's report pays particular attention to these issues and notes with satisfaction the rapid response from the Commission and its successful application of competition policy measures .
I voted in favour of this report as I think that the European Union needs a strong competition policy , founded on the principle of a free market and fair competition in all sectors , which will generate a successful internal market and will favour the creation of sustainable , knowledge-based jobs .
in writing . - I voted for this Report and particularly want to draw attention to paragraph 105 which calls on the Commission to seek the completion of the single railway market .
A call I strongly endorse .
I voted in favour of this report because , based on a positive evaluation of the action taken by the European Commission again this year , it strongly supports a more active role for Parliament in the shaping of competition policy .
We are therefore asking for a ' colegislative ' role and for Parliament to be regularly informed of any initiatives in this field .
We wish to emphasise that an EU competition policy based on the principles of open markets and a level playing field in all sectors is a cornerstone of a successful internal market and a precondition for the creation of sustainable jobs .
We therefore underline our call for greater consistency between all EU policies and the priorities set out in the EU 2020 strategy for growth and jobs .
It is necessary to draft clearer competition rules that encourage the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are a driver of growth in all our economies .
At the same time , we call on the Member States to cooperate actively with the Commission in developing and evaluating the temporary rules established in response to the financial and economic crisis by providing accurate , detailed reports on their implementation and effectiveness .
This report is an ode to the free and undistorted competition that it holds up as an infallible remedy against the financial crisis .
In fact , it is quite the opposite . Competition is the disease , not the cure .
This report is an absurd credo . I shall vote against it .
The analysis of the report on 2009 competition policy shows that the economic crisis , which started in 2008 , may have had some effect on this very policy , not least because the Member States have provided aid to their respective economies in different ways .
It is time to analyse the consequences of this aid for the internal market and interpret whether it has distorted free competition .
We cannot forget that EU competition policy is based on open-market principles and on an activity plan that is equitable in all sectors ; this constitutes the foundation of a successful internal market and a precondition for the creation of sustainable , knowledge-based jobs .
The financial and economic crisis that has rocked the financial markets has naturally also impacted on competition policy .
This impact is apparent in the growing budgetary deficits and increasing public debt in many Member States , slowing down economic recovery , and also in the state supports provided in response to the financial crisis .
The government guarantees have led to a variety of effects and distortions , such as a reduction in the spread of private loans , as well as an impact on the strategy followed by the pension funds .
European policy on competition should make the internal market competitive on a global level .
There is little doubt that a coordinated approach in this area makes sense .
However , it should not degenerate into an attack on sovereignty .
For this reason , I have voted against the report .
I voted in favour of Mr Eppink 's report on competition policy 2009 because competition policy is an essential tool for tackling the effects of the economic crisis .
In terms of competition for 2009 , following the recovery of the financial sector , the Commission carried out - as it is still doing - the essential task of supervising the banks ' repayment of the State aid disbursed to revitalise the economy .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) need to be supported first of all .
Since SMEs have a crucial role to play for the European economy as a whole on account of their great innovation potential , they need clear , fair and non-discriminatory competition rules in order to facilitate cross-border transactions and to take advantage of the EU market by making effective use of SEPA ( the Single Euro Payments Area ) .
in writing . - We have supported globally the proposed report , although we lost some important votes regarding ecological taxation .
However , in general terms , the text was good enough to be supported by us at the end ( with no enthusiasm , that is true ) .
It is becoming increasingly obvious , including in the light of the Commission 's 2009 Report on Competition Policy in Europe , that competition policy is an essential tool that will help the European Union to have a dynamic , efficient and innovative internal market and to be competitive on the global stage , as well as to overcome the financial crisis .
In this context , the European Parliament must have a more active role , starting by increasing its involvement in any of the Commission 's initiatives in this field , as the Commission is the sole EU-wide competent competition authority .
The report points out that small and medium-sized enterprises are particularly important for the whole European economy , stresses the major innovation potential of small and medium-sized enterprises , and reiterates its previous request to the Commission to adopt new initiatives with a focus on fair and non-discriminatory competition conditions for such companies .
We want the internal market to be effective , dynamic and innovative .
Competition policy is the right tool for achieving these objectives .
A priority for the next period is to ensure lasting growth by increasing employment levels , which will result in a strengthening of our competitiveness .
This will contribute to an improvement in the Union 's world position and allow us to overcome the crisis but , above all , it will raise our citizens ' quality of life .
If competition is operating properly in the market for goods and services , we can guarantee better quality , lower prices and greater choice for the consumer .
In particular , we must remember small and medium-sized enterprises , which not only provide jobs for most of our citizens , but also possess huge potential for innovation .
Therefore , it is very important to create fair and non-discriminatory conditions for them to operate , and to develop very clear and transparent rules of competition .
The Commission 's effective use of the instruments of competition policy allowed stabilisation of the economy and moderation of the effects of the economic crisis on businesses and consumers .
The year 2009 was one in which help was essential in order to maintain the integrity and competitiveness of the single market .
The policy of State aid is a crucial element of competition policy , because it allows equal opportunities to be guaranteed to all businesspeople operating in the single market .
However , that aid should be monitored , so that it does not impair the working of the market .
The analysis of the report on Competition Policy prepared by the European Commission relating to 2009 allows us to draw conclusions concerning the advantages of this European policy .
The European free competition policy is one of the key policies of European integration .
The underlying concept aims to establish an internal market where its economic players can freely initiate and exercise their activities .
As stated in this document , I believe that it is necessary to have clear competition rules so that the creation of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) is a real possibility .
At present , the European Union is passing through one of the most serious periods of economic and financial crisis in its entire history and the activity of SMEs is vital for re-booting the economy .
I am pleased to see the development of greater synergies between competition policy and consumer protection policy .
However , I regret that there is still unfair competition in the energy market and I support the invitation made to the European Commission in the document put to the vote today to monitor closely the implementation by the Member States of the third energy liberalisation package .
in writing . - I fully support the calls in this resolution for stronger rules in the area of competition policy .
Compensation for individuals and firms where infringements of EU anti-trust law have taken place will go a long way to dissuading companies and individuals from breaching these laws .
This proposal is well balanced and calls for a wide range of instruments to be developed to deter people from breaching the rules , including individual liability , transparency and accountability of firms , the right of defence and due process .
I am glad that the proposal has not gone as far as the US where the level of fines has led to excessive damages being awarded , resulting in some job losses .
I am voting for this report , taking into account the fact that three EU Member States are members of the Arctic Council , while Iceland is in membership negotiations .
The EU plays an important role in this region and already has shared competences in a number of areas , as well as exclusive ones such as fisheries .
In addition , the EU plays a leading role on certain policies , such as environmental and climate-change research .
In addition to this situation , it is necessary to take into account the fact that some Arctic partners are already major suppliers of energy , raw materials and fish to Europe .
Their variety of resources and potential for alternative sources of energy can only be developed through an eco-systematic approach and with integrated management plans .
Also , the development of new trade routes may benefit the European economy , given the privileged position of Europe to supply services , such as Global Positioning System coverage using the Galileo system .
I voted in favour of this resolution on a sustainable EU policy for the High North .
I agree that there is a need for a united , coordinated EU policy on the Arctic region , in which both the EU 's priorities and the potential challenges and a strategy are clearly defined , taking into account Arctic renewable and non-renewable resources , the impact of climate change on the region and the different geopolitical appreciation of the Arctic on a larger scale .
The Arctic is a sensitive region where the effects of climate change are especially visible , having serious repercussions on other regions in the world .
Therefore , the best protection for the Arctic is a long-term and ambitious global climate agreement , but the rapid warming of the Arctic makes it necessary , in addition , to work on possible further short-term measures to limit Arctic warming .
This is particularly important given the increasing interest in the exploitation of resources .
We also must not forget the indigenous peoples whose economies rely , to a significant extent , on sustainable use of natural resources and therefore , the reduction of climate change and its effects and the right of the indigenous peoples to an unpolluted natural environment are also questions of human rights .
It is estimated that about a fifth of the world 's undiscovered hydrocarbon resources are located in the Arctic region .
This region is also a very important route for world maritime transport .
The availability and safety of these transport routes are therefore of the utmost importance .
The Union may not have a coastline on this sea , but Europeans are , of course , greatly affected by what goes on in the Arctic .
That is why I voted in favour of this resolution , which endorses a strategy for the High North .
The Union must play its role as a world power by asserting both its interests in the region and the need for good global governance of natural resources and of the environmental challenges that are certain to arise .
On this occasion , an explicit reference has been made to the role that Iceland 's accession might play in this area .
I voted in favour of the report on a sustainable EU policy for the High North , because climate change is the main driver of change in the Arctic as elsewhere .
It is commonly agreed that the Arctic is a region that is affected earlier and more heavily by climate change and pollution originating in the industrialised or developing parts of the world .
This question needs to be dealt with on a global level , since its causes lie outside the Arctic and , in turn , will also affect the whole globe .
The EU is already a frontrunner in research and in environmental and climate change policies in the international context and will continue to be so .
Having said this , and recalling the contribution already made today by the EU and its Member States as regards research , funding , its impact through EU legislation on the environment , climate , fisheries , etc . , as well as the possibilities for cooperation in the future on issues such as the development of mapping and maritime safety , economic development and the like , it can be concluded that the EU has a lot to contribute to the sustainable development of the Arctic .
This region will be of major importance to a world adapting to climate change , facing a growing population and a scarcity of resources .
The effects of climate change have a greater impact on the Arctic region than any other region .
We must combat the consequences of changes affecting areas ranging from the environment and climate to the geopolitics of shipping routes and the supply security of resources .
Since the growth of new economies is resulting in an increasing need for resources , energy and minerals , the EU has a natural interest in ensuring the supply security of the resources and energy needed for the population and industries of Europe .
With regard to the geopolitical picture , this will change considerably if Iceland 's EU accession negotiations prove successful .
Iceland 's accession would also strengthen the EU 's presence in the region .
The EU can make a significant contribution to the sustainable development of the Arctic , a region which will be of major importance to a world adapting to climate change , facing a growing population and scarcity of resources .
Three Member States - Denmark , Sweden and Finland - are part of the Arctic Council , at which the EU is an observer .
Bearing in mind that 40 % of the world 's sea trade is conducted by Member States of the EU , it is essential to guarantee the safety of the new world routes through the Arctic , particularly for the Member States of the EU .
Like the author of this report , I believe that cooperation to protect the fragile environment of the Arctic , the interests of its inhabitants and the development of the region is very welcome .
In the present context of prioritising the fight against climate change , the defence and promotion of the Arctic region is of crucial importance , not only in environmental terms , but also in terms of economic development , and of global stability and security .
Its potential in terms of renewable energy supplies and fish is particularly important , meaning that the sustainable exploitation of the natural resources of this region is crucial .
However , we must not fail to give sufficient weight to the interests of this region 's indigenous peoples in this process .
In this respect , the European Union can and must take on a major role in protecting the culture , language , customs and living conditions of these indigenous communities .
Without this , any strategy of intervention to safeguard an extremely important region for the future of the world 's population and the planet will be at risk .
I would stress the importance of guaranteeing the best conditions for scientific research .
I voted in favour of this resolution on a sustainable EU policy for the High North .
The Arctic region is attracting more and more attention , due to the effects of climate change , the main trigger of developments .
Europe does not only bear a certain responsibility , being one of the main contributors to pollution and greenhouse gas emissions , but also has a particular interest in the Arctic , since it will have to deal with the consequences of the changes taking place there , from environmental and climate change issues to the geopolitics of shipping routes and security of supply of resources .
It is essential to formulate EU policy as regards the Arctic region with very specific and comprehensive proposals : from the inclusion of local inhabitants in the dialogue and stability and security in the region to the environmental and climate change dimensions of future projects .
The indigenous peoples have a right to an unpolluted natural environment .
The region of the Arctic Ocean is assuming ever greater significance , not just for the continent of Europe , but for the whole world .
The climate change taking place in the far north is going to have colossal significance for all of humanity .
It is absolutely essential to concentrate efforts on scientific research and to develop a plan for tackling these changes .
The Arctic is also an area of resources , such as hydrocarbons , and of the potential for obtaining renewable energy such as wind or water power .
Another economically important resource are fish , which are of fundamental significance in the context of food security .
Neither can we forget about the maritime transport routes , which facilitate international trade and enable many enterprises to perform better .
In all these areas , the European Union can , and should , make a contribution , helping in the development of the region and setting new standards in striving to protect our planet 's environment .
The High North is rich in resources and energy and will open up new sea routes that could be used by the European Union .
The mineral resources present there are valuable and must also be treated as such .
When extracting raw materials , it is important that the ecological system is not too badly affected .
The indigenous peoples also need special protection and consideration .
The Arctic is a world heritage site and must also be regarded as such .
Therefore , our focus should be on the preservation of this heritage , not the extraction of resources .
I support the report on a sustainable EU policy for the High North by my fellow Member , Mr Gahler .
As the Gahler report states , ' the challenges facing the Arctic are global and should therefore include all relevant actors ' .
The issue of the Arctic region now requires our constant attention more than ever , because of the worrying problems caused by the effects of climate change .
The Arctic is , geopolitically , a very important region , containing an estimated one fifth of the world 's undiscovered hydrocarbon resources .
The fact that three EU Member States - Denmark , Finland and Sweden - are Arctic countries accounts for the Union 's interest in ensuring that environmental factors are henceforth taken far more into account than they are at present .
The Union has always fought for the environment and has made great efforts to protect it through preventive measures .
With the outcome of today 's vote in this House , it is once again strongly confirming its position .
in writing . - I welcome the suggestion of an EU policy for the High North , but any such policy must be conscious of the need to protect the fragile environment of the Arctic and underline the importance of overall stability and peace in the region .
It should stress that the EU should pursue policies that ensure that measures to address environmental concerns take into account the interests of the inhabitants of the Arctic region , including its indigenous peoples , in protecting and developing the region .
It should also stress the similarity in approach , analysis and priorities between the Commission Communication and policy documents in the Arctic States and the need to engage in policies that respect the interest in sustainable management and use of the land-based and marine , non-renewable and renewable natural resources of the Arctic region , which , in turn , provide important resources for Europe and are a major source of income to the inhabitants of the region .
I voted in favour of the report on a sustainable EU policy for the High North , which stresses the need to develop a dialogue with indigenous Arctic communities in order to gain more understanding of their living conditions and culture .
This idea , which is repeated many times in the text , is crucial .
The European Union 's interests must reflect the indigenous peoples ' interests to protect and develop the Arctic region .
We call for specific measures to preserve the culture , language and customs of these peoples , something which requires a regular dialogue between their representatives and the EU institutions .
We call for the European Commission to safeguard the interests of the indigenous peoples when it negotiates trade agreements .
Thus , I deplore the European regulation on the ban on seal products , which goes against the interests - in terms of sustainable management of resources - culture and customs of Arctic communities .
This regulation , which has rightly been challenged by Canada and Norway , undermines the European Union 's interests in the Arctic region and should , in my view , be withdrawn .
This report advocates the sustainable exploitation of the Arctic but relieves the oil and gas companies of any responsibility in this regard .
It disregards environmentalists ' comments on the looting that is taking place in this region , which is vital to mankind 's survival .
Worse still , at no point does it consider limiting investment in the exploitation of non-renewable resources in the High North for the benefit of research in renewable energy .
This report validates environmental crime .
I shall vote against it .
The relationship that exists between the EU and the Arctic is beyond doubt , since Denmark , Finland and Sweden are arctic countries and both Finland and Sweden are partly located in the Arctic Circle .
In view of the contribution of the EU and of its Member States to research and finance , of its impact through EU legislation on the environment , climate , fishing and similar issues , and also of the possibilities for cooperation in the future on matters such as the development of maritime safety and mapping , economic development and similar issues , it can be concluded that the EU has a major contribution to make to the sustainable development of the Arctic .
This region will be crucial to a world that has to adapt to face climate change , a rising population and a shortage of resources .
The Arctic region is attracting more and more attention due to the effects of climate change , the main factor in its evolution .
The European Union contributes significantly to climate change and must therefore play a leading role in the fight against this phenomenon .
Due to the growing need for natural resources , particularly in the EU , the Arctic represents an important and varied opportunity in terms of energy supply ( gas , renewables ) , raw materials and fish .
The EU must engage in policies that take into account the sustainable management and exploitation of natural resources in the region in terms of the environment , safety and organisation .
Iceland 's application for EU membership highlights the need to establish a policy for the Arctic , coordinated at European level .
The European Union is responsible for striking the right balance between environmental concerns and the race to exploit natural resources , and for taking into account the interests of the people living in the Arctic region .
The Arctic 's untold mineral resources have made the area the subject of heated dispute .
It is estimated that 90 billion barrels of oil alone lie untapped under the ice .
Inevitably , there is a feeling of unease that BP of all companies , having caused the oil catastrophe in the Gulf of Mexico last year , is now to be allowed to extract resources in this sensitive natural environment , where conditions are far more extreme than in the Gulf .
After all , the fact is that the Arctic region already provides the final resting place for the world 's mercury emissions .
In view of global warming and the expected consequences , this is a problem that cannot be overestimated .
I have voted in favour of the report , because it adequately presents the many factors involved .
The climate change that has affected the Arctic region in recent years highlights the responsibility that the European Union should accept for such an important and urgent situation .
These effects are greater in the Arctic than in other regions , and sea-level rise and climate change are nothing but a consequence of the greenhouse gases that the EU is constantly emitting .
I believe my vote in favour of a sustainable policy for the High North is of crucial importance , in that the region needs to be safeguarded and protected since it has had to face disastrous environmental impacts that do not depend directly on its own territory but on the more industrialised European countries .
The problem needs to be tackled at a global level , therefore , because its causes lie outside the Arctic but , in turn , have an effect on the whole planet .
In addition , the region has vast natural resources of energy sources and minerals , and the EU has an interest in ensuring the security of the supplies needed for Europe 's people and industries .
The Arctic is therefore a major contributor of energy , raw materials and also fish for Europe .
The Parliamentary report on the High North adopted today constitutes an important step forward in setting the guidelines for European policy on the Arctic region .
Climate change and the resulting melting of the ice caps are causing changes to the region and the focus of the Arctic states , which have worked swiftly to define strategies for tackling the possibilities that are arising .
More specifically , the melting of the ice caps is opening up new opportunities in the creation of new navigation routes and the exploitation of natural resources .
I have supported this report as it highlights the responsibility of the EU in the climate change process that is changing the physiognomy of the Arctic , as well as the need to take appropriate action to mitigate this process .
Similarly , the report recognises the legitimate interest of the EU to play a role on the new stage and stresses the imperative to take advantage of the opportunities that arise through supporting sustainable development in the area by its inhabitants , particularly the indigenous communities .
It is also important to note that the report signals the need to comply with international law with regard to any action taken in the Arctic first of all , and secondly , to pursue a cooperative approach in the governance of the region .
in writing . - The Arctic region is attracting more and more attention , due to the effects of climate change , the main trigger of developments .
Its effects are on a larger scale than in other regions of the world .
At the same time , those changes are affecting other regions of the world , through rising sea levels , on the one hand , and consequences for adjacent regional climates , on the other .
Thus , Europe does not only bear a certain responsibility , being one of the main contributors to pollution and greenhouse gas emissions , but also has a particular interest in the Arctic , since it will have to deal with the consequences of the changes taking place there from environmental and climate-change issues to the geopolitics of shipping routes and security of supply of resources .
I supported this agreement because climate change and pollution originating in the industrialised parts of the world have unfortunately also reached the Arctic for some time now .
This area is often described as pristine , but unfortunately , this has not been the case for many years .
Unlike the Antarctic , the Arctic is inhabited and traditionally , its natural resources are exploited to the detriment of the environment .
In 1996 , in an attempt to curb the phenomenon , the Arctic Council was established to protect the environment in this region .
Its members include three EU Member States - Sweden , Denmark and Finland .
Emerging economies will increasingly need the resources which are to be found in plentiful supply in the Arctic .
Energy , minerals , fish , gas , oil , wind and wave energy are all abundantly available in the region , which makes it vulnerable to speculation .
I am voting for this report on an EU strategy for the Black Sea .
I am doing so , firstly , because of the Commission proposal to develop the strategy for establishing measurable objectives and sectoral partnerships to facilitate joint projects , among other important measures .
My second reason is that the rapporteur presents the need for an up-to-date assessment of EU activity in the Black Sea region .
My last reason is because there is considerable fragmentation in funding for this strategy , as it is financed by various instruments .
To put an end to this fragmentation , it is proposed that this strategy has its own line of finance .
I also agree with the recommendations tabled in this report with a view to developing a stronger political framework , including an integrated approach to this region for the EU , which must be reinforced with the implementation of a specific action plan , and with adequate human and financial resources .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on an EU strategy for the Black Sea .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that given the strategic importance of the Black Sea region for the EU and the rather limited results of the Black Sea Synergy , a strategy should be launched to enhance the coherence and visibility of EU action in the region and that the EU Black Sea strategy should be an integral part of the EU 's broader foreign and security policy vision .
Three years after devising the Black Sea Synergy , an analysis of the current situation indicates , first of all , the lack of a clear , comprehensive and updated picture on the implementation results of the Black Sea Synergy .
Therefore , the EU strategy for the Black Sea should put in place a stronger policy framework and boost EU involvement in the Black Sea region .
I support the opinion that the main objectives of a Black Sea strategy should entail building a space of peace , stability and prosperity in the Black Sea region , while also ensuring EU energy security .
As a consequence , security , good governance , energy , transport , environment , socio-economic and human development should be considered as priority actions .
It is very important for a security dimension of the Black Sea to include resolute actions for strengthening democratic rule , good governance and State capacity building .
For some 50 years now , the European Union has brought peace and stability to the peoples of Western Europe .
Nevertheless , we must not forget that our neighbouring countries continue to be plagued by serious unrest .
The Union must be sensitive to this situation and must give fresh impetus to its strategy for the Black Sea region .
This resolution provides such a response , and I therefore voted in favour of it .
It creates a new budget line , which will give priority to the financing of small-scale development projects and cross-border cooperation , and strengthens human resources .
An ' early-warning system ' will act as a conflict prevention and confidence building tool in the region by anticipating any escalation of violence .
The resolution draws attention , lastly , to the extended lease for Russia 's Black Sea Fleet in Crimea and the concerns that it raises .
I voted in favour of the report on an EU strategy for the Black Sea .
The strategic importance of the Black Sea region for the EU was recognised in 2007 , in the context of Romania 's and Bulgaria 's accession to the EU .
As developments in this region , strategically situated at the junction of Europe , the Middle East and Central Asia , started having a direct impact on EU internal affairs , the EU acknowledged the need to reflect upon its stronger involvement in the area .
This resulted in the launch of a new EU policy approach towards the region , called the Black Sea Synergy .
The aim of the Black Sea Synergy is to develop regional cooperation between the EU and the region , as well as within the region .
However , much less was achieved in the field of implementation , while sectors such as stability , democracy and good governance seem to have witnessed less progress in a context of deterioration of the democratic rule in several Black Sea states and of the Russia-Georgia war in 2008 .
Furthermore , the region continues to face the following challenges : protracted conflicts , trends towards militarisation and proliferation of arms , maritime surveillance , illicit trafficking and cross-border crime .
I believe that in order to achieve efficient implementation , it is necessary to devise mechanisms for regular reporting , monitoring , evaluation and follow-up .
In addition , the main objectives of a Black Sea strategy should entail building a space of peace , stability and prosperity in the Black Sea region , while also ensuring EU energy security .
As a consequence , security , good governance , energy , transport , environmental , socio-economic and human development should be considered as priority actions .
I voted in favour of the Ungureanu report , because I firmly believe that the EU urgently needs a cohesive and visible strategy for the Black Sea region .
The strategy should be closely linked to the European Neighbourhood Policy , the development of which was given a major boost by the Czech Presidency of the EU in the first half of 2009 .
The key priority of the EU 's Black Sea strategy should be to secure energy supplies to the EU , and related support for energy projects which are in the interests of the EU and which focus on diversifying gas supplies to the EU .
The establishment of the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly is also important and urgently required as regards the EU 's energy security .
Among the projects which the Black Sea strategy should be helping to implement , I would include the Nabucco project , the South Stream project , the project to bring liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) to Europe and the development of LNG terminals in Black Sea harbours , and also the pan-European Constanta-Trieste oil pipeline .
The Commission should not delay and should conclude agreements by the end of 2011 with potential supplier countries for the Nabucco pipeline .
The package of measures for energy infrastructure , which the Commission intends to submit in the near future , should place particular emphasis on the previously mentioned energy projects in the Black Sea region .
Last but not least , it is necessary to emphasise the considerable potential of renewable energy sources in the Black Sea region , which may contribute significantly to the future energy security of the EU and the entire world .
The Black Sea is partially surrounded by EU territory and is mainly European geographically .
Moreover , in spite of the 2007 Commission Communication entitled Black Sea Synergy - A new regional cooperation initiative , measures were taken soon after that time with a view to implementing an effective strategy for the future of the Black Sea .
Therefore , I welcome the initiative and adoption of this report , which I strongly support , in the hope that the recommendations just adopted by the European Parliament will be accepted by the Commission , the Council and our neighbours to the east with whom we share administration of the Black Sea , namely , those relating to frozen conflicts , to closed borders and / or ineffective borders controls , to the transportation of energy , and to security and defence .
Only if these issues are resolved will it be possible to achieve the two main objectives proposed by the report : 1 ) peace , democracy , stability and prosperity in the region ; and 2 ) energy security for the EU .
in writing . - I welcome this motion and the parallel report currently with the Fisheries Committee .
Both reports refer to the ' Black Sea Synergy ' .
In the context of south-east Europe , the definition of synergy is one where it represents the ability of a group to outperform even its best individual member .
Apparently , there is a consensus amongst some in this place that the best individual member of the Black Sea Synergy is the EU .
I would caution against this belief , certainly with regard to fisheries .
The common fisheries policy has failed .
I would say to my colleagues from the Black Sea region : learn from the mistakes of the CFP , examine the consequences the present regime has had on the small-scale fisheries of the north-east Atlantic and ask is this what we want for the Black Sea ?
The Black Sea strategy must be based on the uniqueness of the area .
As we have seen , ideas that fit one part of Europe will not work in another part .
The conflict that embroiled Russia and Georgia demonstrates the potential instability affecting the Black Sea region , fully justifying the adoption by the European Union of a strategy to deal with the specific challenges presented by that particular part of the world .
Notwithstanding the tension that still exists , this is also a region that can have a more stable and balanced future , and the Union can play an important part in this stabilisation process .
In this respect , it is necessary not only to establish objectives but , above all , to provide those responsible for implementing the European strategy with the human , technical and financial resources needed to allow them to do their job in the best possible way .
Given their geographical situation , history and specific knowledge of the region , Romania , Bulgaria and Greece could make a valuable contribution to ensuring that the strategy to be devised is capable of achieving the objectives of promoting peace , security , democracy , good governance and economic , social and human development .
The importance of the Black Sea to the European Union is well known , as are the problems of instability that affect this region .
In a context that includes EU Member States - Bulgaria , Greece and Romania - together with Turkey and various states of the former Soviet bloc , including Russia , the Black Sea is crucial to energy supply and the diversification of gas distribution .
It is a strategic bridge that links Europe with the area of the Caspian Sea , Central Asia and the Middle East , as well as Southeast Asia and China .
Among the many differences and rivalries , the close historical and cultural ties are particularly important , as are inter-cultural and inter-faith dialogue .
In this context , greater commitment from the EU is required , along with increased efficiency in formulating measures to assist the stabilisation and revitalisation of this region in a process that must involve all the countries concerned .
Nothing new emerges from this report .
The strategies and objectives are the same as those that have formed the so-called external policy of the EU for a long time : controlling the natural resources of the region , in particular , oil and natural gas , on which the EU is dependent , securing their supply without problems , in addition to trying to guarantee access to its markets and the exploitation of workers .
The mechanisms for achieving these objectives are also the same : interference and recurrent attempts to limit the national sovereignty of these countries through international campaigns controlled by the major news agencies and non-governmental organisations financed by EU funds ; the push towards militarism and the arms race , as in the case of the current re-arming of Georgia ; and looking for people in these countries who , in exchange for benefits for themselves or the interests they serve , defend the interests of the EU and the United States , as well as their economic groups , by accepting NATO 's eastward expansion and allowing the installation of US military bases in the region , which have been used as a platform for supplying NATO troops in Afghanistan .
It is obvious that this road cannot be followed without surprises : imperialism , be it that of the US or the EU , faces the tenacious resistance of the people , who , both here and in those countries , are organising themselves to prevent such a backward step in the course of history .
While I believe Mr Ungureanu has done a good job , I do not think a new budget line for the Black Sea is appropriate .
The Union has many priorities and any new investments must be carefully weighed up , even if we are talking about areas of prime importance in the field of energy .
I therefore declare my vote against the abovementioned report .
Paragraph 39 of this report recalls the aim of diversifying routes .
It specifically mentions the strategic importance of the Nabucco project .
While I acknowledge the significance of this project , I would like to underline the need to treat other projects in the Southern Corridor ( ITGI , TAP and White Stream ) as equally important .
I would also like to reaffirm the fundamental role of South Stream in helping to achieve the aim of diversification .
Moreover , as well as the Constanta-Trieste pipeline which has already been mentioned , we should also comment on the fundamental role played by the Samsun-Ceyhan , which Mr Oettinger has acknowledged as being fundamental for reducing traffic in the Bosphorus Strait and , consequently , also the risk of environmental accidents in the Black Sea ( Odessa conference , 27 July 2010 ) .
Only by taking into consideration all of the possible routes , and not just some of them , will it ultimately be possible to achieve the aim of diversifying energy sources and making Europe energy independent .
I voted in favour of this resolution on an EU strategy for the Black Sea .
The strategic importance of the Black Sea region for the EU was recognised in 2007 , in the context of Romania 's and Bulgaria 's accession to the EU .
Developments in Europe , the Middle East and Central Asia started having a direct impact on EU internal affairs , and the EU acknowledged the need to reflect upon its stronger involvement in the area .
This resulted in the launch of a new EU policy approach towards the region , called the Black Sea Synergy .
The aim of the Black Sea Synergy is to develop regional cooperation between the EU and the region , as well as within the region .
I agree with the opinion that the main objectives of a Black Sea strategy should entail building a space of peace , stability and prosperity in the Black Sea region , as well as ensuring EU energy security .
As a consequence , security , good governance , energy , transport , environmental , socio-economic and human development should be considered as priority actions .
A security dimension of the Black Sea must include resolute actions for strengthening democratic rule , good governance and State capacity building .
Finally , economic , social and human development within the Black Sea region is an important premise for transforming the Black Sea into a stable and prosperous space .
The Black Sea region is a strategic area for Europe .
Therefore , a strengthening of cooperation at many levels is in the European Union 's interest .
For these measures to be successful , they need to be consistent and to take into account the differences in conditions between particular countries .
Care should also be taken to ensure that it is not just giving on our part .
The countries of the Black Sea Basin have much to offer us , starting from sources of energy and natural riches .
I share the rapporteur 's fears on the question of the lack of a clear strategy towards these countries .
In this situation , a large role could be played by Bulgaria and Romania , which are already part of the Union .
It is there that they understand the region 's politics best .
The last issue is Turkey , and we should definitely remember Turkey , because in contrast to Europe , it is a country which is developing at a frantic pace .
We should look after this partnership .
As a strategic bridge connecting Europe with Central Asia and the Middle East , the Black Sea region is extremely important for the European Union .
If to these purely geographical considerations we add the fact that many countries in the region are also Member States of the Union , we will be in a better position to understand why Europe has , for many years , been working to strengthen relations with the countries in this area .
The Ungureanu report calls on both the Commission and the European External Action Service to establish a strategy for increasingly close relations of cooperation between the European Union and the Black Sea region .
Such relations should , however , be subject to strict controls , in order to maintain effective coordination of activities and the subdivision of responsibilities .
I believe , in fact , that the success of such an important partnership depends , to some extent , on the peaceful resolution of current conflicts .
Lastly , I should like to highlight the part of the report that calls on the Union to promote strategies to strengthen the institutions of the countries in the Black Sea area , because I believe that respect for democracy needs to underpin such relations .
I voted for this report because I consider it to be extremely important for the Black Sea region and the EU .
Discussions on the Black Sea Synergy began in 2007 .
The proposal for the Danube strategy was drawn up in 2006 .
The Danube strategy will be finalised in the first half of this year .
It is great that we are discussing the Black Sea now , but I believe that we need to conclude this discussion with a concrete proposal .
The Black Sea can contribute to the development of the Danube .
The Danube region contributes to the development of the Black Sea .
Both regions are interdependent .
For this reason , I believe that a common approach should be considered .
The issue that could bring an immediate result is energy .
The new energy sources from the Caspian Sea , as well as the new routes , can develop the Black Sea region and , by implication , the Danube region .
The most important project in this regard is the Nabucco pipeline .
This is why I think that the Union 's support is necessary for the completion of this project .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which stresses that the main objective pursued by the EU and the Member States in the EU strategy for the Black Sea region should be to establish an area of peace , democracy , prosperity and stability , founded on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and providing for EU energy security , and considers that good governance , the rule of law , promotion of respect of human rights , migration management , energy , transport , the environment , and economic and social development should constitute priority actions .
The EU strategy for the Black Sea is entirely devoted to the development of the Nabucco pipeline and the creation of a free trade area guaranteeing its energy security and its hegemony over the region .
The fight against the current environmental disaster has faded into the background , as have the social and economic interests of the peoples of the region .
This text is an imperialist manifesto .
It takes up the arguments of the propaganda used by the adventuristic Georgian Government whose anti-democratic practices are not mentioned : propaganda and threats .
It is an inflammatory text , and I shall vote against it .
The region of the Black Sea is crucial in strategic terms for the European Union due to its geographical location , which includes three European Union Member States - Greece , Romania and Bulgaria - and several important partners , including Russia and Turkey .
On the other hand , concerns about security and energy supply lead to the need for greater involvement between the European Union and the countries of this region .
Therefore , I agree with the main concerns expressed in the report : the guarantee of peace , democracy and stability in the Black Sea region , and looking after the European Union 's energy security .
Furthering relations between the European Union and the Black Sea region will , without doubt , be important , as the parties can benefit from this and cooperate more effectively .
The strategic importance of the Black Sea is now well established .
As a new border of the EU since the accession of Bulgaria and Romania , it is an obvious geostrategic space .
The EU intends to become involved directly and permanently .
Turkey , Georgia and Ukraine have repeatedly expressed their appetite for EU membership .
The Commission responded by launching its Communication on Black Sea Synergy in 2007 .
While ensuring stability in the region , the Communication meets the needs of applicant States which are seeking both a Euro-Atlantic anchoring and a framework of enhanced cooperation .
The EU must continue in this direction .
It should strengthen its involvement in the Black Sea in order to give positive proof of its ' soft power ' diplomacy .
That way , the EU will guarantee that a space of peace , stability and prosperity is created , and also ensure the security of energy supply in the EU .
The report on an EU strategy for the Black Sea is important and for this reason , it is rightly very comprehensive .
The further development of synergy in the Black Sea region is significant not just for energy strategy reasons .
We need new impulses for the modernisation of the economic area and new enterprise initiatives in the Black Sea region .
It is particularly important that natural gas supplies for Europe should be secured .
However , whatever the efforts by the EU , Russian interests should not be forgotten .
Russia is a vital strategic partner if peaceful and prosperous development is to be assured for the Black Sea region .
Criticising the prolonged stationing of the Russian Black Sea fleet represents an unnecessary provocation .
Nonetheless , I have voted in favour of the report .
Another reason why the report is important is because of its references to the Black Sea 's importance as a natural resource and the environmental situation in this region .
A fact that should not be ignored is that an unprecedented increase in fish mortality has been noted recently in the Black Sea .
The biggest polluters affecting the marine biodiversity are the Dnieper , Don , Dniester and Danube rivers ( which spill 60 000 tonnes of phosphorous and 340 tonnes of inorganic nitrogen into the Black Sea every year ) .
Other factors that contribute to the degradation of the Black Sea are excessive fishing and waste materials .
A group of experts estimated that subaquatic life will completely disappear from the Black Sea in approximately 30 years due to hydrogen sulphide .
I believe that these issues should be as high as possible on the European agenda .
In 2007 , the strategic importance of the Black Sea region for the EU was recognised .
Following the accession of Romania and Bulgaria , part of the Black Sea became an inland sea of the EU .
As developments in this region , which is geopolitically situated between Europe , the Middle East and Central Asia , also have an impact on EU internal affairs , there is a need for stronger involvement in the area .
The aim is to develop regional cooperation between the EU and the region , as well as within the region .
The Black Sea region is intended to be developed into an area of stability , security , democracy and prosperity .
In addition , joint projects are being set up , such as the creation of a Black Sea Civil Society Forum , strengthening of the academic and students ' networks and creation of an Institute for European Studies in the Black Sea region .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
The Black Sea region is an important one for the European Union , and a region which requires an integrated approach and greater visibility of EU action in the future .
The region needs democratic measures to be put in place , intended chiefly to ensure security , stability and peace , as well as to increase prosperity .
The objective of the strategy is also to ensure the EU 's energy security .
In the context of shaping a strategy for the Black Sea macro-region , and then for the Danube region , the proposal put forward by the European Commission in 2007 entitled ' Black Sea Synergy - A New Regional Cooperation Initiative ' ( which recognised the region as strategic for the EU ) is the best method of dealing with the abovementioned issues .
Unfortunately , Black Sea Synergy results have so far been rather limited .
Furthermore , no clear and comprehensive picture exists of the current implementation results , in view of which the criticism is increasingly being made that the EU lacks a coherent vision and that the strategy is too fragmented .
Therefore , as the rapporteur says , while building upon the merits of the Black Sea Synergy , the EU strategy for the Black Sea should put in place a stronger policy framework and boost EU involvement in the Black Sea region .
Just as with the EU strategy for the Baltic Sea region and the Danube region , success in implementation will depend on good dialogue at all levels of regional cooperation , because this dialogue will lead to proposals for appropriate and regular reporting , monitoring , evaluation and follow-up mechanisms .
The strategic importance of the Black Sea region has now been recognised since 2007 : with the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU , the Black Sea began to have a direct impact on the Union 's internal affairs , which is why there needs to be greater EU involvement in the area .
In my opinion , the implementation of a strategy to develop greater cooperation between the EU and the region is a goal that the Union should set itself as soon as possible .
This initiative , called the Black Sea Synergy , could transform the region into an area of stability , security , democracy and prosperity .
In line with this House , I gave my assent - through my vote in favour - to supporting the creation and launch of the Black Sea Synergy .
I believe the economic , social and cultural development of the region can be promoted , with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , by further liberalising trade and intensifying commerce within the region .
In the context of development and greater integration between the Member States , by giving my assent , I encourage the growth and development of the Black Sea region by means of an action plan containing clear objectives and flagship initiatives .
in writing . - We call on the Commission and the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) to draw up a strategy for the Black Sea region in parallel with the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy , thus defining an integrated and comprehensive EU approach to addressing the challenges and opportunities of the region , with a detailed action plan , clear objectives , flagship initiatives and benchmarks .
We believe that the strategy will make for effective coordination of activities and division of tasks .
As well as this , the EP reiterates its call on the Commission and the EEAS to carry out regular reviews of the implementation of the strategy by establishing concrete monitoring , evaluation , follow-up and reporting mechanisms , and urges that the relevant European Parliament committees be consulted at key stages of this process .
As a result of the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the European Union in 2007 , some parts of the shores of the Black Sea became part of Europe .
In the same year , a new European policy called Black Sea Synergy was created , which works to promote stability , security , democracy and prosperity in the region .
As early as 2008 , the European Parliament expressed its support for the creation of the Synergy and also asked for the elaboration of a detailed Action Plan for the area with a number of concrete objectives to be reached .
Unfortunately , so far , the project seems to have been a partial failure , partly as a result of the lack of visibility of the funds made available .
A specific budget line must therefore be created for it as soon as possible .
It should provide clear rules for disbursing funds , so that the requirements and the specific characteristics of the region can be focused upon .
We need to involve the local authorities , business communities and non-governmental organisations present in the territory to a greater extent .
The potential for economic and social growth in the Black Sea region must be developed , starting with areas such as lifelong learning and the adjustment of education to labour market requirements , as well as planning an inter-regional trade strategy capable of increasing the volume of international trade .
in writing . - The strategic importance of the Black Sea in terms of energy , trade and transport can sometimes mean that environmental concerns are sidelined .
In its 2007 communication on the Black Sea Synergy , the Commission stated that ' Community accession to the Convention on the Protection of the Black Sea against Pollution is a priority ' .
In 2008 , the Commission confirmed that it was ' examining the conditions for European Community accession ' .
The report we voted on today reaffirms the importance of this convention , and I would like to reiterate the need for the Commission to continue towards full EU accession to it .
We must work with other partners under this framework to ensure full implementation of the environmental protection measures which the region desperately needs .
I believe that the report , which is aimed at the development of the Black Sea region under the relevant EU strategy , deserves support .
I consider it important for the EU to draw up an action plan regarding Black Sea synergy .
Achieving peace and stability in the region is , in my opinion , a priority objective , and guaranteeing energy security through the Nabucco project is of no small importance either .
The Black Sea region is of major strategic importance for the European Union .
This importance results from its geographical location , encompassing three Member States of the European Union , namely , Greece , Romania and Bulgaria , a candidate country , Turkey , and six partners , including Russia .
Apart from this , the challenges with regard to security and energy supplies require the European Union to achieve greater involvement and commitment in its relations with the countries of this region .
Therefore , I subscribe to the concerns expressed in the document voted on today , which fall into two categories : to guarantee peace , democracy and stability in the Black Sea region and to guarantee the security of the European Union 's energy supply .
I believe that from a regional point of view , it is necessary to create synergies and develop greater cooperation by establishing a more effective partnership with regard to transport and energy , with a view to greater diversification of supply channels and sources .
The strengthening of the dialogue between the European Union and the Black Sea region will certainly be advantageous , since the different parties will be able to benefit from more effective cooperation .
I supported the report on EU strategy in the Black Sea region .
The measures previously taken in the Eastern European Mediterranean were not coordinated and the results achieved have been marginal .
The Black Sea region has known bilateral conflict for many , many years .
In view of the fact that two EU Member States border the Black Sea and the region has therefore become one of the Union 's direct neighbours , the European Union must engage more closely in regional dialogue in order to foster political stability in the region .
Cooperation in establishing regional structures will also benefit the environmental situation , which is currently a cause for considerable concern .
The EU needs to provide active support in order to influence the balance between economic development and environmental protection .
After all , Europe also has interests that it pursues in the Black Sea region .
The area is an integral part of the EU 's energy strategy , so that this new strategy is an implementation of the higher energy strategy and will bring synergy and continuity to our work at European level .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Pakistan : murder of the Governor of Punjab , Salmaan Taseer
The next item is the debate on the seven motions for resolutions on Pakistan .
author . - Mr President , there is a fundamental struggle going on in Pakistan and the extremism that we have seen has to end , especially the abusive blasphemy laws .
These are leading to a climate of fear and intolerance and , in the worst cases , extremism .
The fight against extremism is not an easy task , which is why the Pakistani Government and all those citizens who agree that intolerance and extremism are unacceptable need our support .
We have to continue to wipe out terrorism .
The Governor , Mr Taseer , was violently murdered out of sheer intolerance by a guard from his own security detail , a person who should have protected him .
His daughter , Shehrbano , wrote a letter which was published in The New York Times , from which I would like to quote , because I think she gets to the essence and it is very good to use her words in memory of her father .
She says of the perpetrator : ' Mr Qadri and his supporters may have felled a great oak that day , but they are sadly mistaken if they think they have succeeded in silencing my father 's voice or the voices of millions like him who believe in the secular vision of Pakistan 's founder , Mohammed Ali Jinnah ' .
She continues : ' There are those who say my father 's death was the final nail in the coffin for a tolerant Pakistan .
That Pakistan 's liberal voices will now be silenced . But we buried a heroic man , and not the courage he inspired in others ' .
Others followed in their condemnation of the blasphemy laws , even conservative politicians .
We have to support that here in the European Parliament .
The daughter of Governor Taseer went to Smith College and she studied European politics and human rights , but too many people in Pakistan are educated in madrasahs .
We have to make sure that the young generation has opportunities , and learns how to live together in the diverse society which is Pakistan .
Mr President , several weeks after the governing coalition in Pakistan was on the verge of collapse , the country was rocked by the shooting , in broad daylight , of the Governor of Punjab .
Salmaan Taseer was governor of the country 's wealthiest and most populous province , and was also an important politician in the ruling party .
He died because he had the moral strength and the courage to demand the release of the Christian woman Asia Bibi , who has been sentenced to death for blasphemy .
His murder , carried out by one of his own security guards and inspired by Muslim extremists , is not just another attack on a highly placed politician in Pakistan and proof of the dramatically low level of security there .
It is , principally , testimony to the increasingly visible slide of the country - of Pakistan - towards a situation in which part of the armed forces , the judiciary and the political elite support , both openly and secretly , a policy of concessions towards Islamic political and religious extremists .
Yesterday , in this Chamber , we debated the subject of the persecution of Christians .
Today , we have adopted a resolution on the matter .
It seems to me that scope for activity is opening up for Mrs Ashton and her service to put diplomatic and political pressure on the Pakistani authorities , who must at last start to fight religious extremism .
author . - Mr President , it was shocking , but sadly not surprising , to receive the news that Governor Taseer has been murdered .
I personally knew Benazir Bhutto , and Minister Shahbaz Bhatti has become a good friend of mine .
What links all three of them is their amazing courage as vocal and visible critics of blasphemy laws and their abuse by extremist groups .
The government of Pakistan has indeed taken several important steps to improve the rights of minorities , for example , by allocating a minimum quota in public jobs .
The government has also formed a committee to review all discriminatory laws , including the blasphemy law .
However , the work has not yet finished .
Despite several major steps , so long as there is a legal loophole , such as that in the current blasphemy law , so massive that it enables terrorists and extremists to push their own agenda forward , it is difficult to believe in a true commitment to democracy .
I hope that , with this resolution , we can express our continuing solidarity with the government of Pakistan in the fight against terrorism and the spread of extremism .
Mr President , exactly eight months ago , on 20 May , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on religious freedom in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan .
Today , this subject has returned to our Chamber again , as a result of the religiously motivated sentence of death handed down to 45 year old Asia Bibi and the murder of the Governor of Punjab , Salmaan Taseer , who had spoken out publicly in her defence .
It turns out that the situation we described eight months ago has not only failed to improve , but has become yet worse .
In Pakistan , today , one can lose one 's life both for so-called religious blasphemy and for freedom of speech - in this case , a public statement about a judicial sentence .
The murder of Mr Taseer shows how delicate a situation we face .
Pakistan is divided by religion to such an extent , that on both sides - Christian and Muslim - people are dying , including the representatives of local elites .
Public support for amendment of the Pakistan Penal Code and , in particular , of Section 295 C , which prescribes capital punishment for blasphemy , can also involve the risk of death .
We should , however , require courage from Pakistani politicians and , in particular , from the opposition , for example , the Pakistan Muslim League , which is blocking government reform of the code .
We can also support the work of the Ministry for Minority Affairs and help the government of Prime Minister Gilani in such matters as improving the quality of journalism and media reporting and the standard of educational materials in schools , for example .
Today , the European Parliament is not interfering in Pakistan 's internal affairs , but is only calling attention to Article 20 of Pakistan 's 1973 Constitution and the freedom of religion for which it provides .
Mr President , I would like to open this speech by saying that I read with much interest the joint resolution on Pakistan and , in particular , on the assassination of Governor Taseer .
It offers a strange contrast to the resolution which was adopted this morning on Christian minorities .
All of us here are committed , or so I hope , to protecting freedom of expression , conscience and religion .
What we should be equally preoccupied with are all those who fall victim to persecution because of their religious choices , including when they decide to change religion and also when they do not believe in God .
If we want to combat fundamentalism , of whatever kind that may be , then we must treat all victims of this fundamentalism in the same way .
No religion is , or ever was , invulnerable to what I will call intolerable deviations .
Just let us remind ourselves of the mass murder of American Indians , particularly in the Caribbean and in Latin America .
Let us remind ourselves of the sorrowful period of the Crusades , the Inquisition or the wars of religion between Catholics and Protestants .
Let us remember the anti-Semitism which had such devastating effects during the 20th century and which lives on more or less latently in a number of EU countries .
Every religion has its own form of fundamentalism and the first victims of such fundamentalism are often the religious moderates of those same religions .
From this perspective , the assassination of the Governor of Punjab , Salmaan Taseer , is a classic example .
This man was murdered because he was a model of tolerance and because he dared to condemn the blasphemy laws in force in his country and the abusive usage of these by certain extremist groups in cases such as that of Asia Bibi , a Christian sentenced to death for blasphemy under the Pakistan Penal Code .
What is even more unacceptable is the praising of his murderer by fanatical groups .
Let us not forget that the blasphemy law is applied primarily to Muslims , that it affects all religious minorities , and , in particular , women , but also trade-union activists , journalists and lawyers , and that people from all of these groups are also frequently deprived of their fundamental freedoms , if not obliged to go into hiding .
It is therefore time that the Commission and the External Action Service changed their policy , and I would like you , Commissioner , to provide an accurate assessment of the agreement with Tunisia and the agreement with Pakistan on democracy and human rights , and I would like Tunisia to be a lesson to us , to be a lesson to you .
author . - Mr President , I think all of us would want to express our condolences to the family and friends of Salmaan Taseer , the Governor of Punjab put in place by the government of Pakistan , and we are remembering here today his clear support for Asia Bibi - a position he knew to be controversial and indeed dangerous .
We are rightly distressed by his murder and the reaction to it by part of the population of Pakistan , but we should not forget , as well , that many have mourned him and have done that in public as a public act .
It is an act we should be commending , like , for example , the action taken by the media regulator against certain media with regard to their coverage of the alleged murderer .
However , as we know , the blasphemy law in Pakistan puts the lives of Pakistani citizens at risk : Muslim , Christian and others alike , as many speakers have said this afternoon .
We are aware that Pakistan is a new democracy , that it is facing conflict on its borders , and that it has faced the disaster of the recent flood , as well as the earthquake only this week .
We know that the government is struggling , but we also recognise that it needs our support in terms of developing democracy within Pakistan , not least in the political battle against extremism and for universal human rights , and it is our role as democratic parliamentarians to support all those who are working for positive change and to give them the voice that others would deny them .
We are also asking for action by the government of Pakistan , not least to remove the reservations on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights - which they ratified with a large number of reservations - and we urged this in our recent delegation visit to Pakistan .
We want them , as well , to continue the efforts to change the blasphemy law because this is a law that is more abused than properly used .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , we all strongly condemn the brutal murder of the Governor of Punjab on 4 January .
This murder was committed in the context that Mr Taseer opposed the notorious blasphemy law which has been a legal justification for the persecution and suppression of other religious groups .
When expressing concern over the increased influence of extremists in Pakistan , we also realise that moderate Muslims and the Pakistani Government , of which Mr Taseer was an influential member , have suffered a grave loss and we offer our condolences to them .
We are worried that the young lawyers praised the assassin , but we also take notice that an overwhelming majority of Pakistani society has condemned this murder .
It is important that influential religious authorities have called for the amendment of the blasphemy law , and this is also our demand .
We wish the Pakistani authorities all success in increasing their efforts to fight extremism there .
Mr President , the murder of Salmaan Taseer basically reflects the religious intolerance that prevails in Pakistani society .
Taseer was one of those rare people that dared to speak out against Pakistan 's Blasphemy Law .
He had asked the President to pardon Asia Bibi , a Christian woman sentenced to death for blasphemy , and had also visited her in prison .
The fate of a citizen who opposes injustice is harsh and cruel in today 's Pakistan .
Will Asia Bibi 's fate be the same if she is pardoned ?
Will they murder her too ?
We might well ask whether a state like Pakistan should enjoy the trade benefits that the European Union offers .
Parliament should make respect for human rights a fundamental element when the EU is debating the regulation on emergency autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the murder of Governor Salmaan Taseer is not only a private tragedy but a tragedy for democracy in Pakistan .
All the deplorable incidents and cases that have been outlined in the resolution altogether constitute an intimidating sign of Pakistani society 's reluctance to move towards secularisation , and of the rise of religious extremism .
How can Pakistan even call itself a democracy when the freedom of religion that is granted by the constitution is completely ignored by applying the blasphemy laws , to which the late Salmaan Taseer was so opposed .
I would like the European Union to consider the ramifications of the application of such inhumane laws on relations with Pakistan .
Pakistan would benefit in many aspects by repealing the blasphemy laws and revoking the penalties that have been based on those laws .
I also would expect the government of Pakistan to reinforce the measures that have been taken to fight the spread of violent extremism .
Violence causes violence and I am quite confident that Pakistan cannot afford the escalation of a full-scale civil war with extremist groupings such as the Taliban .
Mr President , once again , we are talking about Pakistan , and once again we have a problem and a political murder .
We are , indeed , talking about this matter one more time .
There was a resolution about Pakistan a couple of months ago .
The problem has come back again , and it is a kind of hot potato .
It seems to me that it is necessary , here , to say something about the unacceptable toleration being shown towards those Muslim imams who make public calls in Pakistan - in Peshawar for example - for killings , offering , for example , to reward the perpetrators financially .
Such situations have occurred , and the Pakistani authorities have not reacted to them .
It should be said clearly that there is a certain sense in which their failure to act and their lack of reaction mean they share responsibility for these things .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , to make a personal statement , I spent a lot of time with Salmaan Taseer when we were both in our twenties .
Indeed , we were friends .
Salmaan wrote to me at Parliament to invite me to stay as his personal guest at the Governor 's house in the Punjab .
That letter arrived after Governor Taseer 's murder .
Salmaan was a man of charm , charisma and high intelligence .
He was also very capable and effective .
He represented the best tradition of Pakistan - a devout Muslim but not in any way fundamentalist .
As has been said , Salmaan strongly supported a Christian lady who had been sentenced under blasphemy laws .
Salmaan paid for that support with his life .
It was a political assassination .
Pakistan is not only a large , developing country .
It is a country with over 20 nuclear warheads .
I came here today , first and foremost , to express my profound sorrow , but I must also express my concern - all our concern - for Pakistan .
( DE ) Mr President , the violent death of the Governor of Punjab , Salmaan Taseer , who was always a proponent of religious tolerance , brings the strengthening of extremist forces to the eyes of the world .
Tens of thousands of people demonstrated in the streets after this atrocity , marching not against the murder but in support of the person who committed it .
Mr Taseer spoke out vehemently against the blasphemy laws , which prescribe the death sentence for blasphemers .
Just recently , as some of my fellow Members have already mentioned , the Christian , Asia Bibi , has been sentenced to death for supposedly having insulted the prophet Mohammed .
As a moderate member of the PPP political party , Salmaan Taseer was one of the strongest voices against extremism .
His death weakens the government , which is already fighting for political survival following the withdrawal of a coalition partner .
There are only 3 million Christians in Pakistan 's population of 160 million .
What fate awaits this always peaceable minority ?
Europe must intervene here and the delegation for relations with the countries of Southeast Asia , of which I am Vice-President , will continue to give its full backing to the human rights movement .
This murder must be thoroughly investigated and the perpetrator and the people behind him must be brought to justice .
( LT ) Mr President , yes , the situation in Pakistan is particularly complicated , both due to internal and external factors , and therefore , events like a political assassination for religious reasons , and of such an important figure , immediately rock the entire country and the whole of society .
After such shocks , events in the country may take a dangerous turn towards strengthening religious fanaticism and restricting human rights .
Our resolution should help to ensure that there is nevertheless a different course of events , and that even in this situation , the Pakistani Government can still find the strength to go down the road of bolstering human rights and opposing religious fanaticism .
We must provide significant support to such steps , as well as , undoubtedly , the independence and protection of the judiciary in complex cases concerning blasphemy .
( HU ) Mr President , I have expressed my firm support on several occasions when it came to taking strong action in defence of human rights in the EU 's relations with third countries .
I do so again in relation to the events that transpired in Pakistan , as such a position conveys the message that Europe does not abandon those who raise their voice in support of tolerance , freedom of religion and the equal treatment of minorities .
We are well aware that the persecution of Christians exists in many countries .
Not only in Pakistan would there be a need for leaders like the late Salmaan Taseer .
For this reason , the European Union must take every opportunity to express the importance of its common values with a single voice through the European External Action Service .
One such common value is the freedom of religion .
If we do not speak out against the atrocities committed against Christians or other religious minorities , we cannot take our own faith seriously either .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe cannot remain powerless in the face of what is happening in Pakistan .
The murder of the Governor of Punjab , Mr Taseer , is a tragic and appalling act in a situation which has worsened enormously over recent months .
The division between Christians and Muslims is increasingly clear , but the law on blasphemy is still at the root of many acts that violate fundamental freedoms .
Anyone who opposes or merely expresses their disapproval of this rule , as the Governor of Punjab did , is suppressed .
The Governor is dead because he was a moderate and because of his moderate views , because of his courage in expressing opposition to this and other rules that violate fundamental freedoms .
This is why a failure by Europe to take clear and strong action risks leaving those who are bravely fighting for something that we should support in isolation .
Mr President , just a few words of criticism on the way some sections of the European public and also some sections of this Parliament are treating Pakistan and its fight against terrorism .
I see too many Pakistan-bashing exercises and I see a disregard of the effort that the Pakistani Government and civil society are making against extremism .
It should be very clear to everybody that 90 % or more of Pakistani people are against terrorism and that they are paying a very high price for this .
The death of Governor Salmaan Taseer has been condemned by an overwhelming majority of the people , and also by the most prominent religious scholars .
Moderate Muslims and all government authorities have also suffered a great loss and that should be fully recognised by everybody .
( FI ) Mr President , freedom of religion is one of the fundamental human rights .
It is being violated , however , around the world almost daily .
It is nothing less than ruthless intolerance .
The Blasphemy Law goes back to the times of the military dictatorship that was in power in Pakistan in the 1980s .
It is not acceptable that the Law be used to persecute religious minorities and sentence dozens of people to death every year .
The EU should act decisively and consistently to persuade the Pakistani authorities to repeal this cruel law .
Mr President , when Governor Salmaan Taseer was buried , it seemed to me as though any hope for a moderate , stable Pakistan was buried with him .
This disgusting murder of a dedicated and enlightened public servant was sparked by his advocacy of reforming Pakistan 's draconian blasphemy laws .
In particular , he championed the case of a Christian woman who is currently awaiting execution - would you believe it - having been convicted of defaming Islam .
We in this Parliament have long called for the reform or scrapping of these wretched blasphemy laws , which are invoked frequently against Pakistan 's religious minorities .
This assassination underlines the growing radicalisation of Pakistani society .
Jinnah , were he alive today , would be shocked .
Few mainstream politicians dared to follow Salmaan Taseer 's lead and suggest a reform of the blasphemy laws and even fewer will be able to do so now .
They will be afraid .
Instead , the violent radicals and fanatics - including , I am afraid , leading jurists - praised the assassin and called for his release .
They seem to be winning the battle of ideas in Pakistan .
As a result , domestic terrorism is flourishing , and we saw this phenomenon again last week .
Can the EU now sustain a strategic relationship with a country so unstable and particularly given our generous concessions over trade and aid ?
Mr President , we are talking here about a double tragedy : firstly , the execution of an innocent man and , secondly , done by someone who was supposed to be minding him , his bodyguard .
I can empathise and sympathise with the family in particular , because only a week ago , we had a similar experience in difference circumstances , where a beautiful 27-year-old girl from Ireland on her honeymoon in Mauritius was killed in her own bedroom when she walked in on staff who were robbing her room .
They strangled her , threw her into the bath and tried to pretend it was suicide .
Circumstances are different but the result is the same : an innocent person dead .
Also , a few weeks ago , I was part of the EU-US delegation to America and there we met the Foreign Minister of Pakistan .
He struck me as being a very reasonable , sensible , fair-minded person and he emphasised that religion is about tolerance and we should try to get that message through to the extremists and the fundamentalists .
( SK ) Mr President , what is particularly alarming about the murder of the Governor of Punjab , Salmaan Taseer , is the background to this violent act .
The fact that this murder took place with the silent approval of Pakistani spiritual leaders , and that local lawyers support the murderer , means that murder on grounds of religious intolerance is tolerated in Pakistani society .
Pakistani laws on blasphemy make it possible to persecute religious minorities with the threat of the death penalty , as has happened to Asia Bibi , a mother of five children who is awaiting her punishment in prison .
We therefore really cannot remain indifferent to what is happening .
Our pressure on the Pakistani administration is quite legitimate and I expect a similar response from all free and democratic forces around the world .
We cannot today tolerate - in the third millennium - brutal behaviour from the middle ages perpetrated by oppressors in an abuse of religion .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I must point out that the situation in Pakistan is quite unsettling not only in this case , but also in general .
Pakistan 's problems must not be viewed as something far away , since we know all too well that the problems arising in the region of Inner Asia , whether they are economic problems , ethnic problems or even the issue of emigration , will sooner or later ripple over to the area of the European Union .
Thus , there is a very real need for us to address the problem of Pakistan .
Pakistan is burdened by two problems in particular : on the one hand , the continuous attacks from Afghanistan and India , and , on the other , the issue which is the most important for us in this sitting , Muslim extremists , to whom Salmaan Taseer also fell victim .
For this reason , I ask the European Parliament that we assure Pakistan of our support , so that the situation can come to a satisfactory conclusion as soon as possible .
( RO ) Mr President , the assassination of Governor Salmaan Taseer , a dedicated voice for tolerance and the rights of minorities in Pakistan , shows a human rights violation on a dramatic scale .
Exercising the right to freedom of expression and religion in Pakistan is punishable under law by imprisonment or even death .
Salmaan Taseer paid with his life in the defence not only of religious freedom , but also of the life and freedom of others .
We must support those who fight courageously and risk their lives for human rights and democracy .
We urge the authorities in Pakistan to punish the criminals and their accomplices and get rid of the blasphemy laws .
Mr President , the murder of Governor Salmaan Taseer is indeed a brutal and tragic crime .
He was killed , apparently , by an Islamic extremist because he advocated changes to the blasphemy law .
The murder is a tragedy for Pakistan , but what does it mean for the West ?
Instead of doing all we can to combat Islamic fundamentalism taking deeper root in Europe , we placate and appease it .
Sharia law is now recognised in some tribunals in the UK .
There are inner city areas where the de facto writ of Sharia law runs .
Europe , having produced the Renaissance , the Enlightenment , the Industrial Revolution and the wonders of the modern scientific age , now lies supine before a 6th century ideology .
Governments are frightened to confront it because of political correctness and the economic power of some Islamic countries .
We must support the moderate and progressive elements in countries like Pakistan , but above all , we must assert that Sharia law and Islamic fundamentalism have no place in a modern , Western , liberal democracy .
( RO ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to say that , for my part , I condemn the brutal assassination of the Governor of Punjab province .
He was a prominent figure in the political life of Pakistan who was noted for his courageous fight against extremism , intolerance and fanaticism .
Seven months ago , I supported here the need to urgently revise the provisions relating to offences against religions in the so-called ' blasphemy laws ' .
I would like to remind you that the possibilities for abuse offered by these laws create an atmosphere of intolerance that encourages violence on religious grounds and also promotes discrimination , intimidation and persecution of religious minorities .
The case of Asia Bibi that actually culminated in the murder of Governor Taseer is symbolic in this regard .
I believe that the Pakistani authorities must demonstrate through action their declared commitment to the fight against extremism in this country by abolishing the blasphemy laws .
I would like , therefore , to reiterate the call to the voices of reason in Pakistan that was initiated by the daughter of Punjab 's deceased Governor , Shehrbano Taseer .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing my sympathy with the citizens of Pakistan and my sorrow over the loss of such an important political figure as Salmaan Taseer .
I am concerned about the fact that people with specific beliefs and religious groups , including Christians , continue to be persecuted in the country , for example , the notorious case of the woman who , on the basis of Sharia law , on the basis of a law on blasphemy , is actually awaiting execution .
The fact that Islamist extremist groups continue to exist directly inside the Pakistani security services does not contribute to the stability of the country , and clearly undermines confidence in the country being governed by the laws of a legal state .
I hope that the reform process will go further in the country , and I would therefore like to call on all political forces , including religious institutions , to provide greater support for moderation , tolerance and mutual respect between communities .
( DE ) Mr President , in many ways , Pakistan is a fragile country .
It is politically fragile because the government is not strong enough to implement effectively its moderate course of political and economic stabilisation and because the army 's offensive against extremists in the border areas is , in fact , causing resistance to increase .
It is economically fragile because the global financial crisis and the devastating floods in the country have set back its development by several years .
It is socially fragile because social structures have failed to develop over the decades in such a way as to enable large sections of society to share in economic development .
We in the European Union must enter into dialogue with the political class there in order to promote a recognition that fundamental economic and social change are necessary so that people can be offered prospects that promise them more than the alternatives of extremism and fundamentalism .
( DE ) Mr President , the most hateful and violent regimes ever known were the anti-religious regimes of the Jacobins , Nazis and Communists in Europe .
For this reason , I do not think it is helpful for Mrs Vergiat to attack religions in such sweeping terms .
The fact remains , however , that religions are often misused for ideological purposes , which is something that we need to combat .
This is the case in Pakistan , for example .
On the other hand , we must remember that Pakistan was created on the basis of religious criteria when India was partitioned .
It is a country with no history , but was established as a Muslim state by the British colonial powers as they pulled out of the region .
That is why we should understand that this is an Islamic state .
However , we must insist that this country should be organised along tolerant lines and that religious freedom should be upheld .
Christians must be treated with greater respect than has been the case to date and the EU needs to show greater vigour in stepping up to its role as an advocate for this group .
After all , if Europe does not stand up for the world 's Christians , then who will ?
( FI ) Mr President , more than one of us here has said how Salmaan Taseer was someone who stood up for vulnerable women and representatives of religious minorities , through both words and action .
He fought against injustice generally .
Taseer was a supporter of the democratic state and spoke out against Pakistan 's harsh blasphemy laws , saying that they were enacted by human beings and were therefore capable of being amended by them .
Several here have already spoken of how he vigorously defended a Christian woman who had been sentenced to death and tried to overturn her sentence .
All these deeds in the name of justice were his undoing .
The EU should support the forces in Pakistan that seek reforms , because not everyone in Pakistan backs fundamentalists .
In its foreign policy , the EU should therefore consider wisely its position on the situation in Pakistan .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this debate is yet more proof that the European Union is shocked by the brutal murder of Mr Salmaan Taseer , Governor of Pakistan 's Punjab province , in Islamabad on 4 January .
High Representative Ashton strongly condemned the killing in her statement on 4 January .
She urged the Pakistani authorities to bring the perpetrators of this crime to justice .
This assassination is all the more distressing as , based on available reports , it is linked to Mr Taseer 's outspoken defence of a Christian woman , Asia Bibi , who was sentenced to death under questionable blasphemy charges .
It should be noted that on 12 November 2010 , High Representative Ashton expressed deep concern over the death sentence given to Mrs Asia Bibi .
She called on Pakistan to abolish the death penalty and respect human rights , as guaranteed under the international conventions to which the country is a party .
The European Union has repeatedly brought up the continued application of the blasphemy laws with the government of Pakistan as part of this human rights dialogue .
We are conscious of the fact that the blasphemy laws in their present form are open to abuse and have often been applied against religious minorities .
We are also aware that false accusations have been used as a tool to settle private disputes or for personal gain .
We were encouraged by earlier steps taken by the government of Pakistan to try amending more controversial aspects of the laws .
Ideally , of course , the blasphemy laws would be totally repealed .
It is unfortunate that in the case of Mr Taseer 's assassination , there has been widespread public support for the murderer .
We are concerned that fatwas were not only issued against Mr Taseer but also against other public figures who have spoken out for a reform of the blasphemy laws .
Inciting hatred and violence with impunity should not be allowed .
The government of Pakistan has a responsibility to protect its citizens , and we count on it to do everything possible to ensure their safety .
There are fears that the murder of Mr Taseer reflects a rise in extremism and intolerance in Pakistan .
We need to face up to the situation and consider carefully how to react , knowing that the government , and democratic institutions of the states more generally , continue to face daunting challenges .
Let me be very clear here : there is no alternative but to continue to strengthen democratic and progressive forces in Pakistan 's civil society .
Pakistan 's constitution explicitly protects the rights of minorities , and accordingly , the government needs to tackle extremism not just in the border areas but also on the streets of Pakistani cities .
We need to provide continued emphasis on education in our development cooperation and more needs to be done to promote tolerance within the educational system , especially towards minorities .
We are well aware of the vulnerable situation of persons belonging to religious minorities in Pakistan ; this does not just concern Christians but also Hindus , Shias , Ahmadis and others .
The European Union should champion their common cause and not that of any particular group or religion , as this would play into the hands of those wishing to deepen divisions among Christians and Muslims .
We will continue to focus on the need to fully protect every individual 's right to religious freedom in Pakistan or elsewhere .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I would like to express my deep indignation at the murder of the Governor of the province of Punjab in Pakistan , Salmaan Taseer , on 4 January 2011 , for having spoken out against Pakistan 's law against blasphemy .
According to the values of our Western societies , murder is considered as the worst single crime .
It is , therefore , difficult to understand how someone can commit murder as a form of retaliation .
Freedom of conscience and freedom of religion are as important as freedom of speech , which may lead to conflicts between these freedoms .
However , any definition by governments of what is to be considered as blasphemy is an unacceptable restriction on freedom of speech .
A modern society should consider as legitimate all personal views expressed in an inoffensive manner .
Moreover , if Pakistan is to become a tolerant society , such barbarian acts motivated by religious fundamentalism are to be condemned .
This incident is yet another reminder that freedom of speech continues to be absent in some regions of the world .
Given the history of his country , it was courageous for Salmaan Taseer to speak out against the blasphemy law and in favour of free speech .
It is regrettable that this ultimately cost him his life .
2 .
Brazil : extradition of Cesare Battisti
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Brazil : extradition of Cesare Battisti .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in international law , a political refugee is a person who , owing to a fear of being persecuted for reasons of race , religion , nationality , membership of a particular social group , or political opinion , is outside the country of his nationality .
Cesare Battisti is not a political refugee .
Regardless of the cover offered by France for many years , we are talking about a mass-murderer , who carried out or ordered four murders , and who hid behind the pretext of political struggle to evade a life sentence .
It is disgraceful that a great country such as Brazil can deny the extradition of an unpunished criminal by granting him political refugee status .
The Italian authorities and , above all , the relations of the victims , insist that this criminal is brought to justice .
Faced with the arrogance of President Lula in denying extradition , the EU cannot leave the Italian Government by itself .
Europe has , and must use , all the diplomatic instruments at its disposal to ensure that Mr Battisti is delivered to Italy , even at a cost of threatening to suspend cooperation agreements with Brazil .
Mr President , respect for the independence of judicial powers and the legality of their decisions is one of the prerequisites for the rule of law and democratic society .
Each person deserves the right to a fair trial and the judgment of an independent court of law should be respected .
In this case , the Brazilian Supreme Court decided to allow Battisti 's extradition .
The decisions taken in Italy to request extradition were all taken in the proper legal order .
The European Court of Human Rights did not consider the appeal . In other words , this case is disposed of .
Now , the Brazilian authorities must act to ensure that the law is applied and extradite Battisti .
My group hopes that the European External Action Service will do its utmost to ensure that the judicial system and rule of law prevail .
Mr President , the truth is that I have made no attempt to conceal my discomfort with the issue and the situation , as I do genuinely believe that we are faced with an important issue .
However , it is an issue that affects both Italy and Brazil and there are many forums in which I believe we must tackle the issue .
However , I am not convinced that this forum , which is for discussing resolutions on violations of human rights throughout the world , is the right one .
I say this with the utmost respect , and from the outset , I offer my complete solidarity with all victims of terrorism in all corners of the world , not least this one .
I say it in order to encourage general reflection on how these types of issue end up being discussed on a Thursday afternoon session , when , and I stress this point , in this context , we have a sub judice situation with a resolution already in place .
It is difficult for our group to support this situation and it is for this reason that we feel obliged to abstain .
We intend to abstain , and I stress this , not because the content or issue do not merit reflection , only that we feel that this is not the time or the place to do it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , through this resolution , we are appealing to the European institutions to play a role in affirming the rights of justice and legality as they carry out their diplomatic functions .
Today , the European Parliament is asking loud and clear that the Charter of Fundamental Rights not be regarded as just a collection of papers , and that citizens not be seen as mere consumers of the common market , but as holders of inalienable and non-negotiable fundamental rights .
The relations of the victims of Cesare Battisti - who killed four decent , hard-working people in a senseless bloodbath in front of their families and children - came here yesterday in this spirit of trust .
Commissioner , with passion and the force of the law behind us , we are relying on everyone to do their part and , in these last few seconds , I should like to ask my fellow Members to dedicate a minute of reflection to the memory of the victims .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are here today in this Chamber to remember that the European Parliament and democratic institutions must protect and support the relatives of the victims of terrorism and provide the sense of justice that European public opinion demands .
In the resolution we have tabled and are shortly to vote upon , we point out that relations between Brazil and the European Union are based on mutual recognition and respect of the rule of law and of fundamental rights .
There are therefore no question marks over our friendly relationship with Brazil .
I should like to point out that , in Italy , the defendant , Cesare Battisti , has been found guilty of four murders .
Although a fugitive , Mr Battisti had the legal assurances in his trials - which were all conducted in the presence of his defence lawyer - that the Italian justice system had run its course , with all levels of justice exhausted , and that they sentenced him to two life sentences .
Mr President , even France - where Cesare Battisti had previously fled - decided back in 2004 to accept Italy 's extradition request , recognising his crimes and the corresponding sentences , because Cesare Battisti is a criminal who must be brought to justice .
Brazil 's contradictory behaviour is difficult to understand , not least because the Brazilian authorities have not officially recognised him as a political refugee , which is one of the reasons to suspend the bilateral agreement between Italy and Brazil regarding extradition .
This is why the decision of the Supreme Court seemed incomprehensible to the victims ' families and the wider public .
Mr President , we are representing a Europe of rights and of rights for all .
The victims have the right to know that those guilty of such heinous crimes will serve their sentence in the prisons of their own countries .
Mr President , I am not Italian , I am not Brazilian , I am a citizen of a Member State of the European Union , and I do not want the Union to be a Union which has lost its sense of proportion - a Union in which a criminal enjoys the same rights as the victims of crimes and their families .
This is not acceptable .
It is a question of certain elementary standards - I would even say human standards - and not European ones .
Speaking as someone who is not very emotionally involved and who , I suppose , can look at the situation coldly and objectively , it seems to me I can say on this matter that a certain loss of balance has , in fact , occurred here , which is inconceivable to our taxpayers and our voters .
I think the decision of the Brazilian Supreme Court is incomprehensible and will be incomprehensible to everyone who looks into it .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Romeva i Rueda , yesterday in a touching press conference held in Parliament , the relatives of the victims of the indiscriminate murders of Cesare Battisti spoke fairly and with dignity to once again present the issue at the heart of this tragic affair .
It is not a matter of revenge , but justice must be done .
Therefore , because justice must be done , Cesare Battisti must be extradited , and because Mr Battisti must be extradited , we hope that through this resolution , Parliament can authoritatively and credibly amplify this same cry : it is not a matter of revenge , but justice must be done .
The European Union is a political project in which we have combined our values and our ideals to definitively defeat the power of ideologies , totalitarian ideologies , arbitrary violence and the limitless evil of terrorism .
In order to realise this project , today , we forcefully ask once again : let us not seek revenge , but let us ensure that justice is done .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it happens all too often that intellectuals or high-powered institutions in some countries refuse to understand the phenomenon of Italian terrorism , raising doubts about the trustworthiness of our judicial system .
Since this is the legal basis for the refusal to extradite Cesare Battisti , we cannot but reject it .
Cesare Battisti , an individual with something of an ambiguous past , is the product of a time in which thousands of young people - many of whom were desperately lonely - chose armed struggle as a means of political struggle and ended up turning the alienating utopian dream they believed in into a crime .
Other countries have experienced similar tragedies but none have so far offered the protagonists of these any chances to reform , unlike Italy , which , in fighting terrorism , really cemented its sense of national unity .
Taking up the appeal of the victims ' relatives , we therefore ask for Cesare Battisti to be brought before the Italian judicial system , which will know how to show - as it has done in hundreds of other cases of former terrorists who are now reintegrated into social and civil life - that to be punished is also to make amends , as the Italian , Cesare Beccaria , taught Western legal civilisation , and not just intimidation or brutalisation , as the Brazilian authorities fear .
Mr President , we are dealing with a matter that is not truly urgent , but there is no lack of topics concerning truly urgent matters , such as the imprisonment and assassination of trade unionists in Colombia , repression and death in Honduras , or the tragic situation in the Israeli-occupied territories of Palestine .
If you want to talk about Brazil , then it would be a matter of true urgency to demonstrate our solidarity with the people affected by the storms that recently lashed the state of Rio de Janeiro , in particular , the cities of Nova Friburgo , Petrópolis and Teresópolis , which killed more than 700 people , left more than 13 000 people homeless , and caused incalculable damage .
It is lamentable that the European Parliament has not commented on this tragedy and has not asked the European Commission to express its active solidarity to the President of Brazil and its availability to provide any aid necessary .
Therefore , from these seats , we congratulate the new President of Brazil , Dilma Roussef , on her recent election .
We send our feelings of solidarity and deep regret for the tragic consequences of the storms , feelings that extend to the Brazilian Congress , the families that are the victims of this tragedy and all the people of Brazil .
With regard to the resolution presented here , we insist on the need to respect the decisions of the legitimate authorities of Brazil , where Cesare Battisti is being held , and to await the decisions of the legitimate authorities of Brazil , without pressure from this Parliament .
Therefore , I propose that the proposal be withdrawn in order to avoid a deplorable decision .
( The speaker agreed to take two blue card questions under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to reply to the fellow Member who said that there are many other urgent issues to be dealt with and so on , simply by stating the fact that , in contrast to many other issues which are quite clearly worthy of our interest , this is an urgent issue that involves not only a country outside the European Union , but one within it , and we are also referring to citizens who have been killed or disabled and who are European citizens .
( PT ) Mr President , I have already said , and now repeat , that this is not a truly urgent matter .
We know that the legitimate authorities in Brazil have this case in hand and that the Italian citizen is being held in Brazil .
Therefore , what we are saying is that this Parliament must not put pressure on the legitimate authorities in Brazil .
We have to await the decisions that they will make in due course .
With regard to urgent matters , we have a whole host of issues here , including , in Brazil , solidarity with the victims of the storms , which have left more than 700 people dead .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just have a simple question for Mrs Figueiredo .
Do you not think that 30 years - because many years have passed since these people were killed - are not enough to ask urgently for justice , at last ?
( PT ) Mr President , as we have already said and now repeat , Mr President , it is a matter of how we are discussing this matter .
We are discussing it at a time when we should be discussing urgent issues .
Even from the statements that Mrs Angelilli has made , it is clear that it could have been debated at other times and that it still can be debated at some other time , but not now as a matter of urgency .
What was urgent was solidarity for the 700 people who died in the last few days in Brazil as the result of the storms .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Cesare Battisti is not a romantic hero as some have depicted him , but a savage murderer with a history of robbery who has been found guilty of killing four people with shots to the back of the neck .
He benefited unjustly from Mr Mitterrand 's doctrine of political asylum and has been protected and idealised by some left-wing French intellectuals .
Having fled to Brazil to avoid repatriation and prison , Mr Battisti was saved by President Lula due to an erroneous decision that was probably made for political reasons , with no regard for the suffering of the victims and their relatives .
Mrs Figueiredo , Parliament 's request to the Brazilian authorities and to the Commission does not only ask for the respect of legal rules and bilateral agreements , but also aims to affirm the principle that no ideological reason can justify the actions of a murderer and no country may guarantee him impunity .
We must never forget that there is ethical value in the moral compensation of victims by serving a punishment .
This is at the foundation of the social contract that props up all communities that are civilised , or that aim to be .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 31 years after the blood spilled by the victims of the barbaric murders carried out by Cesare Battisti and his gang , it has still not been forgotten .
The pain of the victims ' relatives , whom we heard from yesterday in a press conference in Strasbourg , is genuine proof of this .
Indeed , it was Mr Mastella - then Minister for Justice in the Italian Government - who made major efforts through institutional actions to give final justice to the Battisti case .
Today , together with the relatives of the victims , the citizens of Italy and the whole country , it is the European Parliament - showing its extraordinary unity with a joint motion for a resolution - that is forcefully asking another country , which is a friend of Europe and a friend of Italy , for the immediate extradition of Cesare Battisti , who is a criminal and a terrorist and who has been convicted with definitive judgments , so as to finally bring to an end this difficult and painful episode that has been dragging on for too long .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ' By himself , he was a petty crook or a minor felon , but he was bright and like me , he also believed he could become a politician .
The people most emotionally and physically wounded by the crimes of his gang have never asked for revenge but , most civilly , even now , they ask for truth and justice .
Not because it is a life sentence , but because the judgment has been made and so that the punishment decided upon according to the rules of our legal system may be respected and carried out ' .
Those are the words of Arrigo Cavallina , who recruited Cesare Battisti in prison when he was serving a sentence for robbery , talking about Mr Battisti , his crimes and the families of the victims .
This is the very essence of the entire affair : he was a common criminal , who reinvented himself as a terrorist and who has been sentenced to life in prison for carrying out or ordering the murders of four defenceless people , having sheltered first in Mexico , then France , and now in Brazil , protected by a network of international support as if he were a romantic revolutionary and not a ruthless murderer .
This is why the extradition of Cesare Battisti to Italy is not just the latest act in a long history of presumed political persecution , as some armchair intellectuals would still have us believe , but the legitimate claim of a Member - not to mention founding - State of the European Union to have the international treaties and its own judicial system respected .
( Applause )
Mr President , I challenge your decision to allocate catch-the-eye simply on the basis of who had not spoken in the Pakistan debate .
This is an entirely different debate on a different issue .
So far , it has been a debate between Lusophones and Italophones .
That is great , but perhaps other countries might want to have an opinion on this well , as well as other delegations from other political groups .
I fully agree that this is a completely different debate but we have an allocated time of two minutes , so I am free to give time to two people .
If you were in my shoes , how would you do it ?
I want to give a fair go to everybody who did not speak in the previous item , a fair go to the representatives of each political group .
It is very much the situation that mainly our Italian colleagues spoke , so I will take care of that and give the floor mainly to non-Italian Members .
( FI ) Mr President , to some extent , I understand the frustration felt by some of my fellow Members concerning the urgency of a resolution on Cesare Battisti .
At the end of December , after President Lula da Silva issued a decision not to allow extradition , Berlusconi announced that he would recall his ambassador to Brazil and continue to fight to get Battisti extradited back to Italy .
This is doubtless part of that same struggle .
It does not , however , reduce the seriousness of Battisti 's crimes .
He has evaded the Italian judiciary for 30 years now and so far , therefore , he has escaped a life sentence for murder .
Relations between the EU and Brazil are based on trust , inasmuch as there is a respect for democracy , the rule of law , and human rights .
Raising criminals to the status of political refugee cannot be accepted .
( RO ) Mr President , I consider that respect for judicial independence - a fundamental standard shared by the European Union and Brazil - should take precedence over all other considerations .
I firmly believe that the excellent relations between the two sides at both an economic and political level will be backed up by equally good cooperation on judicial matters , so that Cesare Battisti , who was sentenced to life imprisonment for four murders and other crimes , will serve his sentence under the law which governs him .
There is a bilateral extradition treaty between Brazil and Italy .
As such , we must address an appeal to Brazil to respect this agreement .
As the controversy has a high-level political aspect , I believe that dialogue should be initiated at this level with the new Brazilian head of state .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am slightly surprised by the number of Members here in the Chamber for a Thursday afternoon .
As someone who attends every Thursday afternoon , I find the sudden interest in human rights issues quite extraordinary .
I would have welcomed this , had I not noticed that those attending are mostly Italian Members , who do not usually take an interest in human rights and who are , for that matter , often the first to ...
( Protests )
My dear fellow Member , would you like to make yourself clear ? Then please speak into the microphone and I will answer you .
That is what you would call a personal accusation .
You are Italian , I am French , I respect you as an Italian .
Anyone can see that there are , after all , a majority of Italian Members in the House , which , for a Thursday afternoon , is unusual to say the least .
I am here every Thursday afternoon myself , sir !
Every Thursday afternoon , I am here in plenary !
( Heckling )
Let me have quiet to speak !
I am not in the habit of interrupting my fellow Members and I do not tolerate being interrupted !
Mr President , may I please have my allotted time ?
( The President asked the speaker to continue )
I have also noticed that , generally speaking , Italian Members are the first to ask that their democracy be respected and that no one interfere in Italian affairs .
That is a fact .
You only have to read the European Parliament debates to realise that .
We are not here to find out whether Cesare Battisti is guilty or not guilty .
I know -and I am speaking to you now - that the Years of Lead are a difficult period for Italians to come to terms with .
I do know that .
I know that there were many victims .
However , I also know that not all those guilty of terrorist attacks were tried in Italy .
I repeat : not all those guilty of terrorist attacks were tried in Italy !
( Heckling )
Could you please let me speak without interrupting me ?
You would think that we were in a national parliament !
This is not how things are done in the European Parliament !
Mr President , would it be possible to speak without being interrupted ?
( The President asked the speaker to conclude )
I believe we have no business , on a Thursday afternoon , interfering in relations between Brazil and Italy .
We are here to ensure that the right to justice is observed , I fully agree with that , but then let us give the Brazilian Supreme Court time to issue its ruling .
The matter is now before the Brazilian courts , the Supreme Court has yet to issue its ruling , this issue does not come under ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( FR ) Mr President , it is my custom to respect my fellow Members and I am prepared to answer the question .
I would very much like them to show the same tolerance towards me .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if you respect your fellow Members , Mrs Vergiat , you absolutely should not dare to say that your Italian fellow Members are never interested in human rights .
I have been here for 16 years .
You can check the record of my work in Parliament , and I certainly do not deserve to be lectured on human rights by you .
On behalf of my fellow Members , we should like to ask whether or not you are ashamed to raise doubts about these four people ?
Do you know what jobs these people did ?
They were very humble people .
One was a security guard , one was a butcher , another a trader and another an agent of the public security forces .
Yesterday , the children of these people , who were between 10 and 15 years ' old at the time , told us that every single day , they remember their fathers in a pool of blood .
Do you really think it is appropriate to pick fights ?
Mr President , I regard this as a question in the form of a personal accusation .
No , I am not ashamed , Mrs Angelilli , because I made a point of saying that I thought that the Years of Lead were difficult years for Italy .
I do think that the Years of Lead were difficult years for Italy !
I know how many victims there were in Italy .
I have taken a personal interest in this period .
Therefore , no , I am not ashamed .
I am not questioning the victims ; I am questioning the use , by Italian Members , of a Thursday afternoon sitting reserved for human rights issues to debate an issue which strictly concerns Italy and Brazil .
I think - and I hope that the Commissioner will also respond in this way - that the European Union has no business interfering in affairs between Italy and Brazil ; that is not its role .
These sittings are reserved for human rights !
What is more , Mrs Angelilli , I have not lectured you on this matter !
I shall accept no more blue card questions .
We have had the arguments and we have had the counter-arguments .
( We now move to the next speaker . )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am raising a point of order which is based on the Rule in relation to the composition of the agenda .
I should just like to point out that this issue is on the agenda as a result of a decision taken by the Conference of Presidents which was then ratified by a vote in plenary last Monday .
It is not on the agenda due to the wishes of the Italian Members .
It is an official act requested first by the Conference of Presidents and then by all of Parliament .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union really must ensure that the treaty signed between Brazil and Italy , which aims to regulate the terms and procedures of cooperation in matters of extradition , is respected .
The Brazilian Supreme Court has granted the extradition of Cesare Battisti , who has been found guilty in some seven trials and sentenced in absentia to four life sentences for as many murders , with definitive judgments issued by the Italian judicial authorities .
Incredibly , the outgoing President of Brazil has refused to deliver this criminal to Italy .
Furthermore , in an act of extreme contempt for our country , a group of left-wing Brazilian members of parliament went to visit Cesare Battisti in prison and took photos of themselves celebrating with him .
The European Union , which has excellent commercial and economic relations with Brazil , cannot but intervene to enforce the law and the right of the victims ' relatives to justice .
Just yesterday , the victims ' relatives met Members of the European Parliament in Strasbourg , who - for once - were all in agreement , irrespective of their political affiliation .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is fully aware of the outgoing Brazilian President 's recent decision to refuse extradition of an Italian citizen , Mr Battisti , sentenced in absentia to a life sentence and several other terms of prison by the Italian court .
I have taken due note of your views on this particular case , and I share your feelings towards the victims and their families .
However , the Commission considers that there is no scope for its involvement in this case .
The European Union has not concluded any extradition agreement with Brazil and , even if this had been the case , it would have no right to intervene in individual extradition cases .
A decision on extradition between European Union Member States , or between European Union Member States and third states , are entirely the preserve of the judiciary .
Italy 's relations with Brazil on criminal cooperation are governed by a bilateral extradition treaty concluded in 1989 .
The Brazilian authorities have used their discretionary power within the law to refuse extradition of Mr Battisti .
I would like to add , in no uncertain terms : in the case of extradition , I have no doubts that Italian justice delivers the high standards expected of European Union Member States .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I am against the initiative of this resolution , because I believe that the case of Cesare Battisti 's extradition does not have a place in a debate in this House on urgent cases of ' Breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ' , simply because it does not represent a breach of human rights , democracy or the rule of law in Brazil and also because it is not an urgent matter .
This is a legal and political dispute between Brazil and Italy and a decision by the Supreme Federal Court of Brazil is pending .
At this time , this House should be sending two other messages to Brazil : one of solidarity regarding the disaster in which more than 700 people lost their lives , and one of delight on account of the democratic election of President Dilma Rousseff .
Brazil is , without doubt , a democratic country that has made significant progress in political , civil , social , economic and cultural affairs in the last decade and is a model in the fight against poverty and hunger , thanks to the government 's Zero Hunger and Family Allowance programmes .
in writing . - The rule of law must be upheld .
The credibility of public institutions depends on it .
Brazilian President Lula was authorised by the Brazilian Supreme Court to extradite Cesare Battisti , an Italian citizen convicted of four murders , among other charges .
On 31 December 2009 , President Lula 's last day in office , he refused to extradite Battisti to Italy .
I expect the Brazilian authorities to make an apolitical unbiased final decision ; a decision that upholds the rule of law .
The rule of law is fundamental to Brazilian-EU relations .
Our treaties are founded on the principles of human rights and fairness .
I trust these principles to remain mutual .
3 .
Iran , in particular , the case of Nasrin Sotoudeh
The next item is the debate on seven motions for resolutions on Iran , in particular , the case of Nasrin Sotoudeh .
Mr President , exactly one week ago , Nobel Prize winner , Shirin Ebadi , published a penetrating article in The Wall Street Journal about her friend , the Iranian human rights lawyer , Nasrin Sotoudeh , who had just been sentenced to eleven years ' imprisonment .
Ebadi called for the West to pay greater attention to the Sotoudeh case and to all the brave human rights defenders in the territory of the Islamic Republic of Iran .
The debate in this House is part of the response to Ebadi 's urgent appeal .
We cannot and shall not forget Nasrin Sotoudeh , nor her fellow fighters for fundamental rights in Iran .
That will also be the message , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , of the report that I hope to present on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs at the plenary sitting in March , and I count on all of you to vote in favour of it .
A powerful , united European voice for the rights of the Iranian people .
author . - Mr President , once again , we are forced to speak about human rights in Iran , after Nasrin Sotoudeh was sentenced to 11 years in jail .
She is banned from practising law , but let us serve justice .
The Rule of Law is no longer practised or existent in Iran , and the judiciary is highly politicised .
Defending human rights is now considered an act against national security .
Nasrin Sotoudeh , lawyer and mother of two , is charged with acting against national security .
She defended , among others , Zahra Bahrami , an Iranian-Dutch citizen who was sentenced to death before Dutch diplomats had talked to her , and in a climate of serious doubts about due process .
As strong a woman as Nasrin Sotoudeh is and was , by standing for justice , we see a weak regime that represses its citizens instead of providing for their wellbeing .
High Representative Ashton will be in Istanbul later this month in an attempt to bring the Iranian regime to cooperate with the international community on the nuclear issue .
Economic sanctions have the same aim .
I doubt they will render the desired result before disproportionately hurting the people of Iran who , as a result , become more and more dependent on the hard-line government .
However , while I am sceptical about the impact of economic sanctions , I am confident that sanctions against individuals responsible for violating human rights through , for example , censorship , rape , torture and executions , will be an effective and necessary step to end impunity and to honour the justice that Nasrin Sotoudeh stood for .
Human rights are clearly the Achilles heel of the Iranian regime .
Mr President , while I have the floor , may I ask you to encourage our Italian colleagues to be quiet because it is really distracting when they start speaking in the Chamber after their business has been dealt with .
Colleagues , you heard the request made by Mrs Schaake .
Other colleagues have also asked if you could be quiet .
If you have something private to discuss , you can do so outside .
author . - Mr President , it was my intention today to compare the Islamic Republic of Iran to Nazi Germany but I have to say that I think in many ways , it can be even worse .
The mullahs have hanged 65 people so far this year .
Ten were hanged yesterday : first , they were heavily fined and had their homes confiscated , and then each was mercilessly flogged before being dragged to the gallows .
Eighty-seven people have been hanged in the past four weeks .
Ahmadinejad is a holocaust denier and a hater of the Jews ; he says he wants to wipe Israel off the map and he is now building nuclear weapons that will enable him to do so .
He and Khamenei preside over the ruthless suppression of the citizens of Iran , with hangings , torture , stoning to death , amputations and floggings all commonplace , and the execution of children , and even pregnant women , routine .
Two prisoners in Mashhad had their hands amputated this week ; two others have been sentenced to amputation and these verdicts will be carried out soon .
Anyone who tries to expose this evil is immediately targeted .
Nasrin Sotoudeh is a case in point : a courageous human rights lawyer who has defended many of the innocent people unjustly sentenced and executed by this fascist regime .
Her outrageous sentence of 11 years ' imprisonment for doing her job is an insult to humanity .
The real criminals are the tyrants in Tehran and they will be held to account .
They believe that their critics in the West are part of an international conspiracy to topple their regime .
Well , I for one would sign up to that project today .
Evil must never be allowed to prevail , and the sooner we can see freedom , democracy , humanity and women 's rights restored to Iran , the better it will be for the whole world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by asking for the immediate release of Nasrin Sotoudeh , we are urging the Union and its Member States to do more to liberate Iranian citizens and the world from one of the cruellest and most authoritarian regimes in history .
The Islamic Republic of Iran is characterised not only by the threat it poses to world peace with a nuclear project capable of evoking the terror of nuclear war , but also by the illegitimacy of its elections ; mass arrests of people requesting free elections ; the killing of objectors ; the rape and physical abuse of those who do not support the regime ; the iniquity of judicial processes , where decisions can be predicted as soon as the accusations have been made ; serious discrimination against women and homosexuals ; and the absence of freedom of expression and of association .
The conditions of Iranian prisoners in Camp Ashraf , where they are subjected to violence and even stoning , are absolutely incredible .
Every day , at least two people , including children , are sentenced to death in Iran , and they are guilty of nothing more than of not pleasing the regime .
Legal evidence is often created through the cruel and skilful use of brutal methods of torture .
These criticisms are certainly not aimed at Islam , which is based on peace , but at the Iranian regime .
The arrest and conviction of Nasrin Sotoudeh bring to light a new level of judicial deceit , since in this case , the attack and conviction are against a defender of the people , which means that citizens of Iran cannot even defend themselves .
Mr President , while Iran might be starting to open up on nuclear matters , we unfortunately must conclude that the door is clearly closed in this country when it comes to human rights .
The case of Nasrin Sotoudeh demonstrates this completely .
She was punished for her work in support of human rights with an extremely harsh sentence : 11 years , banned from practising as a lawyer for 20 years and from leaving the country .
This verdict was reached following a mockery of a trial .
This case is far from an isolated incident .
It is part of a deliberate strategy by the Iranian regime to systematically silence human rights activists .
A whole series of very harsh sentences are targeted at lawyers who are active in human rights matters , and we must show solidarity with these courageous people who support and take action on human rights in spite of threats , torture and imprisonment .
author . - Mr President , I have to stay that I deeply deplore the fact that we once more have to talk about Iran , but we have to .
We really have to because the situation in Iran is gravely problematic and dramatic .
That is why it is important that this Parliament reiterates once again its call for the release of all prisoners of conscience , including all those who have been detained over the last year in connection with their peaceful - and I repeat , peaceful - political and human rights activities .
This Parliament has to call again on the Iranian authorities to respect the internationally recognised rights to freedom of expression and assembly , and strongly condemn the extraordinarily harsh sentence against Nasrin Sotoudeh and to commend her for her courage and her engagement .
This is also why this Parliament has to consider Mrs Sotoudeh , as well as her fellow human rights activists and prisoners of conscience , and demand her immediate release .
We have to express our concern over the ever more frequently imposed sentence of a ban on leaving Iran , which can lead to the logical conclusion that staying in Iran is considered a punishment by the authorities .
We have to call on the authorities to combat the impunity of human rights violators within the security forces and also reiterate our demand for an independent investigation into allegations of extra-judicial executions since June 's disputed presidential elections and for alleged violators to be brought to justice .
Evidently , we also have to strongly condemn the bomb attack in Chabahar and to express our condolences to the victims ' families and the injured .
Finally , I should like to say that we are seriously concerned about the persecution of certain religions and ethnic groups in Iran .
We have to express our conviction , supported by recent European history , that peaceful and balanced social and political development can only be achieved by taking the cultural and social aspirations of differing regions into account .
Mr President , Nasrin Sotoudeh gave us reason to talk about her in a previous European Parliament debate on the lack of protection of human rights in Iran , when , on 4 September 2010 , she was arrested on charges of propaganda against the state , conspiracy and assembling to act against national security .
She has been held for four months .
Now , following a trial , this distinguished human rights defender and dedicated co-worker of Nobel Laureate , Shirin Ebadi , has been sentenced to 11 years ' imprisonment followed by a 20-year ban on practising law and leaving Iran .
Let us remember that long prison sentences have also been handed down to other political prisoners .
The 26-year-old women 's rights activist , Shiva Nazar Ahari , has been sentenced to four years in prison and 74 lashes for the same crime .
We need to emphasise clearly our opposition to flagrant violations of what are fundamental human rights : freedom of association , freedom of expression , the right to freedom of thought and the right to a fair trial .
Nasrin Sotoudeh , who has devoted her life to the fight to defend human rights - defending minors who have been sentenced to death and people accused of causing peaceful protests as well as working closely with the opposition - has become living proof of the human rights violations in Iran .
The European Union cannot continue to be a passive observer of this uneven fight on the part of Iranian society against the regime .
Mr President , we also support the demands for the immediate and unconditional release of Nasrin Sotoudeh and all prisoners of conscience in Iran .
After the electoral fraud that kept the Ahmadinejad regime in power , thousands of Iranians paid the price of freedom for their courage in protesting against an increasingly repressive regime .
Nasrin Sotoudeh was sentenced , after months of isolation and torture , to 11 years in prison because , as a lawyer and campaigner for human rights , she defended opponents of the Tehran government , including a Nobel Peace Prize laureate .
Along with numerous dissidents , dozens of journalists and bloggers who dared to exercise their basic freedom to express their own conscience are also suffering ill treatment in Iranian prisons .
I believe that the European Union 's commitment to the release of these fighters for democracy should not only take the form of public protest , but also of concrete steps from the European External Action Service , with a view to mobilising the international community to exert increased common pressure to end these human rights violations in Iran .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , we should never forget in this House that the freedom to debate and dissent that we so much enjoy in Europe is scarce and non-existent in many parts of the world .
Nowhere is this more obvious than in Iran .
Yet again in this House , we find ourselves discussing the appalling human rights situation in that Islamic Republic .
As a lawyer , Nasrin Sotoudeh has helped many opposition supporters who were detained and harassed following the rigged presidential election 18 months ago .
She has also represented minors on death row , truly a heroic job in a country that executes children with alacrity .
She was arrested in September last year on charges of spreading propaganda and conspiring to harm state security .
Now she has been sentenced to 11 years in prison and banned from practising law for 20 years .
She should be released immediately and unconditionally .
I call upon the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to make that point .
Parliament and Commission have been resolute in highlighting the human rights abuses of the brutal - almost disgusting - Ahmadinejad regime .
It is time that the Council put the EU 's common values ahead of Member States ' individual commercial interests in that country .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are tackling yet another debate on the violation of human rights and democracy in Iran .
This time , it is the case of a lawyer who protects human rights activists in Iran .
Indeed , the idea is to solve the problem at source by no longer merely imprisoning people who fight for their rights , but to go directly to those that defend them , just to show which way the wind is blowing for those who wish to oppose the Ahmadinejad regime .
I would place a bet today , Mr President , that in a few weeks ' time , we will be back in this Chamber to speak about another different case of all basic rights being violated in Iran .
The violation will be disguised by some criminal motive that would be laughable were it not so tragic , such as acting against national security or propaganda against the regime , as in the case we are discussing today .
I really do wonder , Mr President , whether Parliament should continue to have a delegation for relations with a regime that is the exact opposite of everything the European Union is founded on .
Mr President , once again , we have an appalling situation coming out of Iran .
Prior to Christmas , we discussed the situation of Sakineh Ashtiani , who was condemned to death by stoning for alleged adultery , a sentence subsequently commuted to death by hanging for alleged murder .
Today , we have the unfortunate situation of Nasrin Sotoudeh , who has been condemned to 11 years in jail for doing her job .
She has had her assets frozen and has been denied access to her own lawyer .
Her husband was arrested during the week for - and I quote - ' spreading lies and disrupting public opinion ' .
Figure that one out !
I think all we can do is use our influence to the best of our ability to try and bring an end to this evil madness , particularly the maltreatment and disrespect of women .
Those two examples have been cases in point .
( RO ) Mr President , the conviction of human rights activist , Nasrin Sotoudeh , reflects the fragility of the respect for human rights in Iran .
Since the controversial re-election of President Ahmadinejad in June 2009 , all protests have been brutally suppressed , thousands of citizens arrested and several hundred have already been convicted .
The harsh punishment received by Nasrin Sotoudeh of 11 years in prison resulted from the fact that , as a lawyer , she had defended numerous opponents of the regime who had been arrested during the demonstrations following the presidential elections .
Moreover , she was reprimanded for interviews given to the foreign press during this period .
We can see here a typical case of the violation of the right to freedom of expression , of the right of lawyers to practise their profession without pressure or duress , and also of the right of a defendant to an impartial trial .
In this context , I would remind the Commission and the Council that any cooperation between the European Union and Iran needs to start from the premise that respect for human rights is an absolute must .
( PL ) Mr President , this is another matter which outrages European public opinion and which outrages the Members of this House .
If we keep seeing situations in the same country which evidently violate human rights , we need to think about the structure and responsibility of that country .
It can be seen clearly that respect for one 's own traditions and customs does not , however , go together with the acceptance of certain declared standards or European standards - I am thinking , here , of human rights .
That is obvious .
It is good that the European Parliament has taken up this matter .
There is still a question , however , about political pressure , because that is , as it were , the next matter on which the European Parliament speaks , when we are talking about Iran , and is not achieving any great success .
Perhaps it is necessary to begin applying pressure which is very much stronger than at present .
( SK ) Mr President , activists and advocates fighting for human rights in Iran have long been persecuted and detained , and the verdict against the lawyer , Nasrin Sotoudeh , comprises a sad example of this persecution .
The Iranian regime has done the same to the activist , Shiva Nazar Ahari , the lawyer , Mohammad Seifzadeh , and the advocate , Mohammad Oliyafar .
Other activists are threatened with a similar fate .
Repression in Iran continues to get worse , and our attempts to improve the situation have no effect .
The action of the government against those who have reservations about the regime has now reached such a level that we must seriously begin to consider a change of policy towards this country and to consider other possibilities for more effective pressure on the Iranian administration so that we can help the Iranian people to breath more freely .
It will surely not be easy , but I believe it is our responsibility to try and change the situation in Iran .
( FI ) Mr President , Nasrin Sotoudeh is one of the best known human rights lawyers in Iran and she defended Shirin Ebadi , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , among others .
Her clients have also included underage persons who have been sentenced to death and the victims of family violence .
Her only crime is that she was practising her profession , which is defending people unable to defend themselves against Iran 's brutal regime .
The unrest following the elections in 2009 and their consequences have resulted in the Iranian authorities taking harsh measures against human rights defenders and activists .
It is the aim of the Iranian Government to silence all opposition once and for all both inside and outside the country .
This Parliament has appealed on behalf of the people in Ahvaz , for example , and submitted a unanimous written declaration on the matter .
It is strange that the international community can do nothing to get rid of this barbarous regime .
( PL ) Mr President , during the last debate on human rights violations in Iran , which took place in this Chamber barely four months ago , I said in my speech that five Iranian citizens every day are told they are soon to lose their lives under sentence of capital punishment .
To this tragic statistic must also be added the sentences of many years in prison for Iranian lawyers who defend the victims of the country 's justice system .
Those last two words should probably be put in inverted commas .
Forty seven year-old Nasrin Sotoudeh , who was arrested on 4 September , tortured and who has now been sentenced to 11 years in prison , is an example of this .
Other Iranian lawyers have also met with repression .
Shiva Nazar Ahari , co-founder of the Committee of Human Rights Reporters , has been given a sentence of four years in prison , Mohammad Seifzadeh has been given nine years in prison and a ban on practising law for 10 years , and Mohammad Oliyafar has received a year in prison just for representing his clients in court .
I think that by using the negotiating position of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , we should press for the subject of human rights defenders to be included in talks with Iran as a matter of urgency .
( RO ) Mr President , the case of the lawyer , Nasrin Sotoudeh , is very serious .
She has received 11 years in prison , has been banned from practising law and from leaving the country for 20 years .
What has she done ?
She has defended Shirin Ebadi , a Nobel Peace Prize laureate , other political and human rights activists , journalists and minors sentenced to the death penalty .
Since 2009 , at least 15 human rights lawyers have received prison sentences in Iran .
Through such measures , Iran violates fundamental human rights and fundamental UN principles for the role of a lawyer .
I urge the Commission and the Council to intervene for the immediate release of the lawyer , Nasrin Sotoudeh .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the European Union remains extremely concerned about the grave and deteriorating situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the Islamic Republic of Iran .
Over the last two years , conditions have gone from being difficult to being near impossible for those who work to defend human rights .
For Nasrin Sotoudeh and many others like her who work to defend the just causes of fundamental rights and freedom , working from jail is not an option .
The impact of her arrest is clear : those in Iran who are brave enough to stand up for those whom the state itself is supposed to protect risk being intimidated , imprisoned or worse .
The European Union has been speaking out ; more than ten statements were released in 2010 by High Representative and Vice-President Ashton on both the general situation and on individual cases .
At the same time , the European Union undertook discreet demarches with the Iranian authorities seeking clarifications and explanations , and conveying clear messages on the need to improve the situation in Iran .
A statement on Nasrin Sotoudeh 's case was made by High Representative and Vice-President Ashton on 14 January 2011 , which mentioned both Ms Sotoudeh and Ms Shiva Nazar Ahari , a lawyer and a journalist , sentenced respectively to eleven and four years in prison .
The Islamic Republic of Iran was recently elected to the membership of the UN Commission on the Status of Women .
Mrs Sotoudeh and Ms Ahari are two women who have been deprived of the very rights they were fighting to protect .
The European Union will continue reminding the Iranian authorities that , first and foremost , they must comply with those international obligations stemming from the multilateral agreements and conventions they have signed and ratified .
We will continue seeking ways to make our action in defence of human rights more effective , using all the means at our disposal .
The Iranian people deserve no less .
( DE ) Mr President , we have a completely superfluous working group here in Parliament whose job it is to look at ways of making the plenary sessions more interesting .
This group would have done well to study today 's plenary .
All we need is sufficient time , which is why we should also be allowed time on Thursday afternoons .
We also need the right President in the chair , who can exercise a judicious measure of rigour and flexibility .
This will produce a lively and interesting plenary .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The situation of active human rights defenders in Iran is becoming ever more difficult .
In addition , we read about the increasing number of death sentences .
The Dutch national , Zahra Bahrami , who had been mentioned in our hurried resolutions previously , was sentenced to death , and her lawyer , Nasrin Sotoudeh , received an 11 year prison sentence ' for acting against national security ' .
As we know , the hallmark of Iran 's legal system is a serious lack of justice and transparency .
It is therefore important that the EU 's High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy does not let the country off the hook , but continues to raise human rights issues in relations with Iran .
Let me list the minimum requirements : the immediate and unconditional release of human rights lawyer Sotoudeh and other prisoners of conscience , Bahrami 's death sentence to be reconsidered and the Dutch authorities to be included in handling the case , allowing representatives of the Red Cross to meet with prisoners , and letting human rights organisations into the country to assess the situation .
The European Parliament must react to cases of human rights violations .
We have to remember that thanks to the publicising of specific cases , the international community can exert greater pressure on countries which do not respect generally accepted democratic standards .
Nasrin Sotoudeh represented Iranian civil and human rights activists at their trials and defended minors who had been sentenced to capital punishment .
The Iranian authorities considered her activities to be ' spreading hostile propaganda ' and sentenced her to 11 years in prison .
It is a good thing that her case has appeared on the agenda of a plenary sitting of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament , when it calls for the release of Nasrin Sotoudeh and other prisoners of conscience , and also for the establishment of an independent commission to examine the prosecution of human rights defenders , should 